Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DAPTIVE G RADIENT C LIPPING FOR ROBUST F EDER -
ATED L EARNING

 Youssef Allouah1∗                              Rachid Guerraoui1                     Nirupam Gupta2

 Ahmed Jellouli1                                    Geovani Rizk1                       John Stephan1†
                         1                         2
                             EPFL, Switzerland       University of Copenhagen, Denmark
                                †
                                  Correspondence to: john.stephan@epfl.ch



                                                A BSTRACT
             Robust federated learning aims to maintain reliable performance despite the pres-
             ence of adversarial or misbehaving workers. While state-of-the-art (SOTA) robust
             distributed gradient descent (Robust-DGD) methods were proven theoretically op-
             timal, their empirical success has often relied on pre-aggregation gradient clipping.
             However, existing static clipping strategies yield inconsistent results: enhancing
             robustness against some attacks while being ineffective or even detrimental against
             others. To address this limitation, we propose a principled adaptive clipping
             strategy, Adaptive Robust Clipping (ARC), which dynamically adjusts clipping
             thresholds based on the input gradients. We prove that ARC not only preserves the
             theoretical robustness guarantees of SOTA Robust-DGD methods but also provably
             improves asymptotic convergence when the model is well-initialized. Extensive
             experiments on benchmark image classification tasks confirm these theoretical
             insights, demonstrating that ARC significantly enhances robustness, particularly in
             highly heterogeneous and adversarial settings.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Distributed machine learning, a.k.a. federated learning, has emerged as a dominant paradigm to cope
with the increasing computational cost of learning tasks, mainly due to growing model sizes and
datasets (Kairouz et al., 2021). Worker machines, holding each a fraction of the training dataset,
collaborate over a network to learn an optimal common model over the collection of their datasets.
Workers typically collaborate with the help of a central coordinator, that we call server (McMahan
et al., 2017). Besides scalability, distributed learning is also helpful in preserving data ownership and
sovereignty, since the workers do not have to share their local datasets during the learning.
Conventional distributed learning algorithms are known to be vulnerable to misbehaving workers
that could behave unpredictably (Blanchard et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021; Guerraoui et al., 2023).
Misbehavior may result from software and hardware bugs, data poisoning, or malicious players
controlling part of the network. In the parlance of distributed computing, misbehaving workers are
referred to as Byzantine (Lamport et al., 1982). Due to the growing influence of distributed learning
in critical public-domain applications such as healthcare (Nguyen et al., 2022) and finance (Long
et al., 2020), the problem of robustness to misbehaving workers, a.k.a. robust distributed learning,
has received significant attention (Yin et al., 2018; Farhadkhani et al., 2022; Karimireddy et al., 2022;
Gorbunov et al., 2023; Allouah et al., 2023a; Farhadkhani et al., 2023; El-Mhamdi et al., 2023).
Robust distributed learning algorithms primarily rely on robust aggregation, such as coordinate-
wise trimmed mean (CWTM) (Yin et al., 2018), geometric median (GM) (Chen et al., 2017) and
Multi-Krum (MK) (Blanchard et al., 2017). Specifically, in robust distributed gradient descent
(Robust-DGD), the server aggregates the workers’ local gradients using a robust aggregation method,
instead of simply averaging them. This protects the learning from erroneous gradients sent by
misbehaving workers. Recent work has made significant improvements over these aggregation
techniques by incorporating a pre-aggregation step such as bucketing (Karimireddy et al., 2022;
Gorbunov et al., 2023) and nearest-neighbor mixing (NNM) (Allouah et al., 2023a), to tackle gradient
    ∗
        Authors are listed in alphabetical order.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dissimilarity resulting from data heterogeneity. The learning guarantee of the resulting Robust-DGD
has been proven optimal (Allouah et al., 2023b), i.e., it cannot be improved without additional
assumptions under the standard heterogeneity model of (G, B)-gradient dissimilarity (Karimireddy
et al., 2020).
Despite its theoretical tightness, the empirical success of Robust-DGD has unknowingly relied on
pre-aggregation gradient clipping (Mhamdi et al., 2021; Farhadkhani et al., 2022; Allouah et al.,
2023a). Specifically, clipping the gradients of the workers prior to aggregation has been observed to
sometimes enhance the algorithm’s empirical performance in the presence of adversarial workers (as
evidenced in Figure 7a). Yet, this improvement lacks a concrete explanation, raising the question
of whether the observed benefits of clipping are merely anecdotal. This leads to the natural inquiry:
Why, and when, does pre-aggregation clipping improve robustness?
In particular, using a constant clipping threshold, referred to as static clipping, has exhibited mixed
results. Figure 7 shows that while static clipping effectively mitigates sign-flipping (SF) attacks,
it completely fails under label-flipping (LF). This indicates an inherent fragility of static clipping.
Indeed, we prove in our work that static clipping breaks the standard (f, κ)-robustness property of an
aggregation method (Allouah et al., 2023a). This highlights a key shortcoming of existing empirical
results that rely on static clipping (Mhamdi et al., 2021; Farhadkhani et al., 2022; Allouah et al.,
2023a). To overcome the limitations of static clipping but preserve its empirical benefits at the same
time, we introduce a novel adaptive clipping scheme, termed Adaptive Robust Clipping (ARC).
ARC dynamically adjusts the clipping threshold as per the gradients sent by the workers and the
fraction of adversarial workers to be tolerated. We demonstrate that integrating ARC into Robust-
DGD consistently improves its empirical performance (see Figures 7 and 1a), while also preserving
the convergence guarantee of the original Robust-DGD algorithm. Moreover, we show that when the
model initialization is good, ARC provably improves the robustness of Robust-DGD. The benefits
of ARC are more pronounced as the fraction of misbehaving workers approaches the system’s
breakdown point1 and when the data across the workers is highly heterogeneous. Our key results are
summarized below. Critical comparisons to prior work are deferred to Section 6.
                      100                                  CWTM NNM                           100
                                                           CWTM NNM ARC                                                                   DSGD
                                                           GM NNM                                                                         Robust-DSGD
                       80                                  GM NNM ARC
                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                          Robust-DSGD ARC
      Test Accuracy


                       60
                                                                                               60
                                                                              Test Accuracy


                       40
                                                                                               40

                       20
                                                                                               20

                        0
                            1         2         3          4         5                          0
                                                                                                    1    2                  3              4           5
                                   Number of adversarial workers f                                           Initialization Scaling Factor
                                (a) Improved robustness                                       (b) Influence of model initialization
Figure 1: Worst-case maximal accuracies of Robust-DSGD, with and without ARC, across several
types of misbehavior for distributed MNIST with 10 honest workers and under extreme heterogeneity.
On the left, we vary the number of adversarial workers. On the right, we vary the initialization
conditions by scaling a well-chosen set of initial parameters (CWTM ◦ NNM is used, and f = 1).
More details on the experimental setup can be found in Sections 4 and 5.2, and Appendix D.
Main results & contributions. We consider a system comprising n workers and a server. The goal
is to tolerate up to f adversarial workers.
(1) Adaptive robust clipping (ARC). We propose ARC, wherein prior to aggregating the gradients,
the server clips the largest k := ⌊2(f /n)(n − f )⌋ gradients using a clipping parameter given by the
(Euclidean) norm of the (k + 1)-th largest gradient. It is important to note that in contrast to existing
adaptive clipping schemes (Diakonikolas et al., 2020; Abdalla & Zhivotovskiy, 2024), ARC does not
require additional a priori information on honest workers’ gradients. We prove that ARC preserves
the robustness guarantee of the original robust aggregation method.
(2) Improved empirical robustness. We conduct experiments on MNIST (Deng, 2012), Fashion-
MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2014), across various data heterogeneity
   1
     Breakdown point refers to the minimum fraction of adversarial workers that can break the system, making it
impossible to guarantee a bound on the learning error (Allouah et al., 2023b).


                                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


settings and adversarial regimes. Our results demonstrate that ARC significantly enhances the
performance of state-of-the-art Robust-DGD methods, particularly in scenarios with high data
heterogeneity (Figure 1a) and a large number of adversarial workers (Figure 4b).
(3) Improved learning guarantee. We demonstrate that ARC possesses an additional property that is
not satisfied by classical robust aggregation methods. Specifically, ARC constrains the norm of an
adversarial gradient by that of an honest (non-adversarial) gradient. Leveraging this property, we
show that ARC circumvents the lower bound established under data heterogeneity in Allouah et al.
(2023b), provided the honest gradients are bounded at model initialization. An empirical validation of
this insight is shown in Figure 1b. Such model initialization is often satisfiable in practice (Glorot &
Bengio, 2010), highlighting the practical relevance of ARC. When the model is arbitrarily initialized,
ARC recovers the original convergence guarantee of Robust-DGD in the worst case.

2    P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND R ELEVANT BACKGROUND
We consider the problem of distributed learning in the server-based architecture. The system com-
prises n workers represented by w1 , . . . , wn , that collaborate with the help of a trusted server. The
workers hold local datasets D1 , . . . , Dn respectively, each composed of m data points from an input
                                                    (i)       (i)
space Z. Specifically, for any i ∈ [n], Di := {z1 , . . . , zm } ⊂ Z m . For a given model parameter-
ized by vector θ ∈ Rd , d being the number of trainable parameters, each worker wi incurs a loss
                      1
                        Pm            (i)               d
given by Li (θ) := m       k=1 ℓ(θ, zk ) , where ℓ : R × Z → R is the point-wise loss. We make the
following standard assumptions (Bottou et al., 2018): (i) the point-wise loss function ℓ is differentiable
with respect to θ. (ii) For all i ∈ [n], Li is L-Lipschitz smooth, i.e., there exists L ∈ R+ such that for
all θ, θ′ ∈ Rd , ∥∇Li (θ) − ∇Li (θ′ )∥ ≤ L ∥θ − θ′ ∥, where ∥ · ∥ refers to the Euclidean norm. In the
ideal setting where all workers are honest, i.e., follow the prescribed algorithm
                                                                              Pn       correctly, the server
aims to minimize the global average loss function given by L(θ) := n1 i=1 Li (θ). However, this
objective is rendered vacuous when some workers could be adversarial, described in the following.
A robust distributed learning algorithm aims to output a good model despite the presence of adversarial
(a.k.a., Byzantine) workers in the system (Su & Vaidya, 2016; Yin et al., 2018; Allouah et al., 2023a).
Specifically, the goal is to design a distributed learning algorithm that can tolerate up to f adversarial
workers, of a priori unknown identity, out of n workers. Adversarial workers need not follow a
prescribed algorithm, and can send arbitrary information to the server. In the context of distributed
gradient descent, adversarial workers can send incorrect gradients to the server (Baruch et al., 2019;
Xie et al., 2020). We let H ⊆ [n], with |H| = n − f , denote the set of honest workers that do not
deviate from the algorithm. The objective    Pof the server is to minimize  the average loss function of
                                         1                         d
honest workers given by LH (θ) := |H|          i∈H Li (θ), ∀θ ∈ R . While we can find a minimum of
LH (θ) when LH is convex, in general however the loss function is non-convex, and the optimization
problem is NP-hard (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). Therefore, we aim to find a stationary point
of LH instead, i.e., θ∗ such that ∥∇LH (θ∗ )∥ = 0. Formally, we define robustness to adversarial
workers by (f, ϵ)-resilience (Allouah et al., 2023a).
Definition 2.1. A distributed learning algorithm A is said to be (f, ε)-resilient if,
                                                                                     despite the presence

                                                                                                  2
of f adversarial workers, A enables the server to output a model θ̂ such that E ∇LH θ̂                ≤ ε,
where the expectation E [·] is over the randomness of the algorithm.
If a distributed learning algorithm A is (f, ε)-resilient, then it can tolerate up to f adversarial
workers. It is standard in robust distributed learning to design robust algorithms using f as a
parameter (Blanchard et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018; Gorbunov et al., 2023; Allouah et al., 2023a).
In the context of distributed learning, data heterogeneity is characterized by the following standard no-
tion of (G, B)-gradient dissimilarity (Vaswani et al., 2019; Karimireddy et al., 2020; 2022; Gorbunov
et al., 2023; Allouah et al., 2023b).
Definition 2.2. Loss functions Li , i ∈ H, are said to satisfy (G, B)-gradient dissimilarity if,
                 1 X                             2                         2
                         ∥∇Li (θ) − ∇LH (θ)∥ ≤ G2 + B 2 ∥∇LH (θ)∥ , ∀θ ∈ Rd .
                |H|
                    i∈H

General limitations on robustness. Note that (f, ε)-resilience is impossible (for any ε) when
f /n ≥ 1/2 (Gupta & Vaidya, 2020). Moreover, even for f /n < 1/2, it is generally impossible


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to achieve (f, ε)-resilience for arbitrarily small ε due to the disparity amongst the local datasets
Di , i ∈ H (a.k.a., data heterogeneity) (Liu et al., 2021). Henceforth, we assume that n > 2f . Under
(G, B)-gradient dissimilarity, we have the following lower bound on the achievable resilience.
Lemma 2.3 (Non-convex extension of Theorem 1 Allouah et al.). Under (G, B)-gradient dissimilar-
ity, a distributed learning algorithm is (f, ε)-resilient only if nf < 2+B
                                                                         1           1       f        2
                                                                           2 and ε ≥ 4 · n−(2+B 2 )f G .


For a given distributed learning problem, the minimum fraction of adversarial workers that renders
any distributed learning algorithm ineffective is called the breakdown point (Guerraoui et al., 2023;
Allouah et al., 2023b). Thus, according to Lemma 2.3, there exists a distributed learning problem
satisfying (G, B)-gradient dissimilarity whose breakdown point is given by 1/(2 + B 2 ).
Robust distributed gradient descent. To tolerate adversarial workers, we replace the averaging
operation in the classic distributed gradient descent (DGD) method with a robust aggregation, e.g.,
coordinate-wise trimmed mean (CWTM) and median (CWMed) (Yin et al., 2018), geometric median
(GM) (Chen et al., 2017), and Multi-Krum (MK) (Blanchard et al., 2017). This yields Robust-DGD,
presented in Algorithm 1, where robust aggregation protects the learning from incorrect gradients
sent by the adversarial workers. The robustness of an aggregation method can be quantified by the
following property of (f, κ)-robustness (Allouah et al., 2023a).

Algorithm 1 Robust Distributed Gradient Descent (Robust-DGD)
  Initialization: Server chooses a model θ1 ∈ Rd , a learning rate γ ∈ R+ and a robust aggregation
  method F : Rn×d → Rd .
  for t = 1 to T do
    Server broadcasts θt to all workers.
    for each honest worker wi in parallel do
                                (i)                         (i)
       Compute local gradient gt := ∇Li (θt ), and send gt to Server.
                                                                             (j)
       // An adversarial worker wj can send an arbitrary vector in Rd for gt
    end for
                                  (1)      (n)
    Server computes Rt := F gt , . . . , gt     .
    Server computes the updated model θt+1 := θt − γ Rt .
  end for
  Output: Server outputs θ̂ chosen uniformly at random from {θ1 , . . . , θT }.

Definition 2.4. F : Rn×d → Rd is said to be (f, κ)-robust if there exists a robustness coefficient
κ ∈ R such that for all x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd and any set S ⊆ [n], |S| = n − f , the following holds:
                                       2    κ X              2                     1 X
          ∥F(x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ∥ ≤           ∥xi − xS ∥ , where xS =                 xi .
                                           |S|                                    |S|
                                             i∈S                                     i∈S
(f, κ)-robustness encompasses several robust aggregations, including the ones mentioned above
and more (e.g., see Allouah et al. (2023a)). It has been shown that an aggregation method is
                           f
(f, κ)-robust only if κ ≥ n−2f (Allouah et al., 2023a). Importantly, the asymptotic error of Robust-
DGD with an (f, κ)-robust aggregation, where κ ∈ O(f /(n − 2f )), matches the lower bound
(recalled in Lemma 2.3) (Allouah et al., 2023b). This testifies to the tightness of the (f, κ)-robustness
property. Note that the aforementioned aggregation methods (CWTM, CWMed, GM and MK)
attain optimal robustness when composed with the pre-aggregation scheme: nearest neighbor mixing
(NNM) (Allouah et al., 2023a). Specifically, we recall the following result.
Lemma 2.5 (Lemma 1 in Allouah et al. (2023a)). For F ∈ {CWTM, CWMed,          GM, MK}, the
                                                                     2
                                                8f               f
composition F ◦ NNM is (f, κ)-robust with κ ≤ n−f    1 + 1 + n−2f        .

                                                                    16f    δ+1 2      f

Thus, if n ≥ (2+δ)f for δ > 0, then F◦NNM is (f, κ)-robust with κ ≤ n−f     δ    ∈ O n−2f   .

Convergence of Robust-DGD. Lastly, we recall the convergence result for Robust-DGD with an
(f, κ)-robust aggregation F. We let L∗H denote the minimum value of LH (θ).
Lemma 2.6 (Theorem 2 in Allouah et al. (2023b)). Consider Algorithm 1 with γ ≤ 1/L. Let
∆o ∈ R+ such that LH (θ1 ) − L∗H ≤ ∆o . If F is (f, κ)-robust with κB 2 < 1, then


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                T
                            1X               2      2∆o           κG2
                                  ∥∇LH (θt )∥ ≤               +          .
                            T t=1               (1 − κB 2 )γT   1 − κB 2
Thus, when κ ∈ O (f /(n − 2f )) (and smaller than 1/B 2 ), Robust-DGD is optimal, i.e., its error
matches the lower bound recalled in Lemma 2.3, as soon as T ≥ ∆o /γκG2 . For f = 0, Lemma 2.6
                                                                         f
recovers the convergence of DGD, provided that κ is tight, i.e., κ ∈ O( n−2f ).

3     A DAPTIVE ROBUST C LIPPING (ARC) AND ITS P ROPERTIES
In this section, we first present a preliminary observation on the fragility of static clipping, and then
introduce adaptive robust clipping (i.e., ARC) along with its robustness guarantees.

                                                                                              C
For a clipping parameter C ∈ R+ and a vector x ∈ Rd , we denote clipC (x) := min 1, ∥x∥            x. For
a set of n vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd , we denote ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) := (clipC (x1 ), . . . , clipC (xn )) .
Let F be an (f, κ)-robust aggregation. Given a set of n vectors x1 , . . . , xn , let F ◦
ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) := F (ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn )). We make the following observation.
Lemma 3.1. For any fixed C ∈ R+ and κ′ ≥ 0, F ◦ ClipC is not (f, κ′ )-robust.
Thus, if the clipping threshold is fixed, i.e., independent from the input vectors, pre-aggregation
clipping does not preserve the robustness of the original aggregation. This fragility of such static
clipping is also apparent in practice, as shown by our experimental study in Section 4 and Appendix E.
Description of ARC. ARC is an adaptive clipping scheme that only makes use of the standard
robustness parameter f , i.e., the tolerable number of adversarial workers. ARC is adaptive in the
sense that the clipping threshold C is not fixed but depends on the input vectors. Specifically,
ARC clips the largest k = ⌊2(f /n)(n − f )⌋ vectors using a clipping parameter given by the norm
of the (k + 1)-th largest input vector. The overall scheme is formally presented in Algorithm 2,
and its computational complexity is O(nd + n log(n)) (see Appendix A.2). Thus, pre-composing
more computationally expensive schemes like NNM and Multi-Krum, which have a complexity of
O(dn2 ), with ARC does not introduce a significant overhead (see Appendix F.4). For a detailed
explanation of the underlying intuition behind our adaptive clipping strategy, ARC, we refer the
reader to Appendix A.1.

Algorithm 2 Adaptive Robust Clipping (ARC)
    Input: f and x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd .
    Find a permutation
            j             πk: [n] → [n] such that xπ(1) ≥ xπ(2) . . . ≥ xπ(n) .
    Set k = 2 nf (n − f ) and C = xπ(k+1) .
    Output: ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) .

Robustness Guarantee. We present below the preservation of robustness guaranteed by ARC. Let F
be an (f, κ)-robust aggregation method and F ◦ ARC(x1 , . . . , xn ) := F(ARC(x1 , . . . , xn )) .

                                                                 2f
Theorem 3.2. If F is (f, κ)-robust, then F ◦ ARC is f, κ + n−2f         -robust.
                                                                                          f
Proofs for the results presented in this section are deferred to Appendix B. Since κ ≥ n−2f   (recalled
in Section 2), Theorem 3.2 implies that F◦ARC is (f, 3κ)-robust, i.e., ARC preserves the robustness
of the original aggregation scheme. Therefore, a convergence result for Robust-DGD with ARC
follows verbatim from Lemma 2.6, replacing κ with 3κ. Despite this multiplicative factor of 3, we
observe in Section 4 that incorporating ARC consistently improves the empirical performance of
classical aggregation methods. A more detailed theoretical explanation is provided later in Section 5.1.

4     E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
In this section, we delve into the practical performance of ARC when incorporated in Robust-DSGD
(Algorithm 3 in Appendix D), an order-optimal stochastic variant of Robust-DGD (Allouah et al.,
2023a). We conduct experiments on standard image classification tasks, covering different adversarial
scenarios. We empirically test four aggregation methods when pre-composed with ARC. We contrast


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


these outcomes against the performance of these aggregations under static clipping and when no
gradient clipping is used. We show in Table 1, and Figures 2 and 4, the metric of worst-case maximal
accuracy. For each of the five Byzantine attacks executed (see Appendix D.3), we record the maximal
accuracy achieved by Robust-DSGD during the learning procedure under that attack. The worst-case
maximal accuracy is thus the smallest maximal accuracy reached across the five attacks. Furthermore,
we use the Dirichlet (Hsu et al., 2019a) distribution of parameter α to simulate data heterogeneity.
The comprehensive experimental setup can be found in Appendix D. In this section, we focus on
presenting our results for the CWTM and GM aggregation methods applied to MNIST and CIFAR-10.
As benchmark, we also execute the standard DSGD algorithm, in the absence of adversarial workers
(i.e., without attack and f = 0). Results for Fashion-MNIST, as well as for CWMed and MK, are
provided in Appendices E and F. All aggregation methods in our experiments are pre-composed with
NNM (Allouah et al., 2023a), but we omit explicit mention of NNM in their names for simplicity.

4.1                       B RITTLENESS OF S TATIC C LIPPING AND S UPERIORITY OF ARC

                          100 Heterogeneity                                                                        100 Heterogeneity
                                  extreme                                                                                  extreme
                           90     high                                                                              90     high
                                  moderate                                                                                 moderate
                           80                                                                                       80
      Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                               Test Accuracy (%)
                           70                                                                                       70
                           60                                                                                       60
                           50                                                                                       50
                           40                                                                                       40
                           30                                                                                       30
                           20                                                                                       20
                           10                                                                                       10
                            0                                                                                        0
                                C = 0.02      C = 0.2   C=2   C = 20   No clipping   ARC                                 C = 0.02      C = 0.2   C=2   C = 20   No clipping   ARC

                                                        (a) f = 3                                                                                (b) f = 4
Figure 2: Impact of the clipping strategy, under varying heterogeneity levels, on the worst-case
maximal accuracy achieved by Robust-DSGD on MNIST with n = 15 workers. CWTM ◦ NNM is
used as aggregation. DSGD reaches at least 98.5% in accuracy in all heterogeneity regimes.

We empirically demonstrate the brittleness of static clipping in robust distributed learning. While
an exhaustive empirical study can be found in Appendix E, we present findings on MNIST using
CWTM, considering three heterogeneity levels: moderate (α = 1), high (α = 0.1), and extreme. We
execute Robust-DSGD with n = 15 workers, among which f ∈ {3, 4} are adversarial, and test static
clipping thresholds C ∈ {0.02, 0.2, 2, 20}. First, we observe that the optimal C depends heavily
on data heterogeneity. As seen in Figure 2, C = 2 is ideal in high heterogeneity, whereas C = 20
performs much better under extreme heterogeneity. This dependency requires fine-tuning, which is
impractical in distributed settings. Moreover, static clipping’s effectiveness varies significantly across
Byzantine attacks. While C = 2 performs well under SF (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020), it fails under LF,
causing training collapse (see Figure 7 in Appendix E). This unpredictability makes static clipping
unreliable in practice. The number of adversarial workers further affects static clipping’s performance.
In Figure 2, C = 2 is optimal for f = 3 under high heterogeneity, yet its accuracy drops below 50%
when f = 4, making it ineffective. Unlike static clipping, ARC consistently matches or outperforms
the best static threshold across all configurations, as shown in Figure 2. These results underscore
the superiority of ARC over static clipping, eliminating the need for manual tuning and ensuring
robustness regardless of unpredictable parameters like data heterogeneity and Byzantine attacks.

4.2                       P ERFORMANCE G AINS OF ARC OVER ROBUST-DSGD

To quantify the improvement induced by ARC over Robust-DSGD without clipping, we evaluate a
distributed system with n − f = 10 honest workers while varying the number of adversarial workers
f . We compare the performance of Robust-DSGD with and without ARC on the MNIST dataset,
highlighting the improvements achieved by our method. Additionally, we extend our analysis to
larger distributed systems with 30 honest workers and f ∈ {3, 6, 9}, as detailed in Appendix F.1.2.
ARC boosts robustness in high heterogeneity. Figure 3 shows the performance of Robust-DSGD
against the FOE attack when using ARC opposed to no clipping. In low heterogeneity (i.e., α = 0.5),
the performances of ARC and no clipping are comparable. When the heterogeneity increases
(α = 0.1), CWTM and GM significantly struggle to learn, while the same aggregations composed


                                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with ARC almost match the final accuracy of DSGD. In extreme heterogeneity, the improvement
induced by ARC is the most pronounced, enabling both aggregations to reach a final accuracy close
to 90%. Contrastingly, the same aggregations without clipping stagnate at around 10% throughout
the training. Interestingly, only f = 1 adversarial worker among n = 11 (i.e., less than 10%) suffices
to completely deteriorate the learning when no clipping is applied, highlighting the necessity of ARC
in extreme heterogeneity. These observations are also conveyed in Figure 4a which compares the
worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by Robust-DSGD when f = 1, with and without ARC, for
varying levels of heterogeneity. While CWTM and GM yield comparable accuracies with ARC in low
heterogeneity (α ≥ 0.5), their performance significantly degrades when α drops below that threshold.
Indeed, when α = 0.1, their accuracies drop below 65%, while ARC enables the same aggregations
to maintain their accuracy at just below 98%. In extreme heterogeneity, the performance of the
aggregations without clipping completely deteriorates with accuracies close to 15%. Contrastingly,
ARC efficiently mitigates the Byzantine attacks, resulting in accuracies above 85% in the worst case
for both aggregations. Similar plots for f ∈ {3, 5, 7} convey similar observations (see Appendix F.1).
                100                                                                                100                                                                         100
Test Accuracy


                                                                                   Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                               Test Accuracy
                 75                                                                                 75                                                                          75
                 50                                               DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                  CWTM NNM
                                                                                                    50                                                                          50
                                                                  CWTM NNM ARC
                 25                                               GM NNM                            25                                                                          25
                                                                  GM NNM ARC
                  00                200        400          600      800    1000                     00   200     400          600               800   1000                      00   200   400          600   800   1000
                                                     Step                                                               Step                                                                      Step
                                        (a) α = 0.5                                                            (b) α = 0.1                                                        (c) extreme heterogeneity
Figure 3: Performance of Robust-DSGD when using ARC and without clipping on MNIST. There
are 10 honest workers and f = 1 adversarial worker executing FOE (Xie et al., 2020).
ARC increases the breakdown point in adverse settings. Figure 1a of Section 1 shows that for
f ∈ {1, ..., 5}, Robust-DSGD with CWTM and GM completely fails to learn, consistently yielding
worst-case maximal accuracies close to 15%. This suggests that f = 1 constitutes the breakdown
point for these aggregations in extreme heterogeneity. However, composing them with ARC increases
the breakdown point of these aggregations to f = 3. Indeed, for f = 1 and 2, ARC enables
Robust-DSGD to achieve accuracies greater than 85% in the worst case. However, when f ≥ 3,
the performance degrades, although CWTM with ARC is still able to reach a satisfactory accuracy
close to 70%. Moreover, even when the heterogeneity is not large (α = 0.5), ARC still produces a
significant improvement when the fraction of adversarial workers increases in the system. Indeed,
in Figure 4b , the performances of ARC and no clipping are comparable for f ≤ 3. However, the
improvement induced by ARC is much more visible when f ≥ 5. Particularly when f = 7, ARC
enables CWTM and GM to reach accuracies greater than 80% in the worst case, whereas the same
aggregations yield accuracies below 40% without clipping, indicating the raise of the breakdown
point due to ARC. Plots for α = 0.1 and 1 convey the same observations in Appendix F.1.
                                  100                                                                                                            100

                                   80                                                                                                             80
                  Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                 Test Accuracy


                                   60                                                                                                             60

                                   40                                                                                                             40

                                   20      CWTM NNM
                                           CWTM NNM ARC                                                                                           20       CWTM NNM
                                                                                                                                                           CWTM NNM ARC
                                           GM NNM                                                                                                          GM NNM
                                           GM NNM ARC                                                                                                      GM NNM ARC
                                    0                                                                                                              0
                                          =1             = 0.5        = 0.1                          extreme                                           1         3         5          7                        9
                                                        Heterogeneity Level                                                                                   Number of adversarial workers f
                                                         (a) f = 1                                                                                                (b) α = 0.5
Figure 4: Worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by Robust-DSGD, with and without ARC, on
heterogeneously-distributed MNIST with 10 honest workers. Left: f = 1 adversarial worker among
n = 11 for varying levels of heterogeneity. Right: α = 0.5 for varying f .
Improved robustness on CIFAR-10. We also conduct experiments on CIFAR-10 with n = 17
and f = 1. Table 1 shows the worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by ARC and no clipping
for CWTM and GM. For α = 0.2, ARC consistently outputs accuracies greater than 67% for both
aggregations, while no clipping yields lower accuracies (with a larger variance). For instance, GM
achieves 41.2% on average, i.e., 26% less than its counterpart with ARC. In the more heterogeneous
setting α = 0.075, ARC enables all aggregations to reach worst-case maximal accuracies close to


                                                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


60% (with a small variance). However, executing the same methods without clipping significantly
deteriorates the performance of Robust-DSGD, with GM achieving 16% in worst-case accuracy. This
can also be seen in Figure 23a, where FOE completely degrades the learning when ARC is not used.
We further extend this experiment to a larger distributed system with 33 honest workers, as detailed
in Appendix F.3, where we observe the same trends as reported here.
                                      α = 0.2                       α = 0.075
               Aggregation No Clipping          ARC         No Clipping      ARC
                CWTM           51.6 ± 5.1     67.8 ± 0.9      40.7 ± 0.5     60.5 ± 1.2
                 GM            41.2 ± 3.5     67.0 ± 1.0      16.0 ± 2.3     60.0 ± 2.0
Table 1: Worst-case maximal accuracies (%) achieved by Robust-DSGD on heterogeneously-
distributed CIFAR-10 with ARC and without. There is f = 1 adversarial worker among n = 17. As
a baseline, DSGD (f = 0) reaches 76.5% and 70% when α = 0.2 and 0.075, respectively.

5     I MPROVED G UARANTEE OF ROBUST-DGD WITH ARC
In Section 4, we empirically demonstrated that ARC outperforms SOTA aggregation methods without
clipping, despite these methods being theoretically proven to be optimal. This naturally raises the
question: why does ARC, which shares similar convergence guarantees, significantly outperform
plain Robust-DSGD? To address this, we now focus on the influence of model initialization on the
robustness of aggregation methods, considering both theoretical results and empirical insights.

5.1   I MPROVEMENT OF CONVERGENCE GUARANTEES
In this section, we characterize the improvement induced by ARC over the lower bound recalled in
Lemma 2.3. Specifically, we consider Algorithm
                                                      1 with aggregation F ◦ ARC, i.e., in each learning
                              (1)       (n)
step t, Rt := F ◦ ARC gt , . . . , gt         . We establish in Lemma 5.1 a key property of ARC, crucial
to derive the improved stationarity error of Robust-DGD with ARC in Theorem 5.2.
Lemma 5.1 (Bounded Output). Let F be an (f, κ)-robust aggregation method. For any vectors
x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd and set S ⊂ [n] such that |S| = n − f , ∥F ◦ ARC(x1 , . . . , xn )∥ ≤ maxi∈S ∥xi ∥.
This result indicates that incorporating ARC bounds the norm of the aggregated output by the largest
norm of the honest gradients, i.e., maxi∈H ∥xi ∥. In Appendix C, we provide the proof of Lemma 5.1
and further demonstrate in Lemma C.1 that this property is specific to ARC, i.e., classic (f, κ)-robust
aggregation methods do not inherently exhibit this behavior. This property enables us to obtain the
following improvement on the asymptotic convergence guarantee of Robust-DGD with ARC.
In the following, we show that when the local gradients of the honest workers at the initial model θ1
are sufficiently small, then Robust-DGD with ARC overcomes the lower bound recalled in    Lemma 2.3.
                                       G2 (f /n)                                  1 2
                                                                                               2 2

                      1          1
We denote BP := 2+B 2 , εo := 4 · 1−(2+B 2 )(f /n) , and Ψ(G, B, ρ) := 640 1 + B 2        1 + BGρ2 ,

where ρ denotes a real value. Recall from Lemma 2.3 that BP and εo are the breakdown point
and the lower bound on the stationarity error when f /n < BP, respectively, under (G, B)-gradient
dissimilarity. We obtain the following theorem for Robust-DGD with ARC. Let ∆o be a real value
such that LH (θ1 ) − L∗H ≤ ∆o . The proof of Theorem 5.2 is deferred to Appendix C.
Theorem 5.2. Suppose B > 0 and there exists ζ ∈ R+ such            that max  1i∈H1 ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ ≤  ζ.
                                                                       ∆o                      ∆o L
Let F ∈ {CWTM, CWMed, GM, MK} ◦ NNM , γ  = min κG                        2
                                                                          T L  ,     and T   ≥ κG .
                                                                                                  2
                                                                     2
Consider an arbitrary real value ξo ∈ (0, 1). Let ρ := exp (2+B     )∆o
                                                              (1−ξo )G2 L ζ. For any υ ∈ (0, 1), if
                                     n              o                      2
f                                          υ
n
  := (1 − ξ)BP, where  0 <  ξ ≤ min             ,
                                       Ψ(G,B,ρ) o ξ  , then E    ∇L  H θ̂      ≤ υ εo .

Theorem 5.2 demonstrates that Robust-DGD with ARC improves over the lower bound εo when the
ratio f /n is sufficiently close to the breakdown point (BP), provided the local gradients at model
initialization are bounded. This, in turn, leads to an improvement over the original learning guarantee
of Robust-DGD (as stated in Lemma 2.6), which applies for arbitrary model initialization.
Influence of model initialization and data heterogeneity. Note that the smaller the bound on the
initial gradients (i.e., the better the model initialization), the greater the improvement induced by
ARC. Specifically, a decrease in ζ leads to a reduction in ρ, which subsequently lowers Ψ(G, B, ρ).


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As a result, for a fixed value of ξ (i.e., for a fixed ratio of adversarial workers), the condition
ξ ≤ υ/Ψ(G, B, ρ) is satisfied for a smaller υ, thereby yielding a lower stationarity error. This
theoretical deduction is empirically validated in Section 5.2. A similar improvement occurs when
increasing data heterogeneity, while keeping all other factors unchanged. Specifically, as G increases,
Ψ(G, B, ρ) decreases, allowing for a smaller reduction factor υ and thus a larger improvement in
performance. This trend is also validated empirically in Figures 3 and 4a.
Influence of f /n. Additionally, for a fixed model initialization, an increase of f /n towards the BP
(i.e., as ξ → 0) allows the reduction factor υ to become smaller, leading to a greater improvement,
as evidenced in Figures 1a and 4b. Indeed, we show in Theorem C.4 (a more complete version
                                                                                             1       1
of Theorem 5.2) that ARC effectively increases the BP of (f, κ)-robust methods from 2+B         2 to 2 ,

provided the initial honest gradients are bounded in norm. Lastly, we would like to recall that when
the workers’ gradients at model initialization are arbitrarily large, the convergence guarantee of
Robust-DGD with ARC reduces to that of classic Robust-DGD (see Section 3).
Practical scope of Theorem 5.2. Since ξ = BP−f     BP
                                                      /n
                                                         and υ ≥ Ψ(G, B, ρ)ξ, it follows that the
                                           BP−f /n
improvement factor υ is at least Ψ(G, B, ρ)  BP . For ARC  to induce an improvement, we require
                                              1
υ < 1, which reduces to having f > nBP 1 − Ψ(G,B,ρ)   . Since Theorem 5.2 assumes f < nBP,

                                              1
the improvement occurs when f ∈ nBP 1 − Ψ(G,B,ρ)       , nBP . The length of this interval, i.e.,
     BP
n Ψ(G,B,ρ) , depends on the size of the system n. In small systems where n < Ψ(G, B, ρ), the length
of the interval is smaller than 1 since BP < 1/2. Therefore, at most one value of f , i.e., the largest
integer smaller than nBP, can lie in the improvement interval. Conversely, in large-scale systems
where n ∈ Ω (Ψ(G, B, ρ) log Ψ(G, B, ρ)), the improvement interval expands significantly and can
be much larger than 1, thereby demonstrating ARC’s effectiveness in large-scale distributed learning.


5.2    I NFLUENCE OF MODEL INITIALIZATION ON EMPIRICAL ROBUSTNESS

Figures 1b and 5 illustrate the effect of model initialization on
                                                                     100
the performance of Robust-DSGD with and without ARC, eval-                                                       DSGD
                                                                                                                 Robust-DSGD
uated on MNIST with 10 honest workers. We investigate two             80
                                                                                                                 Robust-DSGD ARC

regimes of heterogeneity: extreme heterogeneity and α = 0.1,
                                                                      60
                                                                                  Test Accuracy


and consider f = 1 adversarial worker. The experiment pro-
ceeds as follows: we begin with the default model parameters          40
initialized by PyTorch (i.e., the same ones used in Section 4),
which represent a well-chosen set of initial parameters. These        20
parameters are then scaled multiplicatively by a factor µ where
                                                                       0
larger values of µ correspond to progressively worse initializa-         1       2                3              4            5
                                                                                   Initialization Scaling Factor
tion, and vary µ ∈ {1, ..., 5}. The results show that, under well- Figure 5: Worst-case maximal ac-
initialized conditions (µ = 1), ARC significantly enhances curacies achieved by Robust-DSGD
the performance of Robust-DSGD, achieving a substantial im- with CWTM, on MNIST (α = 0.1),
provement in worst-case maximal accuracy, particularly under with 10 honest workers and 1 Byzan-
extreme heterogeneity. In this regime, ARC boosts accuracy tine worker. The x-axis represents
by about 70% compared to plain Robust-DSGD (Figure 1b). worsening model initialization.
This (µ = 1) corresponds to the initialization conditions of the
empirical results presented in Section 4. As µ increases (i.e., the initialization worsens), the perfor-
mance of ARC-enhanced Robust-DSGD gradually declines, with noticeable degradation starting from
µ = 4. Nevertheless, even at this point, ARC still offers a performance advantage over Robust-DSGD
without clipping. By µ = 5, the performance of Robust-DSGD with ARC converges to that of plain
Robust-DSGD, both achieving an accuracy of around 10%. Another key observation from Figures 1b
and 5 is that the behavior of Robust-DSGD with ARC closely mirrors that of Byzantine-free DSGD.
Both exhibit similarly poor performance when µ = 5, and their accuracies are comparable when
µ ≤ 3, especially when α = 0.1. This suggests that ARC is particularly effective at exploiting good
model initialization, similar to the performance of DSGD in the absence of Byzantine workers. In
contrast, plain Robust-DSGD struggles to fully leverage well-initialized models, as evidenced by
its consistently lower accuracy (around 20%) in Figure 1b. These findings highlight the important
influence of model initialization on the robustness of aggregation methods, and empirically validate
our theoretical findings in Section 5.1.


                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6    R ELATED W ORK
Gradient clipping is a well-known technique for tackling exploding gradients in deep learning (Good-
fellow et al., 2016). It has been extensively analyzed in the centralized setting (Zhang et al., 2020b;a;
Koloskova et al., 2023), with applications to differential privacy (Pichapati et al., 2019). Moreover,
we would like to note that gradient clipping has also been shown useful to obtain tighter convergence
guarantees for stochastic gradient-descent methods in the case where the gradients have heavy-tailed
noise (Gorbunov et al., 2020; 2022; Danilova, 2023). The considered proof techniques, however, do
not apply directly to our adversarial distributed learning setting. A similar study on the impact of
clipping also exists for distributed settings (Zhang et al., 2022; Khirirat et al., 2023).
In the context of robust distributed learning, prior work has proposed iterative clipping for robust
aggregation (Karimireddy et al., 2021). The clipping scheme, however, has not been shown to induce
any improvement over other SOTA robustness schemes. Recent work (Malinovsky et al., 2023) has
proposed pre-aggregation clipping using temporal gradient differences, in conjunction with variance
reduction, to tackle partial worker participation when adversarial workers can form a majority. We,
however, propose and study pre-aggregation clipping as a tool to improve the robustness obtained by
a general class of aggregation rules. Other prior work (Mhamdi et al., 2021; Farhadkhani et al., 2022;
Allouah et al., 2023a) that used static pre-aggregation clipping to enhance the empirical robustness of
Robust-DGD, did not provide any formal explanation.
While adaptive clipping schemes, similar to ARC, have been studied in the context of robust aggre-
gation (Gupta & Vaidya, 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Diakonikolas et al., 2020; Abdalla & Zhivotovskiy,
2024), critical differences should be noted. The robustness guarantees in Gupta & Vaidya (2020); Liu
et al. (2021) only apply to strongly convex loss functions, under the specific 2f -redundancy condition.
We consider non-convex loss functions, as well as a generic heterogeneous setting of (G, B)-gradient
dissimilarity. In contrast to the clipping scheme proposed in Diakonikolas et al. (2020); Abdalla &
Zhivotovskiy (2024), ARC only uses the f parameter to tune the clipping threshold and does not
rely on any additional a priori knowledge of the distribution of honest workers’ gradients. Moreover,
we prove a deterministic robustness property of ARC (see Theorem 3.2), whereas Diakonikolas
et al. (2020); Abdalla & Zhivotovskiy (2024) only provides probability guarantees assuming the
non-adversarial inputs to be i.i.d. with the distribution satisfying certain special properties.
Lastly, prior work (Guerraoui et al., 2021; Zhu & Ling, 2022; Allouah et al., 2023c; Choffrut et al.,
2024; Allouah et al., 2024) has considered the challenge of privacy preservation alongside robustness
in distributed learning. In this context, the gradients are assumed to have bounded norms in order
to control the sensitivity of the algorithm, as is common in differential privacy (DP) (Abadi et al.,
2016). This is often enforced in practice through static gradient clipping. Our findings suggest that
an adaptive approach, such as ARC, may provide a more reliable alternative. However, a rigorous
analysis of ARC in the context of DP remains an important avenue for future research.
7 C ONCLUSION & D ISCUSSION
We introduced Adaptive Robust Clipping (ARC), a pre-aggregation clipping scheme designed to
harness the empirical benefits of gradient clipping, while preserving the worst-case optimal conver-
gence guarantees of Robust-DGD. Unlike existing adaptive clipping schemes, ARC does not require
additional tuning since it only relies on the standard robustness parameter, i.e., the tolerable fraction
of adversarial workers. Through theoretical analysis, we explained ARC’s ability to enhance the
robustness of Robust-DGD, particularly when the model is well-initialized. This phenomenon was
validated through comprehensive experiments on standard image classification datasets. In short, our
experiments showed that ARC consistently boosts the performance of Robust-DGD, especially in
scenarios with high heterogeneity and large fraction of adversarial workers.
Future direction. Our work also reveals a gap between theory and practice in Byzantine machine
learning (ML). While Robust-DGD and ARC-enhanced Robust-DGD share the same worst-case con-
vergence guarantees, their empirical performances are drastically different. In fact, and unsurprisingly,
Byzantine ML theory focuses on worst-case guarantees, which, although essential, may not fully
capture the practical realities of many learning settings. In practice, we often operate under favorable
conditions (e.g., well-initialized models), where worst-case guarantees have limited relevance. This
gap opens the door for future work that prioritizes practically-driven research in Byzantine ML,
under conditions that are realizable in real-world scenarios. It encourages the development of robust
distributed learning methods, like ARC, that can take full advantage of favorable practical conditions,
thereby yielding relevant theoretical guarantees and superior empirical performance.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgment. This work was supported in part by the FNS Project *Controlling the Spread
of Epidemics: A Computing Perspective* (200021_200477) and the FNS Project *TruBrain*
(20CH21_218778 / 1). We also extend our gratitude to the anonymous reviewers of the ICLR
2025 conference for their valuable insights and feedback.

R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308–318, 2016.

Pedro Abdalla and Nikita Zhivotovskiy. Covariance estimation: Optimal dimension-free guarantees
  for adversarial corruption and heavy tails. Journal of the European Mathematical Society, 2024.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Faeze Ebrahimianghazani, Jerry Li, and Dan Alistarh. Byzantine-resilient non-
  convex stochastic gradient descent. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.

Youssef Allouah, Sadegh Farhadkhani, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Rafael Pinot, and John
  Stephan. Fixing by mixing: A recipe for optimal byzantine ml under heterogeneity. In Francisco
  Ruiz, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem van de Meent (eds.), Proceedings of The 26th International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 206 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1232–1300. PMLR, 25–27 Apr 2023a. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v206/allouah23a.html.

Youssef Allouah, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Rafael Pinot, and Geovani Rizk. Robust
  distributed learning: Tight error bounds and breakdown point under data heterogeneity. In Thirty-
  seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.

Youssef Allouah, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Rafaël Pinot, and John Stephan. On the privacy-
  robustness-utility trilemma in distributed learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, number 202, 2023c.

Youssef Allouah, Rachid Guerraoui, and John Stephan. Robustness, efficiency, or privacy: Pick two
  in machine learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14712.

Gilad Baruch, Moran Baruch, and Yoav Goldberg. A little is enough: Circumventing defenses for
  distributed learning. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2019/file/ec1c59141046cd1866bbbcdfb6ae31d4-Paper.pdf.

Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer. Machine learning
  with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent. In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 30, pp. 119–129. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.

Léon Bottou, Frank E Curtis, and Jorge Nocedal. Optimization methods for large-scale machine
  learning. Siam Review, 60(2):223–311, 2018.

Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.

Yudong Chen, Lili Su, and Jiaming Xu. Distributed statistical machine learning in adversarial settings:
  Byzantine gradient descent. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing
  Systems, 1(2):1–25, 2017.

Antoine Choffrut, Rachid Guerraoui, Rafael Pinot, Renaud Sirdey, John Stephan, and Martin Zu-
  ber. Towards practical homomorphic aggregation in byzantine-resilient distributed learning. In
 Proceedings of the 25th International Middleware Conference, Middleware ’24, pp. 431–444,
  New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400706233. doi:
 10.1145/3652892.3700783. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3652892.3700783.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M Danilova. Algorithms with gradient clipping for stochastic optimization with heavy-tailed noise.
 In Doklady Mathematics, volume 108, pp. S248–S256. Springer, 2023.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M Kane, and Ankit Pensia. Outlier robust mean estimation with sub-
   gaussian rates via stability. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1830–1840,
   2020.
El-Mahdi El-Mhamdi, Sadegh Farhadkhani, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Lê-Nguyên Hoang,
  Rafael Pinot, Sébastien Rouault, and John Stephan. On the impossible safety of large ai models,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.15259.
Sadegh Farhadkhani, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Rafael Pinot, and John Stephan. Byzantine
  machine learning made easy by resilient averaging of momentums. In Kamalika Chaudhuri,
  Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 6246–6283. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
Sadegh Farhadkhani, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Lê-Nguyên Hoang, Rafael Pinot, and
  John Stephan. Robust collaborative learning with linear gradient overhead. In Andreas Krause,
  Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9761–9813. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/farhadkhani23a.html.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 249–256. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. http:
  //www.deeplearningbook.org.
Eduard Gorbunov, Marina Danilova, and Alexander Gasnikov. Stochastic optimization with heavy-
  tailed noise via accelerated gradient clipping. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:15042–15053, 2020.
Eduard Gorbunov, Marina Danilova, David Dobre, Pavel Dvurechenskii, Alexander Gasnikov, and
  Gauthier Gidel. Clipped stochastic methods for variational inequalities with heavy-tailed noise.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31319–31332, 2022.
Eduard Gorbunov, Samuel Horváth, Peter Richtárik, and Gauthier Gidel. Variance reduction is an
  antidote to byzantines: Better rates, weaker assumptions and communication compression as a
  cherry on the top. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pfuqQQCB34.
Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Rafaël Pinot, Sébastien Rouault, and John Stephan. Differential
  privacy and byzantine resilience in sgd: Do they add up? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
  Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC’21, pp. 391–401, New York, NY, USA,
  2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450385480. doi: 10.1145/3465084.
  3467919. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3465084.3467919.
Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, and Rafael Pinot. Byzantine machine learning: A primer. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 2023.
Nirupam Gupta and Nitin H Vaidya. Fault-tolerance in distributed optimization: The case of
  redundancy. In Proceedings of the 39th Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pp.
  365–374, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition, 2015.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C. A. R. Hoare. Algorithm 65: Find. Commun. ACM, 4(7):321–322, jul 1961. ISSN 0001-0782. doi:
  10.1145/366622.366647. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/366622.366647.

Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Hang Qi, and Matthew Brown. Measuring the effects of non-identical data
  distribution for federated visual classification, 2019a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1909.06335.

Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Hang Qi, and Matthew Brown. Measuring the effects of non-identical data
  distribution for federated visual classification, 2019b.

Peter Kairouz, H. Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, Rafael G. L.
  D’Oliveira, Hubert Eichner, Salim El Rouayheb, David Evans, Josh Gardner, Zachary Garrett,
  Adrià Gascón, Badih Ghazi, Phillip B. Gibbons, Marco Gruteser, Zaid Harchaoui, Chaoyang
  He, Lie He, Zhouyuan Huo, Ben Hutchinson, Justin Hsu, Martin Jaggi, Tara Javidi, Gauri Joshi,
  Mikhail Khodak, Jakub Konecný, Aleksandra Korolova, Farinaz Koushanfar, Sanmi Koyejo,
  Tancrède Lepoint, Yang Liu, Prateek Mittal, Mehryar Mohri, Richard Nock, Ayfer Özgür, Rasmus
  Pagh, Hang Qi, Daniel Ramage, Ramesh Raskar, Mariana Raykova, Dawn Song, Weikang Song,
  Sebastian U. Stich, Ziteng Sun, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Florian Tramèr, Praneeth Vepakomma,
  Jianyu Wang, Li Xiong, Zheng Xu, Qiang Yang, Felix X. Yu, Han Yu, and Sen Zhao. Advances
  and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 14(1–2):
  1–210, 2021. ISSN 1935-8237. doi: 10.1561/2200000083.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132–5143. PMLR, 2020.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi. Learning from history for Byzantine robust
  optimization. International Conference On Machine Learning, Vol 139, 139, 2021.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi. Byzantine-robust learning on heterogeneous
  datasets via bucketing. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=jXKKDEi5vJt.

Sarit Khirirat, Eduard Gorbunov, Samuel Horváth, Rustem Islamov, Fakhri Karray, and Peter
  Richtárik. Clip21: Error feedback for gradient clipping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18929,
  2023.

Anastasia Koloskova, Hadrien Hendrikx, and Sebastian U. Stich. Revisiting gradient clipping: stochas-
  tic bias and tight convergence guarantees. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023.

Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. The CIFAR-10 dataset. online: http://www. cs.
  toronto. edu/kriz/cifar. html, 55(5), 2014.

Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. The Byzantine generals problem. ACM Trans.
  Program. Lang. Syst., 4(3):382–401, jul 1982. ISSN 0164-0925. doi: 10.1145/357172.357176.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/357172.357176.

Shuo Liu, Nirupam Gupta, and Nitin H. Vaidya. Approximate Byzantine fault-tolerance in distributed
  optimization. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing,
  PODC’21, pp. 379–389, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  9781450385480. doi: 10.1145/3465084.3467902.

Guodong Long, Yue Tan, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. Federated learning for open banking. In
 Federated Learning: Privacy and Incentive, pp. 240–254. Springer, 2020.

Grigory Malinovsky, Peter Richtárik, Samuel Horváth, and Eduard Gorbunov. Byzantine robustness
  and partial participation can be achieved simultaneously: Just clip gradient differences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.14127, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. In Aarti Singh
  and Jerry Zhu (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, volume 54 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR,
  20–22 Apr 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/mcmahan17a.html.

El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Sébastien Rouault. Distributed momentum for byzantine-
   resilient stochastic gradient descent. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H8UHdhWG6A3.

Dinh C. Nguyen, Quoc-Viet Pham, Pubudu N. Pathirana, Ming Ding, Aruna Seneviratne, Zihuai
  Lin, Octavia Dobre, and Won-Joo Hwang. Federated learning for smart healthcare: A survey.
  ACM Comput. Surv., 55(3), feb 2022. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3501296. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/3501296.

Venkatadheeraj Pichapati, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Felix X. Yu, Sashank J. Reddi, and Sanjiv
  Kumar. Adaclip: Adaptive clipping for private SGD. CoRR, abs/1908.07643, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.07643.

Lili Su and Nitin H Vaidya. Fault-tolerant multi-agent optimization: optimal iterative distributed
  algorithms. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM symposium on principles of distributed computing,
  pp. 425–434, 2016.

Sharan Vaswani, Francis Bach, and Mark Schmidt. Fast and faster convergence of SGD for over-
  parameterized models and an accelerated perceptron. In The 22nd international conference on
  artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 1195–1204. PMLR, 2019.

Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.

Cong Xie, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Fall of empires: Breaking byzantine-tolerant
  sgd by inner product manipulation. In Ryan P. Adams and Vibhav Gogate (eds.), Proceedings of
  The 35th Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence Conference, volume 115 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 261–270. PMLR, 22–25 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v115/xie20a.html.

Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed
  learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5650–5659. PMLR, 2018.

Bohang Zhang, Jikai Jin, Cong Fang, and Liwei Wang. Improved analysis of clipping algorithms
  for non-convex optimization. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020a. Curran Associates Inc.
  ISBN 9781713829546.

Jingzhao Zhang, Tianxing He, Suvrit Sra, and Ali Jadbabaie. Why gradient clipping accelerates
   training: A theoretical justification for adaptivity. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2020b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJgnXpVYwS.

Xinwei Zhang, Xiangyi Chen, Mingyi Hong, Steven Wu, and Jinfeng Yi. Understanding clipping for
  federated learning: Convergence and client-level differential privacy. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 26048–26067. PMLR, 2022.

Heng Zhu and Qing Ling. Bridging differential privacy and Byzantine-robustness via model
  aggregation. In Lud De Raedt (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22, pp. 2427–2433. International Joint Conferences
  on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 7 2022. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/337. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/337. Main Track.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS ON ARC
This section provides further insights into the design and computational complexity of ARC, ex-
plaining its adaptive clipping strategy and its theoretical foundations. We also analyze its efficiency
compared to static clipping.

A.1    D ESIGN OF ARC

Lemma B.1 in Appendix B shows that F ◦ ClipC is (f, κ̃)-robust, provided that |S \ Sc | ≥ 1 for
all subsets S of size n − f . Note that this condition is impossible to guarantee when using a fixed
clipping threshold that does not depend on the input vectors. In order to ensure that |S \ Sc | ≥ 1 for
all subsets S of size n − f , the clipping threshold C should be large enough such that less than n − f
input vectors are clipped. This motivates the design of an adaptive clipping strategy. Accordingly, we
propose to choose a clipping threshold such that the total number of clipped vectors is of the form
⌊λ(n − f )⌋, where λ < 1. Note that it is natural to clip more vectors as the fraction of adversarial
workers f/n increases, to control the impact of Byzantine behavior. Therefore,j we set λ :=k ζ nf where
0 ≤ ζ ≤ 2. Since nf < 12 and λ < 1, the total number of clipped vectors ζ nf (n − f ) < n − f
for all ζ ∈ [0, 2]. This constitutes the underlying idea behind our adaptive clipping strategy ARC,
presented in Algorithm 2. Notably, our theoretical results hold for all ζ ∈ [0, 2]. However, empirical
evaluations show that setting ζ = 2 consistently provides the best performance, leading us to adopt
this value in Algorithm 2 and throughout the paper.

A.2    C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF ARC

The computational complexity of ARC is comparable to static clipping, with the primary difference
being an additional sorting step. The overall complexity can be broken down as follows:

      1. Norm computation: Computing the norms of all input vectors requires O(nd) time. (This
         step is also required in static clipping.)
      2. Sorting step: Sorting the norms incurs an additional O(n log n) time. If n is large relative to
         k = ⌊2(f /n)(n − f )⌋, an efficient selection algorithm such as quick-select (Hoare, 1961)
         can be used instead, reducing the complexity to O(n) in the average case.
      3. Gradient clipping: Clipping vectors requires O(nd) time.

Thus, the total time complexity of ARC is:
                                          O(nd + n log n).
Crucially, this complexity remains dimension-independent in the sorting step, making it scalable
while maintaining robustness.

B     P ROOFS FOR R ESULTS IN S ECTION 3
Proofs for Lemma 3.1 and Theorem 3.2 are presented in B.1 and B.2, respectively.
Notation Let n ∈ N∗ . GivenP vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd and a set S ⊆ [n], we denote by xS the mean
                          1
of the vectors in S xS = |S|   i∈S xi . Given a clipping parameter C ≥ 0, let

                                                               C
                              yi := clipC (xi ) = min 1,             xi ,
                                                             ∥xi ∥
and
                                                    1 X
                                          y S :=        yi .
                                                   |S|
                                                        i∈S

We denote by Sc the set of clipped vectors in S,
                                      Sc := {i ∈ S, ∥xi ∥ > C}.                                     (1)


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Recall that we denote by ClipC be the operator such that, for x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd
                           ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) := (clipC (x1 ), . . . , clipC (xn )) .
                  n×d
Further, let F : R   → Rd . We denote by F ◦ ClipC the aggregation rule that first clips the input
vectors using parameter C, and then aggregates them using F
                           F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) := F(ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn )) .

B.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3.1

Lemma 3.1. For any fixed C ∈ R+ and κ′ ≥ 0, F ◦ ClipC is not (f, κ′ )-robust.

Proof. We use reasoning by contradiction to prove the lemma.
We first consider the case when C > 0. Let S := {1, . . . , n − f }. Consider an arbitrary set of n
vectors x1 , . . . , xn in Rd such that x1 = . . . = xn−f = xS and ∥xS ∥ = 2C. We assume that that
F ◦ ClipC is (f, κ′ )-robust for some κ′ ≥ 0. This assumption implies that
                                                           2   κ′ X           2
                       ∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ∥ ≤       ∥xi − xS ∥ = 0.             (2)
                                                              |S|
                                                                      i∈S

Therefore,
                                        F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) = xS .
However, the clipping operation results in clipC (x1 ) = . . . = clipC (xn−f ) = 12 xS . Therefore, by
(f, κ)-robustness of F,

                                        1             1                                            1
     F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) = F     xS , . . . , xS , clipC (xn−f +1 ), . . . , clipC (xn ) = xS .
                                        2             2                                            2
This contradicts (2). As this contradiction holds for any value of κ′ , F ◦ ClipC cannot be (f, κ′ )-
robust for any κ′ .
The proof for the case when C = 0 is similar to the above, where we choose x1 = . . . = xn−f = xS
such that xS is any vector with strictly positive norm.

B.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

Our proof relies on the following lemma, proof of which is deferred to B.2.1.
Lemma B.1. Let C ∈ R+ and F be an (f, κ)-robust aggregation rule. Consider an arbitrary set of
n vectors x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd and an arbitrary S ⊆ [n] with |S| = n − f . Let Sc denote the set of
indices of clipped vectors in S, i.e., Sc := {i ∈ S, ∥xi ∥ > C}. If |S \ Sc | ≥ 1, then
                                                             2   κ̃ X           2
                         ∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ∥ ≤       ∥xi − xS ∥ ,
                                                                |S|
                                                                        i∈S
                |Sc |
where κ̃ = κ + |S\S c|
                       .

Lemma B.1 shows that F ◦ ClipC is (f, κ̃)-robust, provided that |S \ Sc | ≥ 1 for all subsets S of
size n − f . Note that this condition is impossible to guarantee when using a fixed clipping threshold
that does not depend on the input vectors. In order to ensure that |S \ Sc | ≥ 1 for all subsets S of
size n − f , the clipping threshold C should be large enough such that less than n − f input vectors
are clipped. By construction, ARC satisfies the condition of Lemma B.1. This brings us to the proof
of Theorem 3.2, which we recall below for convenience.

                                                                   2f
Theorem 3.2. If F is (f, κ)-robust, then F ◦ ARC is f, κ + n−2f         -robust.

Proof. Since we clip the largest ⌊2(f /n)(n − f )⌋ gradients, for a given S ⊆ [n] with |S| = n − f
we have
                                |Sc | ≤ ⌊2(f /n)(n − f )⌋ ≤ 2(f /n)(n − f ).


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore,
                                                       2f                     n − 2f
                |S \ Sc | = |S| − |Sc | ≥ (n − f ) −      (n − f ) = (n − f )        .
                                                       n                        n
Since it is assumed that f < n/2, we have
                                                 n  n − n
                                 |S \ Sc | > n −          = 0.
                                                 2    n
Thus,
    the           |S \ Sc | ≥ 1 is always verified. Hence, from Lemma B.1 we obtain that F◦ARC
        condition
            |Sc |
is f, κ + |S\Sc | -robust where

                                |Sc |     2(f /n)(n − f )     2f
                                        ≤          n−2f
                                                          =        .
                              |S \ Sc |    (n − f ) n       n − 2f

This concludes the proof.

B.2.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA B.1
We start by giving bounds on the variance (Lemma B.2) and the bias (Lemma B.3 and Lemma B.4)
due to the clipping operation. We combine these bounds to prove the theorem.

VARIANCE REDUCTION DUE TO CLIPPING
We start by giving a bound on the variance of the clipped vectors. Recall from (1) that Sc := {i ∈
S, ∥xi ∥ > C}.
Lemma B.2. Let C ≥ 0, n > 0 and f < n2 . For all S ⊆ [n] with |S| = n − f , the following holds
true:

     1. If ∥xS ∥ ≤ C then
                     1 X            2   1 X           2   1 X
                         ∥yi − y S ∥ ≤      ∥xi − xS ∥ −      (∥xi ∥ − C)2 .
                    |S|                |S|               |S|
                        i∈S                    i∈S                       i∈Sc


     2. If ∥xS ∥ > C then
          1 X            2   1 X           2  |S \ Sc |                 1 X
              ∥yi − y S ∥ ≤      ∥xi − xS ∥ −           (∥xS ∥ − C)2 −      (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 .
         |S|                |S|                 |S|                    |S|
             i∈S                    i∈S                                                  i∈Sc


Proof. Note that
    1 X               2    1 X                         2
           ∥yi − y S ∥ =          ∥yi − xS + xS − y S ∥
   |S|                    |S|
       i∈S                    i∈S
                           1 X                2             2

                        =          ∥yi − xS ∥ + ∥xS − y S ∥ + 2⟨yi − xS , xS − y S ⟩
                          |S|
                              i∈S
                                                               *                           +
                           1  X             2             2       1 X
                        =         ∥yi − xS ∥ + ∥xS − y S ∥ + 2           yi −xS , xS − y S
                          |S|                                    |S|
                              i∈S                                    i∈S
                                                                | {z }
                                                                          yS
                          1 X              2             2
                       =         ∥yi − xS ∥ + ∥xS − y S ∥ − 2 ⟨xS − y S , xS − y S ⟩
                         |S|
                             i∈S
                          1 X              2             2
                       =         ∥yi − xS ∥ − ∥xS − y S ∥ .                                     (3)
                         |S|
                              i∈S



                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By the definition of Sc (in (1)), for all i ∈ S \ Sc , yi = xi . Therefore,
                  1 X           2   1 X           2   1 X           2
                      ∥yi − xS ∥ =      ∥yi − xS ∥ +      ∥yi − xS ∥
                 |S|               |S|               |S|
                         i∈S                               i∈S\Sc                         i∈Sc
                                                1 X           2   1 X           2
                                             =      ∥xi − xS ∥ +      ∥yi − xS ∥ .
                                               |S|               |S|
                                                           i∈S\Sc                         i∈Sc

The above can be written as
        1 X               2  1 X           2   1 X            2            2
               ∥yi − xS ∥ =      ∥xi − xS ∥ +      (∥yi − xS ∥ − ∥xi − xS ∥ ).                       (4)
       |S|                  |S|               |S|
              i∈S                            i∈S                              i∈Sc

For i ∈ Sc , we have yi = ∥xCi ∥ xi . Thus, for all i ∈ Sc , we obtain that
                    2                  2               2            2                        2   2
      ∥yi − xS ∥ − ∥xi − xS ∥ = ∥yi ∥ + ∥xS ∥ − 2⟨yi , xS ⟩ − ∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥ + 2⟨xi , xS ⟩
                                | {z }
                                 =C 2

                                  2       2              C
                              = C − ∥xi ∥ + 2 1 −              ⟨xi , xS ⟩
                                                       ∥xi ∥
                                                                          ⟨xi , xS ⟩
                              = −(∥xi ∥ − C)(∥xi ∥ + C) + 2(∥xi ∥ − C)
                                                                            ∥xi ∥

                                              ⟨xi , xS ⟩
                              = (∥xi ∥ − C) 2            − ∥xi ∥ − C .
                                                ∥xi ∥
By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have ⟨xi , xS ⟩ ≤ ∥xi ∥ ∥xS ∥ Therefore,
                                 2                         2
                        ∥yi − xS ∥ − ∥xi − xS ∥ ≤ (∥xi ∥ − C) (2 ∥xS ∥ − ∥xi ∥ − C) .
Substituting from the above in (4), we obtain that
      1 X           2   1 X           2   1 X
          ∥yi − xS ∥ ≤      ∥xi − xS ∥ +      (∥xi ∥ − C) (2 ∥xS ∥ − ∥xi ∥ − C) .
     |S|               |S|               |S|
           i∈S                             i∈S                              i∈Sc

Substituting from the above in (3), we obtain that
 1 X            2   1 X           2   1 X                                                2
     ∥yi − y S ∥ ≤      ∥xi − xS ∥ +      (∥xi ∥ − C) (2 ∥xS ∥ − ∥xi ∥ − C) − ∥xS − y S ∥ .
|S|                |S|               |S|
    i∈S                          i∈S                                 i∈Sc
                                                                                                     (5)

We now consider below the two cases: ∥xS ∥ ≤ C and ∥xS ∥ > C.
In the first case, i.e,. when ∥xS ∥ ≤ C, we have
           1 X                                          1 X
                   (∥xi ∥ − C) (2 ∥xS ∥ − ∥xi ∥ − C) ≤          (∥xi ∥ − C) (2C − ∥xi ∥ − C)
          |S|                                          |S|
              i∈Sc                                         i∈Sc
                                                          1 X
                                                     ≤−           (∥xi ∥ − C)2 .
                                                         |S|
                                                                                   i∈Sc

Substituting from the above in (5) yields the following
           1 X               2    1 X              2   1 X                               2
                  ∥yi − y S ∥ ≤          ∥xi − xS ∥ −          (∥xi ∥ − C)2 − ∥xS − y S ∥
          |S|                    |S|                  |S|
              i∈S                    i∈S                  i∈Sc
                                  1 X              2   1 X
                               ≤         ∥xi − xS ∥ −          (∥xi ∥ − C)2 .
                                 |S|                  |S|
                                                 i∈S                           i∈Sc

This proves the first part of the lemma.


                                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consider the second case, i.e., ∥xS ∥ > C. Note that
   1 X                                           1 X
                                                     (∥xS ∥ − C)2 − (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2

          (∥xi ∥ − C) (2 ∥xS ∥ − ∥xi ∥ − C) =
  |S|                                           |S|
      i∈Sc                                                              i∈Sc
                                                               |Sc |                 1 X
                                                          =          (∥xS ∥ − C)2 −      (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 . (6)
                                                                |S|                 |S|
                                                                                                         i∈Sc

Since ∥xS ∥ > C, and ∥y S ∥ ≤ C, we have ∥xS ∥ − ∥y S ∥ ≥ ∥xS ∥ − C ≥ 0 . This, in conjunction
with the reverse triangle inequality, implies that
                                              2                                2
                          ∥xS − y S ∥ ≥ (∥xS ∥ − ∥y S ∥) ≥ (∥xS ∥ − C)2 .                                                   (7)

Substituting from (6) and (7) in (5) yields the following:
 1 X               2    1 X                2    |Sc |                 1 X
        ∥yi − y S ∥ ≤           ∥xi − xS ∥ +          (∥xS ∥ − C)2 −          (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 − (∥xS ∥ − C)2
|S|                    |S|                       |S|                 |S|
    i∈S                    i∈S                                           i∈Sc

                        1 X                2      |Sc |                        1 X
                     ≤          ∥xi − xS ∥ +            − 1 (∥xS ∥ − C)2 −            (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2
                       |S|                         |S|                        |S|
                              i∈S                                                                                 i∈Sc
                        1 X           2  |S \ Sc |                 1 X
                     =      ∥xi − xS ∥ −           (∥xS ∥ − C)2 −      (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 .
                       |S|                 |S|                    |S|
                              i∈S                                                                          i∈Sc

This proves the second part, which concludes the proof of the lemma.

B IAS DUE TO CLIPPING
We now bound the bias induced by clipping the input vectors.
Lemma B.3. Let C ≥ 0, n > 0, f < n2 , and S ⊆ [n], |S| = n − f . Then,

                                                    2      |Sc | X
                                ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤                      2           (∥xi ∥ − C)2 .
                                                           |S|          i∈Sc


Proof. Note that
                                                                                   2                                2
                            2  1 X       1 X                                              1 X
                ∥xS − y S ∥ =      xi −      yi                                        =      (xi − yi )                .
                              |S|       |S|                                              |S|
                                              i∈S                      i∈S                       i∈S

As xi = yi for all i ∈ S \ Sc , we have
                                                                                                 2
                                                    2          1         X
                                ∥xS − y S ∥ =                      2            (xi − yi )           .
                                                          |S|           i∈Sc

Due to Jensen’s inequality,
                                          2                                        2
                           2        |Sc |          1 X                                     |Sc | X                  2
               ∥xS − y S ∥ =            2               (xi − yi )                     ≤     2           ∥xi − yi ∥ .
                                    |S|           |Sc |                                    |S|
                                                        i∈Sc                                     i∈Sc

As yi = ∥xCi ∥ xi for all i ∈ Sc , substituting this in the above proves the lemma.

We now show that the bias is upper bounded by a multiplicative factor of the variance of the input
vectors, as long as there is at least one unclipped honest vector.
Lemma B.4 (Bias due to clipping). C ≥ 0, n > 0, f < n/2, and S ⊆ [n], |S| = n − f , if
|S \ Sc | ≥ 1 then
                                         2      |Sc | 1 X               2
                             ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤                    ∥xi − xS ∥ .
                                              |S \ Sc | |S|
                                                                               i∈S


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We assume throughout the proof that |Sc | > 0. Otherwise, if |Sc | = 0, the bias is 0 and the
statement is trivially true.
By Lemma B.3, we have
                                                 2      |Sc | X
                                ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤                 2          (∥xi ∥ − C)2 .                 (8)
                                                        |S|       i∈Sc

We distinguish two cases: ∥xS ∥ ≤ C and ∥xS ∥ > C. In the first case we have that
                                   0 ≤ ∥xi ∥ − C ≤ ∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥ .
Substituting the above in (8), we find
                          2    |Sc | X                     |Sc | X
               ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤      2     (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 ≤    2    (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 .
                               |S| i∈Sc                    |S| i∈S
                                                                                                   2
Using the reverse triangle inequality, we have that (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 ≤ ∥xi − xS ∥ . This implies that
                         2    |Sc | X                         |Sc | 1 X              2
             ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤       2     (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 ≤                  ∥xi − xS ∥ .
                              |S|                           |S \ Sc | |S|
                                    i∈S                                                   i∈S
This proves the result for the first case.
Consider now the second case, i.e ∥xS ∥ > C. Noting that we assume that |S \ Sc | ≥ 1 and using
                             |Sc |
Young’s inequality with c = |S\S c|
                                    , we find, for any i ∈ Sc ,
          (∥xi ∥ − C)2 = (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥ + ∥xS ∥ − C)2
                         ≤ (1 + c)(∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 + (1 + 1/c)(∥xS ∥ − C)2 )
                           |Sc | + |S \ Sc |                      |Sc | + |S \ Sc |
                         =                   (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 +                       (∥xS ∥ − C)2 .
                               |S \ Sc |                                  |Sc |
Recall from (1) that Sc := {i ∈ S, ∥xi ∥ > C}. This implies that |Sc | + |S \ Sc | = |S|. Therefore

                                          1                              1
               (∥xi ∥ − C)2 ≤ |S|                (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 +         (∥xS ∥ − C)2 .            (9)
                                       |S \ Sc |                      |Sc |
Substituting (9) in (8), we find

                       2    |Sc | X              1                      2       1               2
           ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤        2     |S|              (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥) +            (∥xS ∥ − C)
                            |S| i∈Sc         |S \ Sc |                        |Sc |
                                                                                          !
                            |Sc |       1     X
                                                                   2                    2
                         =                         (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥) + (∥xS ∥ − C) .                   (10)
                             |S| |S \ Sc |
                                                 i∈Sc

Since ∥xS ∥ > C, we have for any i ∈ S \ Sc
                                0 ≤ ∥xS ∥ − C ≤ ∥xS ∥ − ∥xi ∥ .
Therefore
                                                 X
                       |S \ Sc | (∥xS ∥ − C)2 ≤       (∥xS ∥ − ∥xi ∥)2
                                                                  i∈S\Sc

Which gives the bound
                                                    1      X
                           (∥xS ∥ − C)2 ≤                    (∥xS ∥ − ∥xi ∥)2 .                        (11)
                                                 |S \ Sc |
                                                                  i∈S\Sc

Substituting (11) in (10), we find
                                                                                      
                2     |Sc |  1      X                       1      X
    ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤                      (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 +             (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 
                       |S| |S \ Sc |                      |S \ Sc |
                                          i∈Sc                                            i∈S\Sc

                       |Sc | 1 X                        |Sc | 1 X             2
                   =               (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 ≤               ∥xi − xS ∥ .
                     |S \ Sc | |S|                    |S \ Sc | |S|
                                    i∈S                                                   i∈S
This proves the result for the second case and concludes the proof.


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROOF OF L EMMA B.1
Let us recall the lemma below.
Lemma B.1. Let C ∈ R+ and F be an (f, κ)-robust aggregation rule. Consider an arbitrary set of
n vectors x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd and an arbitrary S ⊆ [n] with |S| = n − f . Let Sc denote the set of
indices of clipped vectors in S, i.e., Sc := {i ∈ S, ∥xi ∥ > C}. If |S \ Sc | ≥ 1, then
                                                             2   κ̃ X           2
                         ∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ∥ ≤       ∥xi − xS ∥ ,
                                                                |S|
                                                                         i∈S

                |Sc |
where κ̃ = κ + |S\S c|
                       .

Proof. We assume throughout the proof that |Sc | > 0. Otherwise, the statement is trivially true
by (f, κ)-robustness of F and the fact that the vectors in S remain unchanged after the clipping
operation.
                                                f   2
Consider first the case κ = 0. Since κ ≥ n−2f         , we have that f = 0. Recall that we denote
                              1
                                 P
yi := clipC (xi ) and y S := |S| i∈S yi . Since κ = 0, the output of F will correspond to the average
of its input, which implies that
                                                           2                           2
                     ∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − y S ∥ = ∥F(y1 , . . . , yn ) − y S ∥ = 0.
Therefore
                                          F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) = y S .
We find then
                                                                    2             2
                              ∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ∥ = ∥y S − xS ∥ .
The result for the case κ = 0 follows from lemma B.4.
                                                            |Sc |
Suppose now that κ > 0. Using Young’s inequality with c = κ|S\S   c|
                                                                     we find
                                      2                                                     2
∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ∥ = ∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − y S + y S − xS ∥

                                                                                         2      1              2
                                          ≤ (1 + c) ∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − y S ∥ + 1 +     ∥xS − y S ∥ .
                                                                                                c
                                                                                                       (12)
On the one hand, by (f, κ)-robustness of F, we have
                                                          2                                      2
           (1 + c) ∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − y S ∥ = (1 + c) ∥F(y1 , . . . , yn ) − y S ∥
                                                                    κ X                  2
                                                         ≤ (1 + c)         ∥yi − y S ∥
                                                                   |S|
                                                                       i∈S

                                                                    |Sc |        1 X                2
                                                         = κ+                            ∥yi − y S ∥ .   (13)
                                                                 |S \ Sc | |S|
                                                                                      i∈S

On the other hand, we have

                    2      κ |S \ Sc |              2        |Sc |     |S \ Sc |            2
(1 + /c) ∥xS − y S ∥ = 1 +
     1                                   ∥xS − y S ∥ = κ +                       ∥xS − y S ∥ .
                              |Sc |                        |S \ Sc |     |Sc |
                                                                                          (14)
Substituting (13) and (14) in (12) we obtain that
                                                                                                                !
                                    2         |Sc |                 1 X            2  |S \ Sc |             2
∥F ◦ ClipC (x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ∥ ≤ κ +                              ∥yi − y S ∥ +           ∥xS − y S ∥         .
                                            |S \ Sc |              |S|                  |Sc |
                                                                        i∈S
                                                                                                         (15)
   2
       Proposition 6 (Allouah et al., 2023a)


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We consider below the two cases ∥xS ∥ ≤ C and ∥xS ∥ > C separately.

In the first case, we use the the first part of lemma B.2 and lemma B.3 to obtain that
             1 X               2    |S \ Sc |            2
                    ∥yi − y S ∥ +             ∥xS − y S ∥
           |S|                         |S|
                i∈S
                1 X           2   1 X                |S \ Sc | 1 X
           ≤        ∥xi − xS ∥ −      (∥xi ∥ − C)2 +               (∥xi ∥ − C)2
               |S|               |S|                   |S| |S|
                      i∈S                   i∈Sc                                   i∈Sc
                1 X                   2  |Sc | 1 X                1 X           2
           =                ∥xi − xS ∥ −          (∥xi ∥ − C)2 ≤      ∥xi − xS ∥ .
               |S|                        |S| |S|                |S|
                      i∈S                          i∈S                       i∈S

This proves the result for this case.

Consider the second case, i.e ∥xS ∥ > C. Following the proof of corollary B.4 until (10) we have
                                                                                  !
                         2    |Sc |    1     X
                                                                2               2
              ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤                     (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥) + (∥xS ∥ − C) .
                               |S| |S \ Sc |
                                                   i∈Sc

Therefore,
                                                                                                  !
        |S \ Sc |            2  |S \ Sc |          1      X
                  ∥xS − y S ∥ ≤                             (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 + (∥xS ∥ − C)2
          |Sc |                   |S|           |S \ Sc |
                                                              i∈Sc
                                      1 X                    |S \ Sc |
                                   ≤      (∥xi ∥ − ∥xS ∥)2 +           (∥xS ∥ − C)2 .
                                     |S|                       |S|
                                         i∈Sc

Using the above in conjunction with lemma B.2 for the case ∥xS ∥ > C in (15) proves the result for
the second case, which concludes the proof.

C    P ROOFS OF THE R ESULTS IN S ECTION 5
In this section, we first prove the Bounded Aggregation Output property of ARC in Lemma 5.1,
and show that the other SOTA aggregation rules do not satisfy it in Lemma C.1. Then, to prove
Theorem 5.2, we first prove Lemma C.2. We assume throughout this appendix that for any set of
vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd , ∥F (x1 , . . . , xn )∥ ≤ maxi∈[n] ∥xi ∥. This assumption can be made without
loss of generality, see Appendix C.1.
Lemma 5.1 (Bounded Output). Let F be an (f, κ)-robust aggregation method. For any vectors
x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd and set S ⊂ [n] such that |S| = n − f , ∥F ◦ ARC(x1 , . . . , xn )∥ ≤ maxi∈S ∥xi ∥.

Proof. Without loss of generality and for the sake of simplicity, let us suppose that the vec-
tors x1 , . . . , xn are indexed such that ∥x1 ∥ ≥ ∥x2 ∥ ≥ · · · ≥ ∥xn ∥. Let (x̃1 , . . . , x̃n ) =
ARC(x1 , . . . , xn ) be the clipped version of these vectors after applying ARC.
Case 1: When f = 0, S = [n] and we clip all the vectors by ∥x1 ∥ = maxi∈S ∥xi ∥, hence
for any j, ∥x̃j ∥ ≤ maxi∈S ∥xi ∥. Using the fact that for any set of vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd ,
∥F (x1 , . . . , xn )∥ ≤ maxi∈[n] ∥xi ∥, we have
               ∥F ◦ ARC(x1 , . . . , xn )∥ = ∥F(x̃1 , . . . , x̃n )∥ ≤ max ∥x̃j ∥ ≤ max ∥xi ∥ .       (16)
                                                                     j∈[n]           i∈S

Case 2: When 0 < f < n2 , as presented in Algorithm 2, ARC clips all the vectors x1 , . . . , xn to
∥xk+1 ∥ where k = ⌊2 nf (n − f )⌋. Hence, for any j ∈ [n],
                                             ∥x̃j ∥ ≤ ∥xk+1 ∥ .                                       (17)

We have that k + 1 = ⌊2 nf (n − f )⌋ + 1 ≥ 2 nf (n − f ).


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


One can show that


                                   2f                       2f
                                      (n − f ) − f = f (1 −    )
                                   n                        ni
                                                                             nh
                                                        > 0, ∀f ∈ 0,                                    (18)
                                                                             2

Hence, 2f
       n (n − f ) > f , which gives k + 1 > f , and since k + 1 is an integer, we have k + 1 ≥ f + 1.
Hence we know that at least f + 1 vectors have their norm greater or equal to the clipping threshold
C = ∥xk+1 ∥,
                            ∥x1 ∥ ≥ · · · ≥ ∥xk+1 ∥ ≥ ∥xk+2 ∥ ≥ · · · ≥ ∥xn ∥
                            |          {z         } |          {z           }
                               at least f + 1 vectors         at most n − f − 1 vectors


Hence, at most n − f − 1 vectors will not be clipped. For any subset of S ⊂ [n] of size n − f , at
least one of the vectors has its norm equal to the clipping threshold (i.e. maxi∈S ∥xi ∥ = ∥xk+1 ∥) or
will be clipped (i.e. maxi∈S ∥xi ∥ > ∥xk+1 ∥). Hence, we have that
                                           max ∥xi ∥ ≥ ∥xk+1 ∥ .                                        (19)
                                            i∈S

Combining (17) and (19), we have that for all j ∈ [n],
                                             ∥x̃j ∥ ≤ max ∥xi ∥ .
                                                        i∈S

Using the fact that for any set of vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd , ∥F (x1 , . . . , xn )∥ ≤ maxi∈[n] ∥xi ∥, we
have
             ∥F ◦ ARC(x1 , . . . , xn )∥ = ∥F(x̃1 , . . . , x̃n )∥ ≤ max ∥x̃j ∥ ≤ max ∥xi ∥ .           (20)
                                                                         j∈[n]            i∈S


Lemma C.1. For any aggregation rule F ∈ {CWTM, CWMed, GM, MK, CWTM◦NNM,
CWMed◦NNM, GM◦NNM, MK◦NNM}, there exists f ∈ [0, n2 ), a set of vectors x1 , . . . , xn
and a subset S ⊂ [n], |S| = n − f such that
                                        F(x1 , . . . , xn ) ≰ max ∥xi ∥                                 (21)
                                                                i∈S


Proof. Let us consider (x1 , x2 , x3 ) = ((0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1)), and S = {x1 , x2 },
                                                                                                    √
For F ∈ {CWTM, CWMed, GM}, we have ∥F(x1 , x2 , x3 )∥ = ∥(1, 1)∥ =                                      2 >
maxi∈S ∥xi ∥ = ∥x1 ∥ = 1.
For F ∈ {MK, CWTM ◦ NNM,         √ CWMed ◦ NNM, GM ◦ NNM, MK ◦ NNM}, we have
∥F(x1 , x2 , x3 )∥ = ∥(0.5, 1)∥ = 1.25 > maxi∈S ∥xi ∥ = ∥x1 ∥ = 1.

Lemma C.2. Let F be (f, κ)-robust. Let  ∆o and ρ be real
                                                       ∆values
                                                             1 such that LH (θ1 ) − L∗H ≤ ∆o
                                ∆o                               1
and maxi∈H ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ ≤ exp − κG2 L ρ. If γ = min κGo2 T , L , then
                              T
                          1X               2  2∆o L
                                                    + 5κ G2 + B 2 ρ2 .

                                ∥∇LH (θt )∥ ≤
                          T t=1                T

Our proof for Lemma C.2 relies on the following sub-result.
Lemma C.3. For all t ∈ [T ], we obtain that
                           max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ ≤ exp (γLT ) max ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ .
                           i∈H                                     i∈H


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      (1)          (n)
Proof. Consider an arbitrary t ∈ [T ]. Let (x1 , . . . , xn ) := ARC gt , . . . , gt     . As n > 2f and
                                                                                                      (i)
|H| = n − f , the clipping threshold C used in ARC (see Algorithm 2) is bounded by maxi∈H gt
(see (19) in Lemma 5.1). Therefore,
                                                     (i)
                             max ∥xi ∥ ≤ max gt             = max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ .                       (22)
                             i∈[n]          i∈H                  i∈H

Since for any set of n vectors z1 , . . . , zn ∈ Rd , ∥F (z1 , . . . , zn )∥ ≤ maxi∈[n] ∥zi ∥, from (22) we
obtain that

                                       (1)        (n)
            ∥Rt ∥ = F ◦ ARC gt , . . . , gt              ≤ max ∥xi ∥ ≤ max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ .
                                                                 i∈[n]          i∈H

Recall that θt+1 := θt − γRt . Thus, from above we obtain that

                                     θt+1 − θt ≤ γ max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ .                                  (23)
                                                           i∈H

Due to L-Lipschitz smoothness of Li (θ) for all i ∈ H, the above implies that
                     ∇Li (θt+1 ) − ∇Li (θt ) ≤ γL max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ ,               ∀i ∈ H.
                                                            i∈H

This, in conjunction with the triangle inequality, implies that
                    ∇Li (θt+1 ) ≤ ∥∇Li (θt )∥ + γL max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ ,                  ∀i ∈ H.
                                                             i∈H

Therefore,
   max ∇Li (θt+1 ) ≤ max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ + γL max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ = (1 + γL) max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ .
   i∈H                     i∈H                        i∈H                                   i∈H

As t was chosen arbitrarily from [T ], the above holds true for all t ∈ [T ]. For an arbitrary τ ∈ [T ],
using the inequality recursively for t = τ, . . . , 1 we obtain that
                                           τ                                     T
         max ∇Li (θτ +1 ) ≤ (1 + γL) max ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ ≤ (1 + γL) max ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ .
         i∈H                                   i∈H                                    i∈H

                T
Since (1 + γL) ≤ exp (γLT ), the above concludes the proof.

We are now ready to present our proof of Lemma C.2.

Proof of Lemma C.2. For simplicity, we write LH as L throughout the proof.
Consider an arbitrary t ∈ [T ]. Due to L-Lipschitz smoothness of L(θ), we obtain that
                                                                         L          2
                    L(θt+1 ) ≤ L(θt ) + θt+1 − θt , ∇L(θt ) +              θt+1 − θt .
                                                                         2
                                                                            2          2          2
Substituting θt+1 = θt − γRt , and using the identity: 2 ⟨a, b⟩ = ∥a∥ + ∥b∥ − ∥a − b∥ , we obtain
that
                               γ           2    γ                  2  γ              2
          L(θt+1 ) ≤ L(θt ) − ∥∇L(θt )∥ + ∥Rt − ∇L(θt )∥ − (1 − γL) ∥Rt ∥ .
                               2                2                     2
Since γ ≤ L1 , (1 − γL) ≥ 0. Therefore, from above we obtain that
                                               γ          2 γ              2
                      L(θt+1 ) ≤ L(θt ) −        ∥∇L(θt )∥ + ∥Rt − ∇L(θt )∥ .
                                               2            2
Recall that t is chosen arbitrarily from [T ]. Thus, the above holds true for all t ∈ [T ]. Taking
summation on both sides from t = 1 to t = T we obtain that
                    T                                      T
                 γX             2                       γX                  2
                       ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤ L(θt ) − L(θT +1 ) +       ∥Rt − ∇L(θt )∥ .
                 2 t=1                                  2 t=1


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Multiplying both sides by 2/(γT ) we obtain that
                 T                                             T
             1X               2   2 L(θ1 ) − L(θT +1 )     1X                  2
                    ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤                          +       ∥Rt − ∇L(θt )∥ .
             T t=1                         γT              T t=1

Note that L(θ1 ) − L(θT +1 ) = L(θ1 ) − L∗ − L(θT +1 ) − L∗ ≤ L(θ1 ) − L∗ ≤ ∆o . Using this

above we obtain that
                            T                       T
                         1X             2  2∆o   1X                  2
                               ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤     +       ∥Rt − ∇L(θt )∥ .
                         T t=1             γT    T t=1

Recall, by Theorem 3.2, that F ◦ ARC is (f, 3κ)-robust. Therefore, by Definition 2.4,
              2   3κ
                     P                          2
∥Rt − ∇L(θt )∥ ≤ |H|   i∈H ∥∇Li (θt ) − ∇L(θt )∥ for all t. Using this above we obtain that

                     T                                   T
                  1X             2    2∆o     3κ X 1                           2
                       ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤          +             ∥∇Li (θt ) − ∇L(θt )∥ .                       (24)
                 T t=1                γT      T t=1 |H|
                       ∆o                           ∆o L

Note that, since γ ≤ κG 2 T and ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ ≤ exp − κG2    ρ, by Lemma C.3 we have

                                          ∆o L
                 max ∥∇Li (θt )∥ ≤ exp           max ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ ≤ ρ, ∀t ∈ [T ].
                 i∈H                      κG2 i∈H
This, in conjunction with triangle inequality, implies that
                                        1 X
                        ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤             ∥∇Li (θt )∥ ≤ ρ,        ∀t ∈ [T ].
                                       |H|
                                             i∈H

Therefore, under (G, B)-gradient dissimilarity, for all t ∈ [T ],
                               1                       2
                                  ∥∇Li (θt ) − ∇L(θt )∥ ≤ G2 + B 2 ρ2 .
                              |H|
Using this in (24) we obtain that
                               T
                            1X             2  2∆o
                                                  + 3κ G2 + B 2 ρ2 .

                                  ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤                                                           (25)
                            T t=1             γT

Consider the two cases: (i) T ≥ ∆ oL             ∆o L                    ∆o
                                κG2 and (ii) T < κG2 . In case (i), γ = κG2 T . Using this in (25)
implies that
                    T
                1X             2
                      ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤ 2κG2 + 3κ G2 + B 2 ρ2 ≤ 5κ G2 + B 2 ρ2 .

                                                                                                        (26)
                T t=1

In case (ii), γ = L1 . Using this in (25) implies that
                               T
                           1X             2  2∆o L
                                                   + 3κ G2 + B 2 ρ2 .

                                 ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤                                                            (27)
                           T t=1              T

Combining (26) and (27) concludes the proof.

We now prove Theorem C.4, stated below, which immediately implies Theorem 5.2. Specifically,
                                                                                     1
Theorem 5.2 follows immediately from Part 1 of Theorem C.4, upon substituting ξ ≤ Ψ(G,B,ρ) υ.
Theorem C.4. Suppose B > 0 and there exists ζ ∈ R+ such
                                                       1 that maxi∈H ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ ≤ ζ. Let
                                                 ∆o        1           ∆o L
F ∈ {CWTM, CWMed, GM, MK}, γ =            min    κG  T L and T ≥ κG2 . Consider an
                                                   2    ,
                                                   (2+B 2 )∆o
arbitrary real value ξo ∈ (0, 1). Let ρ := exp     (1−ξo )G2 L     ζ. Then, the following holds true:
                                                                        2
      1. If nf := (1 − ξ)BP, where ξ ∈ (0, ξo ], then, E         ∇LH θ̂    ≤ ξ Ψ(G, B, ρ) εo .


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                   2                   2
      2. If BP ≤ f /n < 1/2, then E         ∇LH θ̂    ≤ Ψ(G, B, ρ) · G8 .

In order to prove Theorem C.4, we first obtain the following corollary of Lemma C.2 and Lemma 2.6.
Corollary C.5. For the parameters given in Lemma C.2, if T ≥ ∆ oL
                                                             κG2 , then Robust-DGD ◦ ARC
achieves
                                                               G2
                           2
             E ∇LH θ̂          ≤ 5κ min G2 + B 2 ρ2 ,                         ,
                                                        max{(1 − κB 2 ), 0}

where E [·] denotes the expectation over the choice of θ̂.

Proof of Corollary C.5. For simplicity, we write LH as L throughout the proof.
Since T ≥ ∆ oL       ∆o     1
          κG2 , γ = κG2 T ≤ L . Therefore, from Lemma C.2 we obtain that

                                  T
                               1X             2
                                     ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤ 5κ G2 + B 2 ρ2 .

                                                                                                  (28)
                               T t=1

                                            ∆o
In the specific case when κB 2 < 1, as γ = κG 2 T , from Lemma 2.6 we obtain that


                       T
                   1X             2      2∆o           κG2        3κG2
                         ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤               +          =          .                        (29)
                   T t=1             (1 − κB 2 )γT   1 − κB 2   1 − κB 2

Combining (28) and (29) we obtain that
                       T
                                                              G2

                    1X             2
                          ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤ 5κ min G2 + B 2 ρ2 ,            .
                    T t=1                                  1 − κB 2
       h           i
                 2        PT           2
Since E ∥∇L(θt )∥ = T1 t=1 ∥∇L(θt )∥ (see Algorithm 1), the above concludes the proof.

We are now ready to prove Theorem C.4. Recall that
                                1         1       G2 (f /n)
                     BP :=          ,       ·
                                            εo :=                 ,          and
                             2 + B2       4 1 − (2 + B 2 )(f /n)
                                               2
                                                       B 2 ρ2

                                            1
                     Ψ(G, B, ρ) := 640 1 + 2       1+           .
                                           B             G2

Proof of Theorem C.4. For simplicity, we write LH as L throughout the proof.
                                   1
In the proof, we substitute BP = 2+B 2.


We first consider the case when nf = 2+B
                                      1−ξ
                                         2 . In this particular case,


                                             B2                   B2

                                    2
                           n=           +            f ≥ 2+             f.
                                  1−ξ      1−ξ                   1−ξ
Therefore, thanks to Lemma 2.5, F is (f, κ)-robust with
                         2                               2                            2
     16f            1−ξ         16(1 − ξ)         1−ξ          16(1 − ξ)          1
κ≤            1+            =                 1 +            ≤               1 +         ≤ κo (1 − ξ),
    n−f              B2        1 + B2 + ξ          B2            1 + B2          B2
               16
                             2
where κo := 1+B   2  1 + B12 . Also, recall from the limitations of (f, κ)-robustness in Section 2 that
                                              f     f  1 − ξo
                                   κ≥              ≥ ≥        .
                                            n − 2f  n  2 + B2


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Summarizing from above, we have
                                            1 − ξo
                                                   ≤ κ ≤ κo (1 − ξ).                                           (30)
                                            2 + B2
This implies that
                                            (2 + B 2 )∆o

                                                                      ∆o
                             ρ := exp                    L  ζ ≥ exp       L   ζ.
                                             (1 − ξo )G2              κG2
Therefore, since ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ ≤ ζ for all i ∈ H, the condition: maxi∈H ∥∇Li (θ1 )∥ ≤
       ∆o

exp − κG2 L ρ in Lemma C.2 is satisfied. Thus, by Corollary C.5 and (30) we obtain that
   h
             2
               i                            5κo (1 − ξ)(G2 + B 2 ρ2 )                           f G2
  E ∥∇L(θt )∥ ≤ 5κo (1 − ξ)(G2 + B 2 ρ2 ) =           f G2
                                                                                                           .   (31)
                                                                                           n − (2 + B 2 )f
                                                                  n−(2+B 2 )f

Since nf = 2+B
            1−ξ
               2 , we obtain that


5κo (1 − ξ)(G2 + B 2 ρ2 )                            ξ(2 + B 2 )           B 2 ρ2

                                                  2       2 2
                                                                                    2 + B 2 ξ.

           f G2
                              = 5κo (1 − ξ)(G + B ρ ) 2          = 5κo 1 +
                                                     G (1 − ξ)              G2
        n−(2+B 2 )f

Substituting κo from above, we obtain that
                                                                       2
              5κo (1 − ξ)(G2 + B 2 ρ2 )              2 + B2                      B 2 ρ2

                                                                   1
                           f G2
                                               = 80            1 +          1 +           ξ
                                                     1 + B2        B2             G2
                        n−(2+B 2 )f
                                                              2
                                                                     B 2 ρ2

                                                          1
                                               ≤ 160 1 + 2       1+           ξ.
                                                          B           G2
Substituting from above in (31) concludes the proof for the first part of Theorem C.4.
The second part of Theorem C.4 follows immediately from the first inequality in (31), using the fact
that κo (1 − ξ) ≤ κo . This concludes the proof.

C.1    A SSUMING ∥F (x1 , . . . , xn )∥ ≤ maxi∈[n] ∥xi ∥ IS W ITHOUT L OSS OF G ENERALITY

Recall that we assume ∥F (x1 , . . . , xn )∥ ≤ maxi∈[n] ∥xi ∥ for all set of n vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd .
In case this is not true, we can instead use the aggregation rule F† given by
                 F† (x1 , . . . , xn ) := clipC (F (x1 , . . . , xn )) , where C = max ∥xi ∥ .
                                                                                    i∈[n]

This modification to the aggregation rule does not affect the learning guarantee. Specifically, due to
the non-expansion property of clipC (·), for any non-empty set S ⊆ [n], we have
                             F† (x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ≤ ∥F (x1 , . . . , xn ) − xS ∥ ,
             1
                          xi . Thus, if F is (f, κ)-robust, then F† is also (f, κ)-robust. Hence, we can
                    P
where xS := |S|
                    i∈S
make the above assumption on ∥F (x1 , . . . , xn )∥ without loss of generality.


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D             C OMPREHENSIVE E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

In this section, we present the comprehensive experimental setup considered in our paper.

D.1               DATASETS AND H ETEROGENEITY

In our experiments, we consider three standard image classification datasets, namely MNIST (Deng,
2012), Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2014). To simulate
data heterogeneity in our experiments, we make the honest workers sample from the datasets
using a Dirichlet distribution of parameter α (Hsu et al., 2019a), as done in (Hsu et al., 2019b;
Allouah et al., 2023a; Farhadkhani et al., 2023). The smaller the α, the more heterogeneous the
setting. In our empirical evaluation, we set α ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 1} on (Fashion-)MNIST and α ∈
{0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5} on CIFAR-10 (refer to Figure 6). Furthermore, on MNIST and Fashion-
MNIST, we also consider an extreme heterogeneity setting where the datapoints are sorted by
increasing labels (0 to 9) and sequentially split equally among the honest workers.
The input images of MNIST are normalized with mean 0.1307 and standard deviation 0.3081, while
the images of Fashion-MNIST are horizontally flipped. Moreover, CIFAR-10 is expanded with
horizontally flipped images, followed by a per channel normalization with means 0.4914, 0.4822,
0.4465 and standard deviations 0.2023, 0.1994, 0.2010.


          9                                                       9
                                                                                                                             9
          8                                                       8                                                          8
          7                                                       7                                                          7
          6                                                       6                                                          6
          5                                                       5
  Label


                                                          Label


                                                                                                                             5



                                                                                                                     Label
          4                                                       4                                                          4
          3                                                       3                                                          3
          2                                                       2                                                          2
          1                                                       1                                                          1
          0                                                       0                                                          0
              1    2   3    4   5   6    7   8   9   10               1   2   3    4   5    6   7       8   9   10               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                            Honest Worker                                          Honest Worker                                             Honest Worker

                           (a) α = 0.1                                            (b) α = 0.5                                                (c) α = 1


              9                                                                                     9
              8                                                                                     8
              7                                                                                     7
              6                                                                                     6
              5                                                                                     5
    Label


                                                                                            Label


              4                                                                                     4
              3                                                                                     3
              2                                                                                     2
              1                                                                                     1
              0                                                                                     0
                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                        Honest Worker                                                                  Honest Worker
                                    (d) α = 0.075                                                                      (e) α = 0.2

 Figure 6: Distribution of labels across honest workers on MNIST (row 1) and CIFAR-10 (row 2).


D.2               A LGORITHM , D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEM , ML M ODELS , AND H YPERPARAMETERS

We perform our experiments using Robust-DSGD, an order-optimal robust variant of Robust-
DGD (Allouah et al., 2023a) (see Algorithm 3), in distributed systems of varying sizes. On MNIST
and Fashion-MNIST, we train a convolutional neural network (CNN) of 431,080 parameters
with batch size b = 25, T = 1000, γ = 0.1, and momentum parameter β = 0.9. Moreover,
the negative log likelihood (NLL) loss function is used, along with an ℓ2 -regularization of 10−4 .
On CIFAR-10, we train a CNN of 1,310,922 parameters. We set b = 50, T = 2000, β = 0.9,
and γ = 0.05 decaying once at step 1500. Finally, we use the NLL loss function with an ℓ2


                                                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


regularization of 10−2 . In order to present the architectures of the ML models used in our
experiments, we adopt the following compact terminology introduced in Choffrut et al. (2024).
  L(#outputs) represents a fully-connected linear layer, R stands for ReLU activation, S stands
  for log-softmax, C(#channels) represents a fully-connected 2D-convolutional layer (kernel size 5,
  padding 0, stride 1), M stands for 2D-maxpool (kernel size 2), B stands for batch-normalization,
  and D represents dropout (with fixed probability 0.25).
The comprehensive experimental setup and the architecture of the models are presented in Table 2.


Algorithm 3 Robust Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent (Robust-DSGD)
  Input: Server chooses an initial model θ1 ∈ Rd , learning rate γ ∈ R+ , robust aggregation
  F : Rn×d → Rd , momentum parameter β ∈ R+ . Each honest worker wi sets an initial
                (i)
  momentum m0 = 0 ∈ Rd .
  for t = 1 to T do
    Server broadcasts θt to all workers.
    for each honest worker wi in parallel do
       Sample a random data point z (i) uniformly from Di .
                                     (i)
       Compute stochastic gradient gt := ∇ℓ(θt , z (i) ).
                             (i)             (i)      (i)
       Update momentum: mt := (1 − β)gt + βmt−1 .
               (i)
       Send mt to Server.
                                                                              (j)
       // An adversarial worker wj can send an arbitrary vector in Rd for mt
    end for
                                  (1)         (n)
    Server computes Rt := F mt , . . . , mt .
    Server updates the model: θt+1 := θt − γ Rt .
  end for
  Output: Server outputs θ̂ chosen uniformly at random from {θ1 , . . . , θT }.


           Dataset                (Fashion-)MNIST                         CIFAR-10
     Data heterogeneity         α ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 1} and        α ∈ {0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}
                                      extreme
         Model type                     CNN                                 CNN
     Model architecture        C(20)-R-M-C(20)-R-M-        (3,32×32)-C(64)-R-B-C(64)-R-B-M-
                                 L(500)-R-L(10)-S            D-C(128)-R-B-C(128)-R-B-M-D-
                                                                  L(128)-R-D-L(10)-S
   Number of parameters                431,080                            1,310,922
            Loss                         NLL                                NLL
                                           −4
      ℓ2 -regularization                10                                  10−2
      Number of steps                 T = 1000                            T = 2000
        Learning rate                  γ = 0.1

                                                                      0.05    t ≤ 1500
                                                           γt =
                                                                      0.00082 1500 < t ≤ 2000

   Momentum parameter                  β = 0.9                             β = 0.9
         Batch size                     b = 25                             b = 50

                           Table 2: Comprehensive experimental setup.



                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3   B YZANTINE ATTACKS

In our experiments, the adversarial workers execute five state-of-the-art adversarial attacks from
the Byzantine ML literature, namely sign-flipping (SF) (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020), label-flipping
(LF) (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020), mimic (Karimireddy et al., 2022), fall of empires (FOE) (Xie et al.,
2020), and a little is enough (ALIE) (Baruch et al., 2019). The exact functionality of the attacks is
detailed next. In every step t, let mt be an estimation of the true honest momentum at step t. In our
experiments, we estimate mt by averaging the momentums sent by the honest workers in step t of
                                          1
                                             P        (i)           (i)
Robust-DSGD. In other words, mt = |H|           i∈H mt , where mt is the momentum computed by
honest worker wi in step t.

• SF: the adversarial workers send the vector −mt to the server.
• LF: the adversarial workers compute their gradients on flipped labels, and send the flipped gradients
  to the server. Since the original labels l for (Fashion-)MNIST and CIFAR-10 are in {0, ..., 9},
  the adversarial workers execute a label flip/rotation by computing their gradients on the modified
  labels l′ = 9 − l.
• Mimic: the adversarial workers mimic a certain honest worker by sending its gradient to the server.
  In order to determine the optimal honest worker for the adversarial workers to mimic, we use the
  heuristic in Karimireddy et al. (2022).
• FOE: the adversarial workers send (1 − τ )mt in step t to the server, where τ ≥ 0 is a fixed real
  number representing the attack factor. When τ = 2, this attack is equivalent to SF.
• ALIE: the adversarial workers send mt + τ σt in step t to the server, where τ ≥ 0 is a fixed real
  number representing the attack factor, and σt is the coordinate-wise standard deviation of mt .

Since FOE and ALIE are parametrized by τ ∈ R, we implement in our experiments enhanced and
adaptive versions of these attacks, where the attack factor is not constant and may be different in
every iteration. In every step t, we determine the optimal attack factor τt through a grid search over
a predefined range of values. More specifically, in every step t, τt takes the value that maximizes
the damage inflicted by the adversarial workers, i.e., that maximizes the ℓ2 -norm of the difference
between the average of the honest momentums mt and the output of the aggregation Rt at the server.

D.4   B ENCHMARKING AND R EPRODUCIBILITY

We evaluate the performance of ARC compared to no clipping within the context of Robust-DSGD.
Accordingly, we choose F◦ NNM as aggregator in Algorithm 3, where F ∈ {CWTM, GM, CWMed,
MK} is an aggregation method proved to be (f, κ)-robust (Allouah et al., 2023a). Pre-composing
these aggregation schemes with NNM provides them with optimal (f, κ)-robustness (Allouah et al.,
2023a). As benchmark, we also execute the standard DSGD algorithm in the same setting, but in
the absence of adversarial workers (i.e., without attack and f = 0). We use the metric of worst-case
maximal accuracy to evaluate the performance of our algorithm. In other words, for each of the
aforementioned five Byzantine attacks, we record the maximal accuracy achieved by Robust-DSGD
during the learning under that attack. The worst-case maximal accuracy is thus the smallest maximal
accuracy encountered across the five attacks. As the attack executed by adversarial workers cannot be
known in advance in a practical system, this metric is critical to accurately evaluate the robustness
of aggregation methods, as it gives us an estimate of the potential worst-case performance of the
algorithm. Finally, all our experiments are run with seeds 1 to 5 for reproducibility purposes. We
provide standard deviation measurements for all our results (across the five seeds).


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E                ARC VS . S TATIC C LIPPING

In this section, we present empirical results on static clipping when used as a pre-aggregation
technique in Robust-DSGD, and compare its performance to our proposed adaptive algorithm ARC.

E.1               C OMPARISON WITH S TATIC C LIPPING ON MNIST

On MNIST, we execute Robust-DSGD in a distributed system composed of n = 15 workers, among
which f ∈ {3, 4} are adversarial. We consider three different levels of heterogeneity: moderate
(α = 1), high (α = 0, 1), and extreme (as explained in Appendix D). In our experiments, we examine
a wide range of static clipping parameters C ∈ {0.02, 0.2, 2, 20}.

                1.00                                                               100
Test Accuracy


                                                                   Test Accuracy
                0.75                                                                75
                0.50                                                                50    DGD (f = 0)
                                                                                          CWTM NNM
                0.25                                                                25    CWTM NNM C = 2
                                                                                          CWTM NNM ARC
                0.000     200     400          600   800   1000                      00    200      400          600   800   1000
                                        Step                                                              Step
                (a) Sign-flipping (SF) (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020)            (b) Label-flipping (LF) (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020)
Figure 7: Impact of pre-aggregation clipping, specifically static clipping with C = 2 and our adaptive
clipping algorithm ARC, on Robust-DGD with CWTM ◦ NNM, under the SF and LF attacks. We
consider the MNIST (Deng, 2012) dataset distributed amongst 10 honest (non-adversarial) workers
with extreme heterogeneity, and there are three adversarial workers.

Unreliability due to the attack. First, the efficacy of static clipping is significantly influenced by the
type of Byzantine attack executed during the learning process. To illustrate, while C = 2 exhibits
the best performance under the SF attack (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020), depicted in Figure 7, it leads to a
complete collapse of learning under LF (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020). Consequently, identifying a static
clipping threshold C that consistently performs well in practice against any attack is difficult (if
not impossible). This highlights the fragility of static clipping, as the unpredictable nature of the
Byzantine attack, a parameter that cannot be a priori known, can significantly degrade the performance
of the chosen static clipping approach.
Unreliability due to the heterogeneity model. Second, the robustness under static clipping is
notably influenced by the level of heterogeneity present across the datasets of honest workers. To
illustrate this impact, we present in Figure 2 the performances of Robust-DSGD for different levels of
heterogeneity (moderate, high, and extreme) and different values of C. In Figure 2a, C = 2 emerges
as the best static clipping threshold when the heterogeneity is high whereas C = 20 appears to be
sub-optimal. On the other hand, under extreme heterogeneity, the accuracy associated to C = 2
diminishes drastically while C = 20 becomes a better choice. Intuitively, in heterogeneous scenarios,
honest gradients become large in ℓ2 -norm, due to the increasingly detrimental effect of Byzantine
attacks. Consequently, we must increase the static clipping threshold. This highlights the intricate
dependence of the performance of static clipping on data heterogeneity, and emphasizes the necessity
to fine-tune static clipping strategies prior to the learning.
Unreliability due to the number of adversarial workers. Last but not least, the number of
adversarial workers f also affects the efficacy of static clipping. As seen in Figure 2, C = 2 leads to
the highest accuracy among static clipping strategies when f = 3 in high heterogeneity, but cannot
be used when f = 4 as its corresponding accuracy drops below 50% (see Figure 2b).
Overall, our empirical findings reveal that there is no single value of C for which static clipping
consistently delivers satisfactory performance across the various settings. We have also shown that
the performance of static clipping is greatly influenced on typically uncontrollable parameters, such
as data heterogeneity and the nature of the Byzantine attack. Indeed, it should be noted that explicitly
estimating these parameters is challenging (if not impossible) in a distributed setting. First, since the
server does not have direct access to the data, it cannot estimate the degree of heterogeneity. Second,
as (by definition) an adversarial worker can behave in an unpredictable manner, we cannot adjust C


                                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to the attack(s) being executed by the adversarial workers. This highlights the necessity for a robust
clipping alternative that can naturally adapt to the setting in which it is deployed.
In contrast to static clipping, ARC is adaptive, delivering consistent performance across diverse levels
of heterogeneity, Byzantine attacks, and number of adversarial workers.
Adaptiveness. ARC dynamically adjusts its clipping parameter Ct based on the norms of honest
momentums at step t, avoiding static over-clipping or under-clipping. This adaptability is evident in
Figure 8, where Ct consistently decreases with time under all attacks, an expected behavior when
reaching convergence. Moreover, Figure 8 also illustrates that any surge in the norm of the honest
mean corresponds to a direct increase in Ct , highlighting the adaptive nature of ARC.
Robust performance across heterogeneity regimes. The efficacy of our solution is illustrated
in Figure 2, showcasing a consistently robust performance for all considered heterogeneity levels.
Specifically, in scenarios of moderate heterogeneity where clipping may not be essential, ARC
matches the performance of No clipping as well as static strategies C = 2 and C = 20. Conversely,
Figure 2a shows that under high and extreme heterogeneity, ARC surpasses the best static clipping
strategy in terms of accuracy, highlighting the effectiveness of our approach.
Robust performance across Byzantine regimes. ARC exhibits robust performance across diverse
Byzantine scenarios, encompassing variations in both the type of Byzantine attack and the number of
adversarial workers f . As depicted in Figures 7 and 2, ARC consistently yields robust performance,
regardless of the Byzantine attack. In extreme heterogeneity with f = 3, ARC maintains an accuracy
of 75%, while C = 2 demonstrates a subpar worst-case accuracy of 25% (also refer to Figure 7b).
Furthermore, despite the increase in the number of adversarial workers to f = 4, ARC remains the
top-performing clipping approach among all considered strategies.
This analysis underscores the empirical superiority of ARC over static clipping methods, eliminating
the reliance on data heterogeneity and the specific Byzantine regime. Similar trends are also observed
in Figure 9, when executing Robust-DSGD using other aggregation methods such as CWMed ◦
NNM, GM ◦ NNM, and Multi-Krum ◦ NNM.

                               ALIE                                    SF
                                             Ct                                     Ct
            7.5                               x                                      x
            5.0
            2.5
            0.0
                  0   200 400 600 800 1000             0     200 400 600 800 1000
                             t                                      t
                               FOE                                     LF
                                             Ct                                     Ct
            7.5                               x                                      x
            5.0
            2.5
            0.0
                  0   200 400 600 800 1000             0     200 400 600 800 1000
                             t                                      t
Figure 8: Evolution of the adaptive clipping parameter Ct of ARC compared to the norm of the
honest mean during the learning on heterogeneous MNIST (α = 1). There are f = 3 adversarial
workers among n = 15. CWTM ◦ NNM is used as aggregation.


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      100     extreme
                                                = 0.1
                                      90        =1
                                      80


                  Test Accuracy (%)
                                      70
                                      60
                                      50
                                      40
                                      30
                                      20
                                      10
                                       0
                                            C = 0.02    C = 0.2    C=2        C = 20   No clipping   ARC


                                                              (a) CWMed ◦ NNM


                                      100     extreme
                                                = 0.1
                                      90        =1
                                      80
                  Test Accuracy (%)


                                      70
                                      60
                                      50
                                      40
                                      30
                                      20
                                      10
                                       0
                                            C = 0.02    C = 0.2    C=2        C = 20   No clipping   ARC


                                                                  (b) GM ◦ NNM


                                      100     extreme
                                                = 0.1
                                      90        =1
                                      80
                  Test Accuracy (%)


                                      70
                                      60
                                      50
                                      40
                                      30
                                      20
                                      10
                                       0
                                            C = 0.02    C = 0.2    C=2        C = 20   No clipping   ARC


                                                                  (c) MK ◦ NNM

Figure 9: Impact of the clipping strategy on the worst-case maximal accuracy achieved during the
learning against five Byzantine attacks on heterogeneous MNIST, with f = 3 and n = 15.


                                                                         33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2                        C OMPARISON WITH S TATIC C LIPPING ON FASHION -MNIST

On Fashion-MNIST, we execute Robust-DSGD in a distributed system composed of n = 15 workers,
among which f = 3 are adversarial. See Figure 10.


                      80                                                                                  80
                              extreme                                                                            extreme
                                = 0.1                                                                              = 0.1
                      70        =1                                                                        70       =1

                      60                                                                                  60
  Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                          Test Accuracy
                      50                                                                                  50

                      40                                                                                  40

                      30                                                                                  30

                      20                                                                                  20

                      10                                                                                  10

                      0                                                                                   0
                            C = 0.02    C = 0.2   C=2   C = 20   No clipping   ARC                             C = 0.02    C = 0.2   C=2   C = 20   No clipping   ARC



                      80                                                                                  80
                              extreme                                                                            extreme
                                = 0.1                                                                              = 0.1
                      70        =1                                                                        70       =1
                      60                                                                                  60
  Test Accuracy


                                                                                          Test Accuracy
                      50                                                                                  50

                      40                                                                                  40

                      30                                                                                  30

                      20                                                                                  20

                      10                                                                                  10

                      0                                                                                   0
                            C = 0.02    C = 0.2   C=2   C = 20   No clipping   ARC                             C = 0.02    C = 0.2   C=2   C = 20   No clipping   ARC



Figure 10: Impact of the clipping strategy and heterogeneity level on the worst-case maximal
accuracy achieved during the learning against five Byzantine attacks on Fashion-MNIST. f = 3 and
n = 15, and the heterogeneity levels considered are extreme, high (α = 0.1), and moderate (α = 1).
Aggregation methods used: CWTM ◦ NNM (top left), CWMed ◦ NNM (top right), GM ◦ NNM
(bottom left), and Multi-Krum ◦ NNM (bottom right). DSGD reaches 85% in accuracy in all settings.


                                                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3    C OMPARISON WITH S TATIC C LIPPING ON CIFAR-10

For this particular experiment, we execute Robust-DSGD using the ResNet-18 (He et al., 2015)
model, in a distributed system comprising n = 9 workers among which f ∈ {1, 2} are adversarial.
We set b = 128, T = 2000, β = 0.9, and γ = 0.1 decaying once by 10× at step 1500. Finally, we
use the cross-entropy loss function with an ℓ2 -regularization of 5 × 10−4 . See Tables 3 and 4.

      Attack    C = 0.05       C = 0.5         C=5            C = 50       No clipping       ARC
      FOE       26.4 ± 1.2   52.6 ± 2.0      76.4 ± 5.4     47.0 ± 8.0     43.0 ± 6.2     79.1 ± 1.6
      ALIE      34.6 ± 1.3   43.3 ± 1.1      47.2 ± 3.4     47.2 ± 4.2     47.2 ± 4.2     51.8 ± 3.5
       LF       33.7 ± 1.5   58.4 ± 1.8      83.6 ± 1.2     85.7 ± 0.5     85.9 ± 0.4     81.5 ± 1.4
       SF       32.3 ± 1.4   57.9 ± 1.2      77.2 ± 4.6     68.6 ± 8.5     66.4 ± 9.0     82.0 ± 1.1
      Mimic     38.2 ± 1.6   68.3 ± 1.4     85.6 ± 0.42     85.7 ± 0.4     85.7 ± 0.4     85.4 ± 0.5
  Worst-case    26.4 ± 1.2   43.3 ± 1.1     47.2 ± 3.4      47.0 ± 8.0     43.0 ± 6.2     51.8 ± 3.5

Table 3: Maximum accuracy (%) achieved by CWTM ◦ NNM on CIFAR-10 under moderate
heterogeneity (α = 1), for various clipping strategies and attacks. There are f = 2 adversarial
workers among n = 9. We highlight in blue the highest accuracy achieved per attack (i.e., per row).

      Attack    C = 0.05       C = 0.5         C=5          C = 50        No clipping       ARC
      FOE       28.9 ± 1.7   56.8 ± 1.9    75.6 ± 2.8     35.5 ± 11.6    34.9 ± 12.2     75.9 ± 3.0
      ALIE      34.9 ± 1.3   43.4 ± 1.0     47.4 ± 4.1     44.9 ± 3.8     44.9 ± 3.8     54.6 ± 3.6
       LF       33.7 ± 1.4   58.4 ± 1.8    77.4 ± 12.9     85.8 ± 0.6     85.6 ± 0.7     80.5 ± 1.8
       SF       32.5 ± 1.4   57.5 ± 1.4     77.7 ± 5.0    63.0 ± 12.0    55.4 ± 18.9     82.5 ± 0.3
      Mimic     38.1 ± 1.3   68.5 ± 1.4    85.5 ± 0.5      85.9 ± 0.5     85.9 ± 0.5     85.4 ± 0.2
  Worst-case    28.9 ± 1.7   43.4 ± 1.0     47.4 ± 4.1    35.5 ± 11.6    34.9 ± 12.2     54.6 ± 3.6

Table 4: Maximum accuracy (%) achieved by CWMed ◦ NNM on heterogeneous CIFAR-10 (α = 1),
for various clipping strategies and attacks. There are f = 2 adversarial workers among n = 9. We
highlight in blue the highest accuracy achieved per attack (i.e., per row).


                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     P ERFORMANCE G AINS OF ARC OVER ROBUST-DSGD
In this section, we present additional experimental results demonstrating the performance improve-
ments achieved by ARC in Robust-DSGD on the MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, and CIFAR-10 datasets.
These results could not be included in the main paper due to space constraints.

F.1     MNIST

F.1.1            I NITIAL S YSTEM (M AIN PAPER ): 10 H ONEST W ORKERS
We consider training on MNIST in a system comprised of n − f = 10 honest workers. These results
complement the ones presented in Section 4 of the main paper.

                      100                              CWMed NNM
                                                                                             100
                                                       CWMed NNM ARC
                                                       Multi-Krum NNM
                       80                              Multi-Krum NNM ARC                     80
      Test Accuracy


                                                                             Test Accuracy
                       60                                                                     60

                       40                                                                     40

                       20                                                                     20   CWMed NNM
                                                                                                   CWMed NNM ARC
                                                                                                   Multi-Krum NNM
                                                                                                   Multi-Krum NNM ARC
                        0                                                                      0
                            1        2         3          4            5                             2       4          6          8
                                  Number of adversarial workers f                                    Number of adversarial workers f

                                       (a) extreme                                                          (b) α = 0.5
                      100                                 CWTM NNM
                                                                                             100                          CWMed NNM
                                                          CWTM NNM ARC                                                    CWMed NNM ARC
                                                          GM NNM                                                          Multi-Krum NNM
                       80                                 GM NNM ARC                          80                          Multi-Krum NNM ARC
      Test Accuracy


                                                                             Test Accuracy


                       60                                                                     60

                       40                                                                     40

                       20                                                                     20

                        0                                                                      0
                                 2       4          6          8                                     2       4          6          8
                                 Number of adversarial workers f                                     Number of adversarial workers f

                                       (c) α = 0.1                                                          (d) α = 0.1
                      100                                                                    100

                       80                                                                     80
      Test Accuracy


                                                                             Test Accuracy


                       60                                                                     60

                       40                                                                     40

                       20       CWTM NNM
                                CWTM NNM ARC                                                  20   CWMed NNM
                                                                                                   CWMed NNM ARC
                                GM NNM                                                             Multi-Krum NNM
                                GM NNM ARC                                                         Multi-Krum NNM ARC
                        0                                                                      0
                                 2       4          6          8                                     2       4          6          8
                                 Number of adversarial workers f                                     Number of adversarial workers f

                                        (e) α = 1                                                            (f) α = 1

Figure 11: Worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by Robust-DSGD when using ARC compared to
no clipping, on heterogeneously-distributed MNIST with 10 honest workers. We fix the heterogeneity
level, and vary the the number of adversarial workers f .



                                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    100                                                                                                           100
    Test Accuracy     80                                                                                                           80


                                                                                                                  Test Accuracy
                      60                                                                                                           60

                      40                                                                                                           40

                      20           CWTM NNM
                                   CWTM NNM ARC                                                                                    20     CWTM NNM
                                                                                                                                          CWTM NNM ARC
                                   GM NNM                                                                                                 GM NNM
                                   GM NNM ARC                                                                                             GM NNM ARC
                       0                                                                                                            0
                             =1                  = 0.5        = 0.1                          extreme                                    =1                = 0.5        = 0.1                           extreme
                                                Heterogeneity Level                                                                                      Heterogeneity Level
                                                  (a) f = 3                                                                                                         (b) f = 5
                100                                                                   100                                                                          100

                 80                                                                    80                                                                           80
Test Accuracy


                                                                      Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                   Test Accuracy
                 60                                                                    60                                                                           60

                 40                                                                    40                                                                           40

                 20        CWMed NNM
                           CWMed NNM ARC                                               20    CWMed NNM
                                                                                             CWMed NNM ARC                                                          20      CWMed NNM
                                                                                                                                                                            CWMed NNM ARC
                           Multi-Krum NNM                                                    Multi-Krum NNM                                                                 Multi-Krum NNM
                           Multi-Krum NNM ARC                                                Multi-Krum NNM ARC                                                             Multi-Krum NNM ARC
                  0                                                                     0                                                                            0
                      =1            = 0.5        = 0.1     extreme                          =1        = 0.5        = 0.1                 extreme                         =1          = 0.5        = 0.1   extreme
                                   Heterogeneity Level                                               Heterogeneity Level                                                            Heterogeneity Level

                                   (c) f = 1                                                         (d) f = 3                                                                      (e) f = 5

Figure 12: Worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by Robust-DSGD when using ARC compared to
no clipping, on heterogeneously-distributed MNIST with 10 honest workers. We fix the number of
adversarial workers f , and vary the heterogeneity level.



                  100                                                                                                         100                                                           DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                                                                                            CWTM NNM
 Test Accuracy


                                                                                                              Test Accuracy


                   75                                                                                                          75                                                           CWTM NNM ARC
                                                                                                                                                                                            GM NNM
                   50                                                 DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                      CWTM NNM
                                                                                                                               50                                                           GM NNM ARC
                                                                      CWTM NNM ARC
                   25                                                 GM NNM                                                   25
                                                                      GM NNM ARC
                    00                 200         400          600                    800       1000                           00           200                     400            600          800      1000
                                                         Step                                                                                                              Step
                                                  (a) ALIE                                                                                                               (b) SF
                  100                                                                                                         100                                                           DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                                                                                            CWTM NNM
 Test Accuracy


                                                                                                              Test Accuracy


                   75                                                                                                          75                                                           CWTM NNM ARC
                                                                                                                                                                                            GM NNM
                   50                                                 DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                      CWTM NNM
                                                                                                                               50                                                           GM NNM ARC
                                                                      CWTM NNM ARC
                   25                                                 GM NNM                                                   25
                                                                      GM NNM ARC
                    00                 200         400          600                    800       1000                           00           200                     400            600          800      1000
                                                         Step                                                                                                              Step
                                                   (c) LF                                                                                                          (d) Mimic

Figure 13: Performance of Robust-DSGD when using ARC compared to no clipping, on
heterogeneously-distributed MNIST (extreme heterogeneity) with 10 honest workers and f = 1,
under several attacks. This complements Figure 3c of the main paper.



                                                                                                           37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Test Accuracy   100                                                                                                                100


                                                                                                                      Test Accuracy
                    75                                                         DSGD (f = 0)                                            75                                                     DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                               CWTM NNM                                                                                                       CWTM NNM
                    50                                                         CWTM NNM ARC
                                                                               GM NNM
                                                                                                                                       50                                                     CWTM NNM ARC
                                                                                                                                                                                              GM NNM
                                                                               GM NNM ARC                                                                                                     GM NNM ARC
                    25                                                                                                                 25
                     00          200            400                     600                     800      1000                           00            200                  400          600            800         1000
                                                          Step                                                                                                                   Step
                                                (a) FOE                                                                                                                     (b) SF
                100                                                                            100                                     DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                                                                         100                                 DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                                       CWTM NNM                                                              CWTM NNM
Test Accuracy


                                                                               Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                         Test Accuracy
                 75                                                                             75                                     CWTM NNM ARC                       75                                 CWTM NNM ARC
                                                                                                                                       GM NNM                                                                GM NNM
                 50                                 DSGD (f = 0)
                                                    CWTM NNM
                                                                                                50                                     GM NNM ARC                         50                                 GM NNM ARC
                                                    CWTM NNM ARC
                 25                                 GM NNM                                      25                                                                        25
                                                    GM NNM ARC
                  00      200    400          600      800              1000                     00     200     400              600        800   1000                     00     200     400          600      800    1000
                                       Step                                                                           Step                                                                      Step

                                (c) ALIE                                                                       (d) LF                                                                   (e) Mimic

Figure 14: Performance of Robust-DSGD when using ARC compared to no clipping, on heteroge-
neous MNIST (α = 0.1) with 10 honest workers and f = 3, under several attacks.


                   100                                                         DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                                 1.00
                                                                               CWTM NNM
   Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                 Test Accuracy


                    75                                                         CWTM NNM ARC                                      0.75
                                                                               GM NNM
                    50                                                         GM NNM ARC                                        0.50
                    25                                                                                                           0.25
                     00          200            400                     600                     800      1000                    0.000             200                     400          600            800         1000
                                                          Step                                                                                                                   Step
                                               (a) f = 3                                                                                                                  (b) f = 4
                                                                       1.00
                                                       Test Accuracy


                                                                       0.75
                                                                       0.50
                                                                       0.25
                                                                       0.000                      200         400                     600         800              1000
                                                                                                                    Step
                                                                                                              (c) f = 5

Figure 15: Performance of Robust-DSGD under the LF attack when using ARC compared to no
clipping, on heterogeneously-distributed MNIST (α = 0.1) with 10 honest workers and varying
number of adversarial workers f .


                                                                                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1.2                   L ARGER S YSTEM : 30 H ONEST W ORKERS
We consider training on the MNIST dataset in a larger system comprised of n − f = 30 honest
workers, and f ∈ {3, 6, 9} adversarial workers.

                  100                                                                      100
                                                                                                                               DSGD (f = 0)
  Test Accuracy


                                                                           Test Accuracy
                                                                                                                               CWTM ∘ NNM
                                                      DSGD (f = 0)
                  75                                  CWTM ∘ NNM                           75                                  CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                               GM ∘ NNM
                                                      CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                               GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      GM ∘ NNM
                  50                                  GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                           50                                  CWMED ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                               CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      CWMED ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                               MK ∘ NNM
                  25                                  CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      MK ∘ NNM
                                                                                           25                                  MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC

                                                      MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                   0                                                                        0
                        0    200   400          600      800       1000                          0   200   400          600       800       1000
                                         Step                                                                    Step

                                   (a) ALIE                                                                (b) SF
                  100                                                                      100
                                                                                                                               DSGD (f = 0)
  Test Accuracy


                                                                           Test Accuracy
                                                                                                                               CWTM ∘ NNM
                                                      DSGD (f = 0)
                  75                                  CWTM ∘ NNM                           75                                  CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                               GM ∘ NNM
                                                      CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                               GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      GM ∘ NNM
                  50                                  GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                           50                                  CWMED ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                               CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      CWMED ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                               MK ∘ NNM
                  25                                  CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      MK ∘ NNM
                                                                                           25                                  MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC

                                                      MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                   0                                                                        0
                        0    200   400          600      800       1000                          0   200   400          600       800       1000
                                         Step                                                                    Step

                                    (c) LF                                                                 (d) FOE

Figure 16: Performance of Robust-DSGD when using ARC and without clipping on distributed
MNIST under extreme heterogeneity. There are f = 3 adversarial workers executing 4 attacks.


                  100                                                                      100
  Test Accuracy


                                                                           Test Accuracy


                                                      DSGD (f = 0)                                          DSGD (f = 0)
                  75                                  CWTM ∘ NNM                           75               CWTM ∘ NNM
                                                      CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                       CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      GM ∘ NNM                                              GM ∘ NNM
                  50                                  GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                           50               GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      CWMED ∘ NNM                                           CWMED ∘ NNM

                  25                                  CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      MK ∘ NNM
                                                                                           25               CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                            MK ∘ NNM
                                                      MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                         MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                   0                                                                        0
                        0    200   400          600      800       1000                          0   200   400          600       800       1000
                                         Step                                                                    Step

                                   (a) ALIE                                                                (b) SF
                  100                                                                      100
                                                      DSGD (f = 0)
  Test Accuracy


                                                                           Test Accuracy


                                                      CWTM ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                               DSGD (f = 0)
                  75                                  CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC                      75                                  CWTM ∘ NNM
                                                      GM ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                               CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                               GM ∘ NNM
                  50                                  CWMED ∘ NNM                          50                                  GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                      CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                               CWMED ∘ NNM
                                                      MK ∘ NNM
                  25                                  MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC                        25                                  CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                               MK ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                               MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                   0                                                                        0
                        0    200   400          600      800       1000                          0   200   400          600       800       1000
                                         Step                                                                    Step

                                    (c) LF                                                                 (d) FOE

Figure 17: Performance of Robust-DSGD when using ARC and without clipping on heterogeneously-
distributed MNIST with α = 0.1. There are f = 6 adversarial workers executing 4 attacks.


                                                                          39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   100                                                                                           100
  Test Accuracy


                                                                                                 Test Accuracy
                                                  DSGD (f = 0)                                                                                                DSGD (f = 0)
                   75                             CWTM ∘ NNM                                                          75                                      CWTM ∘ NNM
                                                  CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                                                                             CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                  GM ∘ NNM                                                                                                    GM ∘ NNM
                   50                             GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                      50                                      GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                  CWMED ∘ NNM                                                                                                 CWMED ∘ NNM

                   25                             CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                  MK ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                      25                                      CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                                                              MK ∘ NNM
                                                  MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                                                                               MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                    0                                                                                                  0
                         0         200          400          600        800       1000                                     0       200     400          600      800         1000
                                                      Step                                                                                       Step

                                               (a) ALIE                                                                                     (b) SF
                   100                                                                                           100
                                                                                                                                                              DSGD (f = 0)
  Test Accuracy


                                                                                                 Test Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                              CWTM ∘ NNM
                                                                     DSGD (f = 0)
                   75                                                CWTM ∘ NNM                                       75                                      CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                                                              GM ∘ NNM
                                                                     CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                                                              GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                     GM ∘ NNM
                   50                                                GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                      50                                      CWMED ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                                                              CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                     CWMED ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                                                              MK ∘ NNM
                   25                                                CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                     MK ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                      25                                      MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC

                                                                     MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                    0                                                                                                  0
                         0         200          400          600        800       1000                                     0       200     400          600      800         1000
                                                      Step                                                                                       Step

                                                 (c) LF                                                                                    (d) FOE

Figure 18: Performance of Robust-DSGD when using ARC and without clipping on heterogeneously-
distributed MNIST with α = 0.1. There are f = 9 adversarial workers executing 4 attacks.


                   100                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                                              CWTM ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                                                              CWTM ∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                                                              GM ∘ NNM
                    80                                                                                                 80                                     GM ∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                                                              CWMed ∘ NNM
   Test Accuracy


                                                                                                      Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                              CWMed ∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                                                              Multi-Krum ∘ NNM
                    60                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                              Multi-Krum ∘ NNM ∘ ARC

                                 CWTM ∘ NNM
                    40           CWTM ∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                                                      40
                                 GM ∘ NNM
                                 GM ∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                 CWMed ∘ NNM
                    20           CWMed ∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                       20
                                 Multi-Krum ∘ NNM
                                 Multi-Krum ∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                     0                                                                                                  0
                             3                   6                                      9                                      3                 6                               9
                                    Number of adversarial workers f                                                                 Number of adversarial workers f


                                            (a) α = 0.1                                                                            (b) extreme heterogeneity

Figure 19: Worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by Robust-DSGD, with and without ARC, on
heterogeneously-distributed MNIST with 30 honest workers. We consider a heterogeneous data
distribution with α = 0.1 (left) and extreme heterogeneity (right), and vary f ∈ {3, 6, 9}.


                                                                                            40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2               FASHION -MNIST

                 100                               CWTM NNM
                                                                                   100                            CWMed NNM
                                                   CWTM NNM ARC                                                   CWMed NNM ARC
                                                   GM NNM                                                         Multi-Krum NNM
                  80                               GM NNM ARC                       80                            Multi-Krum NNM ARC
 Test Accuracy


                                                                   Test Accuracy
                  60                                                                60

                  40                                                                40

                  20                                                                20

                   0                                                                 0
                       1      2         3          4         5                           1      2         3          4            5
                           Number of adversarial workers f                                   Number of adversarial workers f
                                 (a) α = 0.1                                                      (b) α = 0.1
                 100                               CWTM NNM
                                                                                   100                            CWMed NNM
                                                   CWTM NNM ARC                                                   CWMed NNM ARC
                                                   GM NNM                                                         Multi-Krum NNM
                  80                               GM NNM ARC                       80                            Multi-Krum NNM ARC
 Test Accuracy


                                                                   Test Accuracy
                  60                                                                60

                  40                                                                40

                  20                                                                20

                   0                                                                 0
                       1      2         3          4         5                           1      2         3          4            5
                           Number of adversarial workers f                                   Number of adversarial workers f
                                (c) α = 0.05                                                      (d) α = 0.05
                 100                               CWTM NNM
                                                                                   100                            CWMed NNM
                                                   CWTM NNM ARC                                                   CWMed NNM ARC
                                                   GM NNM                                                         Multi-Krum NNM
                  80                               GM NNM ARC                       80                            Multi-Krum NNM ARC
 Test Accuracy


                                                                   Test Accuracy


                  60                                                                60

                  40                                                                40

                  20                                                                20

                   0                                                                 0
                       1      2         3          4         5                           1      2         3          4            5
                           Number of adversarial workers f                                   Number of adversarial workers f
                                 (e) extreme                                                       (f) extreme

Figure 20: Worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by Robust-DSGD when using ARC compared
to no clipping, on heterogeneously-distributed Fashion-MNIST with 10 honest workers. We fix the
heterogeneity level and vary the number of adversarial workers f .


                                                                  41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 100                                                               100

                  80                                                                80
 Test Accuracy


                                                                   Test Accuracy
                  60                                                                60

                  40                                                                40

                  20       CWTM NNM
                           CWTM NNM ARC                                             20       CWMed NNM
                                                                                             CWMed NNM ARC
                           GM NNM                                                            Multi-Krum NNM
                           GM NNM ARC                                                        Multi-Krum NNM ARC
                   0                                                                 0
                       = 0.5      = 0.1       = 0.05    extreme                          = 0.5        = 0.1       = 0.05        extreme
                                 Heterogeneity Level                                                 Heterogeneity Level
                                    (a) f = 1                                                           (b) f = 1
                 100                             CWTM NNM
                                                                                   100                              CWMed NNM
                                                 CWTM NNM ARC                                                       CWMed NNM ARC
                                                 GM NNM                                                             Multi-Krum NNM
                  80                             GM NNM ARC                         80                              Multi-Krum NNM ARC
 Test Accuracy


                                                                   Test Accuracy


                  60                                                                60

                  40                                                                40

                  20                                                                20

                   0                                                                 0
                       = 0.5      = 0.1       = 0.05    extreme                          = 0.5        = 0.1       = 0.05        extreme
                                 Heterogeneity Level                                                 Heterogeneity Level
                                    (c) f = 3                                                           (d) f = 3
                 100                             CWTM NNM
                                                                                   100                              CWMed NNM
                                                 CWTM NNM ARC                                                       CWMed NNM ARC
                                                 GM NNM                                                             Multi-Krum NNM
                  80                             GM NNM ARC                         80                              Multi-Krum NNM ARC
 Test Accuracy


                                                                   Test Accuracy


                  60                                                                60

                  40                                                                40

                  20                                                                20

                   0                                                                 0
                       = 0.5      = 0.1       = 0.05    extreme                          = 0.5        = 0.1       = 0.05        extreme
                                 Heterogeneity Level                                                 Heterogeneity Level
                                    (e) f = 4                                                           (f) f = 4

Figure 21: Worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by Robust-DSGD when using ARC compared
to no clipping, on heterogeneously-distributed Fashion-MNIST with 10 honest workers. We fix the
number of adversarial workers f and vary the heterogeneity level.


                                                                  42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3                CIFAR-10

Initial System (Main Paper): 16 Honest Workers

                                                             α = 0.2                                     α = 0.075
                                Aggregation          No Clipping     ARC                          No Clipping     ARC
                                  CWMed              43.4 ± 4.2    69.4 ± 0.8                     13.7 ± 12.1      62.7 ± 1.2
                                   MK                50.9 ± 5.1    68.7 ± 0.5                      40.5 ± 0.7      59.9 ± 1.9

Table 5: Worst-case maximal accuracies (%) achieved by Robust-DSGD on heterogeneously-
distributed CIFAR-10 with ARC and without. There is f = 1 adversarial worker among n = 17. As
a baseline, DSGD (f = 0) reaches 76.5% and 70% when α = 0.2 and 0.075, respectively. This table
complements Table 1 in the main paper.

                  100                                     CWTM NNM
                                                                                           100                              CWMed NNM
                                                          CWTM NNM ARC                                                      CWMed NNM ARC
                                                          GM NNM                                                            Multi-Krum NNM
                   80                                     GM NNM ARC                        80                              Multi-Krum NNM ARC
  Test Accuracy


                                                                           Test Accuracy
                   60                                                                       60

                   40                                                                       40

                   20                                                                       20

                    0                                                                        0
                        0.5          0.2      0.1      0.075      0.05                           0.5    0.2      0.1      0.075           0.05
                                      Heterogeneity Level                                                Heterogeneity Level
                                         (a) f = 1                                                           (b) f = 1

Figure 22: Worst-case maximal accuracies achieved by Robust-DSGD when using ARC compared to
no clipping, on heterogeneously-distributed CIFAR-10 with 16 honest workers. We fix the number of
adversarial workers f = 1 and vary the heterogeneity level.


                100       DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                           100
                          CWTM NNM
Test Accuracy


                                                                           Test Accuracy


                 75       CWTM NNM ARC
                          GM NNM
                                                                                            75
                          GM NNM ARC
                 50                                                                         50                  DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                CWTM NNM
                 25                                                                         25                  CWTM NNM ARC
                                                                                                                GM NNM
                                                                                                                GM NNM ARC
                  00              500         1000      1500      2000                       00        500        1000          1500      2000
                                              Step                                                                Step
                          (a) FOE with CWTM and GM                                                 (b) ALIE with CWTM and GM
                 100          DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                          100
                              CWMED NNM
 Test Accuracy


                                                                          Test Accuracy


                  75          CWMED NNM ARC
                              MK NNM
                                                                                           75
                              MK NNM ARC
                  50                                                                       50                   DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                CWMED NNM
                  25                                                                       25                   CWMED NNM ARC
                                                                                                                MK NNM
                                                                                                                MK NNM ARC
                   00              500        1000      1500      2000                      00         500       1000           1500     2000
                                              Step                                                               Step
                          (c) FOE with CWMed and MK                                               (d) ALIE with CWMed and MK

Figure 23: Performance achieved by Robust-DSGD when using ARC compared to no clipping, on
heterogeneously-distributed CIFAR-10 (α = 0.075) with 16 honest workers and f = 1 executing
ALIE and FOE.


                                                                         43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We also test the performance of ARC in more adversarial regimes, with f ∈ {2, 3} adversarial
workers (along with n − f = 16 honest workers). We consider heterogeneity regimes of α = 0.2 and
0.5, when f = 2 and 3, respectively. The results are presented in Table 6, and we show in Figure 24
the performance of ARC compared to no clipping under the FOE attack.

                                                               f = 2, α = 0.2                                  f = 3, α = 0.5
                               Aggregation                No Clipping     ARC                             No Clipping     ARC
                           CWTM ◦ NNM                     44.3 ± 5.2       53.0 ± 4.7                     52.0 ± 1.3        55.4 ± 1.1
                            GM ◦ NNM                      33.8 ± 6.7       50.2 ± 3.3                     50.9 ± 2.5        49.6 ± 1.4
                           CWMed ◦ NNM                    32.6 ± 9.8       49.7 ± 2.7                     48.7 ± 2.4        62.7 ± 0.9
                            MK ◦ NNM                      45.0 ± 4.2       51.9 ± 2.1                     50.3 ± 1.4        50.2 ± 2.4

Table 6: Worst-case maximal accuracies (%) achieved by Robust-DSGD on heterogeneously-
distributed CIFAR-10 with ARC and without. There are f ∈ {2, 3} adversarial workers with
n − f = 16 honest workers.


                     100                                                                        100
                                DSGD (f = 0)
     Test Accuracy


                                                                                Test Accuracy
                                CWTM ∘ NNM
                     75         CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                                 75
                                GM ∘ NNM
                                GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                     50                                                                         50                DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                  CWTM ∘ NNM

                     25                                                                         25                CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                  GM ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                  GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                      0                                                                          0
                           0          500          1000      1500       2000                          0    500     1000             1500         2000
                                                   Step                                                            Step


                                     (a) f = 2, α = 0.2                                                    (b) f = 3, α = 0.5
                     100                                                                        100
                                DSGD (f = 0)
     Test Accuracy


                                                                                Test Accuracy


                                CWMED ∘ NNM
                     75         CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                                75
                                MK ∘ NNM
                                MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                     50                                                                         50                                  DSGD (f = 0)
                                                                                                                                    CWMED ∘ NNM

                     25                                                                         25                                  CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                                                                                                                    MK ∘ NNM
                                                                                                                                    MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                      0                                                                          0
                           0          500          1000      1500       2000                          0    500     1000             1500         2000
                                                   Step                                                            Step


                                     (c) f = 2, α = 0.2                                                    (d) f = 3, α = 0.5

Figure 24: Performance of Robust-DSGD when using ARC and without clipping on CIFAR-10.
There are 16 honest workers, and f = 2 (left) and f = 3 (right) adversarial workers executing the
FOE attack. The aggregations used are CWTM ◦ NNM and GM ◦ NNM (top), and CWMed ◦ NNM
and MK ◦ NNM (bottom).

Larger System: 33 Honest Workers We also run experiments on CIFAR-10 in a larger system
comprised of n − f = 33 honest workers and f ∈ {2, 3} adversarial workers. We consider the high
heterogeneity regime of α = 0.1. The results are presented in Table 7, and we show in Figure 25 the
performance of ARC compared to no clipping under the FOE attack.

                                                                   f =2                                             f =3
                               Aggregation                No Clipping   ARC                               No Clipping    ARC
                           CWTM ◦ NNM                      45.5 ± 1.3     54.2 ± 1.0                      41.3 ± 0.5        47.5 ± 1.5
                            GM ◦ NNM                       41.8 ± 1.1     55.2 ± 2.2                      40.0 ± 1.2        47.5 ± 1.5
                           CWMed ◦ NNM                    42.5 ± 1.42     54.7 ± 1.2                      35.7 ± 8.7        49.7 ± 3.4
                            MK ◦ NNM                       45.8 ± 0.8     54.8 ± 2.5                      41.4 ± 0.6        48.7 ± 2.8

Table 7: Worst-case maximal accuracies (%) achieved by Robust-DSGD on heterogeneously-
distributed CIFAR-10 with ARC and without. There are f = 2 (left) and f = 3 (right) adversarial
workers, along with n − f = 33 honest workers. We consider the high heterogeneity regime α = 0.1.


                                                                               44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      100                                                                100
                                 DSGD (f = 0)                                                      DSGD (f = 0)


      Test Accuracy


                                                                         Test Accuracy
                                 CWTM ∘ NNM                                                        CWMED ∘ NNM
                      75         CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                         75        CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                 GM ∘ NNM                                                          MK ∘ NNM
                                 GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                                     MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                      50                                                                 50

                      25                                                                 25

                       0                                                                  0
                            0          500         1000   1500   2000                          0         500          1000   1500   2000
                                                   Step                                                               Step


                                 (a) CWTM and GM, f = 2                                            (b) CWMed and MK, f = 2
                      100                                                                100
                                 DSGD (f = 0)                                                      DSGD (f = 0)
      Test Accuracy


                                                                         Test Accuracy
                                 CWTM ∘ NNM                                                        CWMED ∘ NNM
                      75         CWTM∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                         75        CWMED∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                                 GM ∘ NNM                                                          MK ∘ NNM
                                 GM∘ NNM ∘ ARC                                                     MK∘ NNM ∘ ARC
                      50                                                                 50

                      25                                                                 25

                       0                                                                  0
                            0          500         1000   1500   2000                          0         500          1000   1500   2000
                                                   Step                                                               Step


                                 (c) CWTM and GM, f = 3                                            (d) CWMed and MK, f = 3

Figure 25: Performance of Robust-DSGD when using ARC and without clipping on CIFAR-10.
There are 33 honest workers, and f = 2 (top) and 3 (bottom) adversarial workers executing the FOE
attack. We consider the high heterogeneity regime α = 0.1. The aggregations used are CWTM ◦
NNM and GM ◦ NNM (left), and CWMed ◦ NNM and MK ◦ NNM (right).


F.4   RUNTIME C OMPARISON : NNM (A LLOUAH ET AL ., 2023 A ) VS . ARC


                                (a) Varying Model Size d                                               (b) Varying System Size n

Figure 26: Computational performance of ARC vs NNM in two different settings. In the left plot,
we fix the total number of workers n = 30, the number of adversarial workers f = 3, and vary the
model size d. In the right plot, we fix the model size d = 1310922 (the size of the model we used on
CIFAR-10) and f = 3, and vary the number of workers n in the distributed system.


                                                                        45
