Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ULTI - MODAL BRAIN ENCODING MODELS FOR MULTI -
MODAL STIMULI

 Subba Reddy Oota1∗ , Khushbu Pahwa2∗ , Mounika Marreddy3 , Maneesh Singh4
 Manish Gupta5 , Bapi S. Raju6
 1
   Technische Universität Berlin, Germany, 2 Rice Univ, USA, 3 Univ of Bonn, Germany
 4
   Spector Inc, USA, 5 Microsoft, India, 6 IIIT Hyderabad, India
 subba.reddy.oota@tu-berlin.de, gmanish@microsoft.com, raju.bapi@iiit.ac.in



                                                A BSTRACT
           Despite participants engaging in unimodal stimuli, such as watching images or
           silent videos, recent work has demonstrated that multi-modal Transformer models
           can predict visual brain activity impressively well, even with incongruent modality
           representations. This raises the question of how accurately these multi-modal mod-
           els can predict brain activity when participants are engaged in multi-modal stimuli.
           As these models grow increasingly popular, their use in studying neural activity
           provides insights into how our brains respond to such multi-modal naturalistic
           stimuli, i.e., where it separates and integrates information across modalities through
           a hierarchy of early sensory regions to higher cognition (language regions). We
           investigate this question by using multiple unimodal and two types of multi-modal
           models—cross-modal and jointly pretrained—to determine which type of model is
           more relevant to fMRI brain activity when participants are engaged in watching
           movies (videos with audio). We observe that both types of multi-modal models
           show improved alignment in several language and visual regions. This study also
           helps in identifying which brain regions process unimodal versus multi-modal in-
           formation. We further investigate the contribution of each modality to multi-modal
           alignment by carefully removing unimodal features one by one from multi-modal
           representations, and find that there is additional information beyond the unimodal
           embeddings that is processed in the visual and language regions. Based on this
           investigation, we find that while for cross-modal models, their brain alignment is
           partially attributed to the video modality; for jointly pretrained models, it is partially
           attributed to both the video and audio modalities. This serves as a strong motivation
           for the neuroscience community to investigate the interpretability of these models
           for deepening our understanding of multi-modal information processing in brain.
           We make the code publicly available1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
Brain encoding aims at predicting the neural brain activity recordings from an input stimulus represen-
tation. Recent brain encoding studies use neural models as a powerful approach to better understand
the information processing in the brain in response to naturalistic stimuli (Oota et al., 2024b). Cur-
rent encoding models are trained and tested on brain responses captured from participants who are
interacting with unimodal stimuli. Several unimodal pretrained models have been used to obtain
stimulus representations for this purpose, such as language (Wehbe et al., 2014; Jain & Huth, 2018;
Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Caucheteux & King, 2022; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Toneva et al., 2022; Aw
& Toneva, 2023; Oota et al., 2022a), vision (Yamins et al., 2014; Eickenberg et al., 2017; Schrimpf
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019) or speech (Millet et al., 2022; Vaidya et al., 2022; Tuckute et al.,
2023). In this paper, we build encoding models where participants are engaged with multi-modal
stimuli (e.g., watching movies that include audio). We explore multi-modal stimulus representations
extracted using Transformer-based (Vaswani et al., 2017) multi-modal models. Our analysis focuses
on brain alignment—the degree of similarity when predicting brain activity using both uni-modal and
multi-modal models.
    1
        https://github.com/subbareddy248/multi-modal-brain-stimuli


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 “The wolf of wall street”                                              Actual brain
                                                            fMRI
                    movie video clip                                                    activations

                                                                   Uni-modal Video          Ridge
                                                                     Model (VM)         Regression (𝒇𝒇𝟏𝟏 )      𝑓𝑓1 𝑉𝑉𝑀𝑀(𝑋𝑋) ≈

                                                                   Uni-modal Speech         Ridge
                                                                      Model (SM)        Regression (𝒇𝒇𝟐𝟐 )
                                                                                                                𝑓𝑓2 𝑆𝑆𝑀𝑀(𝑋𝑋) ≈
                                                         Video
                Video included with Audio               Encoder     Cross-modality           Ridge
                                                                     Model (CM)          Regression (g)
                                                                                                                 g 𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀(𝑋𝑋) ≈
                                                         Audio
             Multi-modal naturalistic stimulus          Encoder

                                                        +
                                                                   Jointly-pretrained        Ridge
              (A)                                                     Model (JM)         Regression (h)
                                                                                                                 ℎ 𝐽𝐽𝐽𝐽(𝑋𝑋) ≈

                                                                          Ridge
                                                        𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝑋𝑋)       Regression (r)        r VM X          ≈ 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶(X)

              (B)                   |𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑋𝑋 − 𝑟𝑟(𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉 𝑋𝑋 )|
                                                                       Ridge
                                                                   Regression (g’)
                                                                                         𝑔𝑔′ 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑋𝑋 − 𝑟𝑟 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉 𝑋𝑋        ≈


Figure 1: (A) Overview of our proposed Multi-modal Brain Encoding Pipeline. Using fMRI
recordings from participants watching popular movies included with speech, we align stimulus
representations with brain recordings through ridge regression. For uni-modal alignment, we use
representations from video models (VM) or speech models (SM), where the input consists exclusively
of either videos (without speech) or speech, respectively. For multi-modal alignment, we leverage
representations from cross-modal (CM) and jointly-pretrained models (JM), where the input consists
of both video and speech. Here, f1 , f2 , g and h are ridge regression models. (B) Residual Analysis.
First, we remove the uni-modal video model (VM) representations from the cross-modal (CM)
representations by learning a simple linear function r that maps VM representations to the CM
representations, and use this estimated function to obtain the residual representations |CM(X)-
r(VM(X))|. In step 2, we learn another ridge regression model (g ′ ) to measure the brain alignment
between residual representations |CM(X)-r(VM(X))| and the fMRI brain recordings. Similarly,
residual analysis can also be applied to remove unimodal speech (SM) features from CM or JM
representations for a given input X.
There is growing evidence that the human brain’s ability for multi-modal processing is underpinned by
synchronized cortical representations of identical concepts across various sensory modalities (Gauthier
et al., 2003; Bracci & Op de Beeck, 2023). Reflecting similar principles, the recent advances in
AI systems have led to the development of multi-modal models (like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
ImageBind (Girdhar et al., 2023), and TVLT (Tang et al., 2022)) use massive interleaved image-text
data, speech-text data or video-audio-text data to represent multi-modal input. This recent progress
in AI has stimulated advancements in brain encoding models (Conwell et al., 2022); (Doerig et al.,
2022; Oota et al., 2022b; Popham et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024; Nakagi et al.,
2024) that learn effectively from multiple input modalities, despite participants being engaged with
unimodal stimulus during experiments, e.g., watching natural scene images, or silent movie clips.
However, these studies have experimented with subjects engaged with unimodal stimulus. Only
recently there has been some work on training models for true multi-modal stimulus scenarios, but
most of them have focused on video+text stimuli (Nakagi et al., 2024; Subramaniam et al., 2024).
The only exception being Dong & Toneva (2023a) who experiment with video+audio stimuli and
explored brain alignment differences with pretrained versus finetuned joint multi-modal transformer
representations.
Using brain recordings of participants watching several popular movies included with audio (St-
Laurent et al., 2023), we investigate several research questions. First, we investigate the effectiveness
of stimulus representations obtained using multi-modal models versus unimodal models for brain
encoding. Multi-modal models are of two broad types: (i) cross-modal pretrained models, where first
intermediate representations for both modalities are computed using individual modality encoders
and then combined using contrastive loss, and (ii) jointly pretrained models, which involve combining
data from multiple modalities at token level itself, and training a single joint encoder. Hence, we also
investigate which of the two types (cross-modal versus joint) is better for encoding. We focus on
one cross-modal (ImageBind), one jointly pretrained (TVLT), three video and two speech models.
Additionally, we explore which modality representations are more brain relevant, and identify which
brain regions process unimodal versus multi-modal information. Overall, this research utilizes
multi-modal representations to develop encoding models based on fMRI responses (see Fig. 1).
Using our multi-modal brain encoding approach, we examine several insights. First, we use previous
neuroscience findings that have identified brain regions involved in visual, language and auditory


                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


processing, and investigate how well our model aligns with these regions when both the model
and a human participant watch the same multi-modal video stimuli. Secondly, we hypothesize that
multi-modal models capable of learning cross-modal and joint embeddings across various sensory
inputs in a manner that mimics brain processing would likely show significant alignment with these
neural regions. However, alignment with these brain regions doesn’t necessarily mean that the model
is effectively learning from multiple modalities, as unimodal models for vision or language or audio
have also been shown to significantly align with these brain regions (Wehbe et al., 2014; Toneva et al.,
2022; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Millet et al., 2022; Vaidya et al., 2022). To check the second aspect, we
investigate this question via a direct approach, closely related to previous studies (Toneva et al., 2022;
Oota et al., 2023a;b). For each modality, we analyze how the alignment between brain recordings
and multi-modal model representations is affected by the elimination of information related to that
particular modality from the model representation.
Our analysis of multi-modal brain alignment leads to several key conclusions: (1) Both cross-modal
and jointly pretrained models demonstrate significantly improved brain alignment with language
regions (AG, PCC, PTL, and IFG) and visual regions (EVC and MT) when analyzed against unimodal
video data. In contrast, compared to unimodal speech-based models, all multi-modal embeddings
show significantly better brain alignment, except in the LOC (object visual processing) region.
This highlights the ability of multi-modal models to capture additional information—either through
knowledge transfer or integration between modalities—which is crucial for multi-modal brain
alignment. (2) Using our residual approach, we find that the improved brain alignment in cross-
modal models can be partially attributed to the removal of video features alone, rather than auditory
features. On the other hand, the improved brain alignment in jointly pretrained models can be partially
attributed to the removal of both video and auditory features.
We make the following contributions. (1) To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to
leverage both cross-modal and jointly pretrained multi-modal models to perform brain alignment
while subjects are engaged with multi-modal naturalistic stimuli. (2) We evaluate the performance of
several unimodal Transformer models (three video and two audio) and measure their brain alignment.
(3) Additionally, we remove unimodal features from multi-modal representations to explore the
impact on brain alignment before and after their removal. We make the code publicly available1 .

2    R ELATED W ORK
Multi-modal models. Pretrained Transformer-based models have been found to be very effective in
various tasks related to language (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019), speech (Baevski et al.,
2020), and images (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). To learn associations between pairs of modalities,
Transformer models have been pretrained on multiple modalities, showing excellent results in multi-
modal tasks like visual question answering and visual common-sense reasoning. These multi-modal
models are pretrained in two different ways: (i) cross-modal models that integrate information
from multiple modalities and learn a joint encoder, such as VisualBERT (Li et al., 2019) and
ImageBind (Girdhar et al., 2023), and (ii) jointly pretrained models like LXMERT (Tan & Bansal,
2019), CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), and TVLT (Tang et al., 2022) which fuse individual modality
encoders at different stages, transferring knowledge from one modality to another. In this work, we
investigate how the representations extracted from cross-modal and jointly-pretrained Transformer
models align with human brain recordings when participants engage with multi-modal stimuli.
Brain encoding using multi-modal models. The majority of brain encoding studies tend to focus on
vision or language alone, in large part due to the availability of only unimodal datasets (Conwell et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2023). Notably, Conwell et al. (2022) conducted controlled comparisons between
visual models with identical architecture and training data, finding no performance improvement
from contrastive image-language training. Similarly, Wang et al. (2023) reported that language
alignment did not enhance encoding performance across most of the high-level visual cortex in their
experiments. However, these studies focused on a single modality of input – vision alone. Since
human brain perceives the environment using information from multiple modalities (Gauthier et al.,
2003), examining the alignment between language and visual representations in the brain by training
encoding models on fMRI responses, while extracting joint representations from multi-modal models,
can offer insights into the relationship between the two modalities. For instance, it has been shown
that multi-modal models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) better predict neural responses in the
high-level visual cortex as compared to previous vision-only models (Doerig et al., 2022; Wang et al.,


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023; Tang et al., 2024; Nakagi et al., 2024). However, these studies have experimented with subjects
engaged with single-modality stimulus, leaving the full potential of these models in true multi-modal
scenarios still unclear. Recently, Dong & Toneva (2023b) interpreted the effectiveness of pretraining
versus finetuning using a multi-modal video transformer model, MERLOT Reserve (Zellers et al.,
2022). Further, they leverage single modality embeddings obtained from the same mulitmodal
model for residual analysis. It should be noted that multi-modal models can be trained broadly
using two strategies – cross-modally (dual) or jointly (Frank et al., 2021). It is conceivable that the
representations arising from these two kinds of training might have different brain alignment (Oota
et al., 2022b). To address these differences, we experiment with both cross-modal (dual) and joint
multi-modal models. In addition, for residual analysis, to avoid any information propagation from
one modality to another, we perform a comprehensive study using 3 separate unimodal video and 2
unimodal audio encoders. We discuss more related studies in Appendix J.


3   DATASET C URATION

Brain imaging dataset. We experiment with a multi-modal naturalistic fMRI dataset, Movie10 (St-
Laurent et al., 2023) obtained from the Courtois NeuroMod databank. This dataset was collected
while six human subjects passively watched four different movies: The Bourne supremacy (∼100
mins), The wolf of wall street (∼170 mins), Hidden figures (∼120 mins) and Life (∼50 mins). Among
these, Hidden figures and Life are repeated twice, with the repeats used for testing and the remaining
movies for training. In this work, we use Life movie for testing where we average the two repetitions
to reduce noise in brain data. This dataset is one of the largest publicly available multi-modal fMRI
dataset in terms of number of samples per participant. It includes 4024 TRs (Time Repetitions) for
The Bourne supremacy, 6898 TRs for The wolf of wall street used in train and 2028 TRs for Life in
test. The fMRI data is collected every 1.49 seconds (= 1 TR).
The dataset is already preprocessed and projected onto the surface space (“fsaverage6”). We use the
multi-modal parcellation of the human cerebral cortex based on the Glasser Atlas (which consists
of 180 regions of interest in each hemisphere) to report the ROI (region of interest) analysis for the
brain maps (Glasser et al., 2016). This includes four visual processing regions (early visual cortex
(EVC), object-related areas (LOC), face-related areas (OFA) and scene-related areas (PPA)), one early
auditory area (AC), and eight language-relevant regions, encompassing broader language regions:
angular gyrus (AG), anterior temporal lobe (ATL), posterior temporal lobe (PTL), inferior frontal
gyrus (IFG), inferior frontal gyrus orbital (IFGOrb), middle frontal gyrus (MFG), posterior cingulate
cortex (PCC) and dorsal medium prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), based on the Fedorenko lab’s language
parcels (Milton et al., 2021; Desai et al., 2023). We list detailed sub-ROIs in Appendix C.
Estimating dataset cross-subject prediction accuracy. To account for the intrinsic noise in
biological measurements, we adapt Schrimpf et al. (2021)’s method to estimate the cross-subject
prediction accuracy for a model’s performance for the Movie10 fMRI dataset. By subsampling fMRI
dataset from 6 participants, we generate all possible combinations of s participants (s ∈ [2,6]) for
watching movies, and use a voxel-wise encoding model (see Sec. 5) to predict one participant’s
response from others. Note that the estimated cross-subject prediction accuracy is based on the
assumption of a perfect model, which might differ from real-world scenarios, yet offers valuable
insights into model’s performance. We estimate cross-subject prediction accuracy by training on the
combined brain data from The Bourne supremacy and The wolf of wall street and testing on the brain
data from the movie Life. We present the average cross-subject prediction accuracy across voxels for
the Movie10 fMRI dataset across subjects in Appendix B.

4   M ETHODOLOGY

Multi-modal Models: To analyse how human brain process information while engaged in
multi-modal stimuli, we use recent popular deep learning models to explore multiple modalities
information and build the encoding models in two different ways: “cross-modality pretraining” and
“joint pretraining”.
Cross-modality pretrained multi-modal models. Cross-modality representations involve transfer-
ring information or learning from one modality to another. For example, in a cross-modal learning
scenario, text descriptions can be used to improve the accuracy of image/video recognition tasks.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This approach is particularly effective when one modality has limited data or indirect relevance
to the task, but can be augmented by information from another modality. Recently, a cross-modal
model called ImageBind (IB) (Girdhar et al., 2023) has shown immense promise in binding data from
six modalities at once, without the need for explicit supervision. ImageBind model uses separate
encoders for each individual modality and learns a single shared representation space by leveraging
multiple types of image-paired data. ImageBind has 12 layers and outputs a 1024-D representation
for each modality.
Jointly pretrained multi-modal models. Jointly pretrained multi-modal model representations, on
the other hand, involve combining data from multiple modalities to build a more comprehensive joint
understanding to improve decision-making processes. The system processes these diverse inputs
concurrently to make more informed and robust decisions. TVLT (Tang et al., 2022) is an end-to-end
Text-less Vision-Language multi-modal Transformer model for learning joint representations of
video and speech from YouTube videos. This joint encoder model consists of a 12-layer encoder
(hidden size 768) and uses masked autoencoding objective for both videos and speech. Given the
video-speech pairs, the TVLT model gives 768D representations for each modality across 12 layers.
Extraction of multi-modal features. To extract video and audio embedding representations from
multi-modal models for the brain encoding task, we input video and audio pairs at each TR simul-
taneously, and obtain the output embeddings for the two modalities from the last layer. Here, we
first segment the input video and audio into clips corresponding to 1.49 seconds, which matches the
fMRI image rate. For both the models, ImageBind and TVLT, we use the pretrained Transformer
weights. ImageBind generates an embedding for each modality (IB video and IB audio) at the output.
We refer to IB video, IB-audio as modality-specific embeddings extracted from multi-modal models
in the remainder of the paper. We concatenate these embeddings to create what we refer to as IB
concat embeddings. On the other hand, TVLT provides a joint embedding across all modalities at
each layer. Only for the last layer, TVLT provides an embedding for each modality - referred to as
modality specific embeddings extracted from multi-modal models, similar to IB-video and IB-audio.
Unimodal Models: To investigate the effectiveness of multi-modal representations in comparison
to representations for individual modalities, we use the following methods to obtain embeddings for
individual modalities.
Video-based models. To extract representations of the video stimulus, we use three popular pretrained
Transformer video-based models from Huggingface (Wolf et al., 2020): (1) Vision Transformer Base
(ViT-B) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), (2) Video Masked Autoencoders (VideoMAE) (Tong et al., 2022)
and (3) Video Vision Transformer (ViViT) (Arnab et al., 2021). Details of each model are reported in
Table 1 in Appendix.
Speech-based models. Similar to video-based models, we use two popular pretrained Transformer
speech-based models from Huggingface: (1) Wav2Vec2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020) and (2) AST (Baade
et al., 2022). Details of each model are reported in Table 1 in Appendix D.
Extraction of video features. ViT-B (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), the underlying video encoder model
for ImageBind is used for extracting representations for all frames in each TR for every video. To
extract embedding at each TR, we average all frame embeddings and obtain the corresponding video
representation. For VideoMAE and ViViT, we directly obtain the video embeddings for each TR. All
3 models provide 768 dimensional representations and all of them are 12-layer Transformer encoders.
Extraction of speech features. To explore whether speech models incorporate linguistic information,
we extract representations beyond 1.49 secs, i.e., we considered context window of 16 secs with
stride of 100 msecs and considered the last token as the representative for each context window. The
pretrained speech-based models output token representations at different layers. Both Wav2Vec2.0
and AST models provide 768 dimensional representations and all of them are 12-layer Transformer
encoders. Finally, we align these representations with the fMRI data acquisition rate by downsampling
the stimulus features with a 3-lobed Lanczos filter, thus producing chunk-embeddings for each TR.


5   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Encoding model. We train bootstrap ridge regression based voxel-wise encoding models (Deniz
et al., 2019) to predict the fMRI brain activity associated with the stimulus representations obtained
from the individual modalities (speech and video) and multi-modal embeddings from cross-modal
and jointly pretrained multi-modal models. We employ z-score thresholding separately for both input


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


stimulus representations and brain recordings for training and test datasets. This helps identify and
remove extreme outliers that could disproportionately affect the Pearson Correlation results. For each
subject, we account for the delay in the hemodynamic response by modeling hemodynamic response
function using a finite response filter (FIR) per voxel with 5 temporal delays (TRs) corresponding to
∼7.5 seconds (Huth et al., 2022). Formally, at each time step t, we encode the stimuli as Xt ∈ RD
and brain region voxels Yt ∈ RV , where D denotes the dimension of the concatenation of delayed 5
TRs, and V denotes the number of voxels. Overall, with N such TRs, we obtain N training examples.
Train-test setup. We build encoding models where the train and test sets are totally disjoint and the
model cannot use any clock relationships from the training data during inference. To be completely
clear: independent encoding models are trained for each subject using data concatenated from
two movies (The Bourne supremacy: 4024 TRs and The wolf of wall street: 6898 TRs). The test
set consisted only data from the “Life” movie (2028 TRs). Thus there is no possibility of any
information leakage during inference on the test set. Model details and hyper-parameter settings are
in Appendix E.
Removal of a single modality features from multi-modal representations. For removing unimodal
model representations (VM or SM) from the multi-modal model representations (CM or JM), we
employ the direct or residual approach, as outlined by Toneva et al. (2022); Oota et al. (2023a); Oota
& Toneva (2023); Dong & Toneva (2023b); Oota et al. (2024a). This method estimates the impact of
specific modality features on the alignment between the model and brain recordings by comparing
the alignment before and after computationally removing the targeted modality features from the
multi-modal representations. To remove features corresponding to a particular modality (VM or
SM) from multi-modal model representations, we remove the linear contribution of the unimodal
features by training a ridge regression model (r), where the unimodal feature vector is the input and
the multi-modal representation serves as the target. Since our encoding model (ridge regression) is
also a linear function, this linear removal limits the contribution of features for the particular modality
to the eventual brain alignment. The approach is illustrated in Fig. 1 (B).
Evaluation metrics. We evaluate our models using Pearson Correlation (PC) which is a standard
metric for evaluating brain alignment (Jain & Huth, 2018; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Goldstein et al.,
2022). Let TR be the number of time repetitions in the test set. Let Y = {Yi }Ti=1R
                                                                                    and Ŷ = {Ŷi }Ti=1
                                                                                                     R

denote the actual and predicted value vectors for a single voxel. Thus, Y and Ŷ ∈ R . We use
                                                                                          TR

Pearson Correlation (PC) which is computed as corr(Y, Ŷ ) where corr is the correlation function.
The final measure of a model’s performance is obtained by calculating Pearson’s correlation between
the model’s predictions and neural recordings. To quantify the model predictions, the resulting model
prediction correlations are divided by the estimated cross-subject prediction accuracy and averaged
across voxels, regions, and participants, resulting in a standardized measure of performance referred
to as normalized brain alignment. For calculating normalized alignment, we select the voxels whose
cross-subject prediction accuracy is ≥ 0.05.
Statistical significance. To determine if normalized predictivity scores are significantly higher than
chance, we run a permutation test using blocks of 10 contiguous fMRI TRs (considering the slowness
of hemodynamic response) rather than individual TRs. By permuting predictions 5000 times, we
create an empirical distribution for chance performance, from which we estimate p-value of the actual
performance. The choice of these specific permutation test configurations is based on established
methodologies in previous research (Deniz et al., 2019; Reddy & Wehbe, 2021; Oota et al., 2024a).
To estimate the statistical significance of performance differences, such as between the model’s
predictions and chance or residual predictions and chance, we utilized the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test (Conover, 1999), applying it to the mean normalized predictivity for the participants. Finally, the
Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction for multiple comparisons (Benjamini
& Hochberg, 1995) is used for all the tests (appropriate because fMRI data is considered to have
positive dependence (Genovese, 2000)). In all cases, we denote significant differences (p≤ 0.05)
with a ∗ or ∧.

6     R ESULTS
6.1   H OW EFFECTIVE ARE MULTI - MODAL REPRESENTATIONS ?
In Fig. 2, we present the average normalized brain alignment scores for both multi-modal and
individual modality features. Specifically, we show the normalized brain alignment for cross-modality


                                                    6
      Under reviewasasa aconference
       Published          conferencepaper
                                     paperatatICLR
                                               ICLR2025
                                                    2025


324                                                         Random                     Unimodal VM
                                                            IB Concat                  Unimodal VM Random
325                                                         IB Concat Random           Unimodal SM
                                                                                                                                         0.6                                            0.6
                                                            TVLT Joint                 Unimodal SM Random
326


                                                                                                            Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                           Normalized brain alignment
                         Normalized brain alignment
                                                            TVLT Joint Random
                                                      0.6                                                                                      *^
                                                                                                                                                                                              ^ ^
                                                                                                                                         0.5                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                    ^
327                                                   0.5        x*^      x^              x                                              0.4                                            0.4



328
                                                      0.4
                                                                                                 x                                       0.3                                            0.3

                                                      0.3

329
                                                                                                                                         0.2                                            0.2
                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                         0.1                                            0.1

330                                                   0.1
                                                                                Whole brain
                                                                                                                                                Language                                       Visual


331      Figure
      Figure   2: 2:
                   The(Left)
                          Left Avg    normalized
                               plot compares          thebrain
                                                           average alignment
                                                                         normalized of pretrained       vs randomly
                                                                                            brain alignment               initialized
                                                                                                                 of pretrained       andmulti-modal
                                                                                                                                           randomly
332      and unimodal
      initialized             modelsand
                    multi-modal           across
                                             unimodalwholemodels
                                                               brain. across
                                                                           × =⇒whole    pretrained
                                                                                               brain. × model    embeddings
                                                                                                           indicates    cases whereare significantly
                                                                                                                                          pretrained
333      betterembeddings
      model       than randomly          initialized models,
                                are significantly         better than   i.e.,  p≤ 0.05.
                                                                            randomly             (Right) models,
                                                                                            initialized     Avg normalized
                                                                                                                     i.e., p≤ 0.05. brainRight
                                                                                                                                             alignment
                                                                                                                                                   plot
334
         for both
      displays    themulti-modal       and unimodal
                       average normalized                     model features
                                                     brain alignment           for both specifically
                                                                                             multi-modal withinandlanguage
                                                                                                                    unimodaland   modelvisual    regions.
                                                                                                                                             features
         Blue bar represents
      specifically    within languagethe normalized
                                                and visual    alignment
                                                                  regions. usingIn both  randomly
                                                                                             plots, Bluegenerated     vector embeddings.
                                                                                                             bar represents      the normalized     Error
335
         bars indicate
      alignment     usingthe     standard
                             randomly           error ofvector
                                            generated        the mean        across participants.
                                                                      embeddings.           Error bars indicate
                                                                                                            ∗ =⇒ the  multi-modal
                                                                                                                           standard error embeddings
                                                                                                                                                of the
336
         are significantly
      mean                       better than
              across participants.                  unimodal
                                            ∗ indicates       cases video
                                                                       where  models        (VM), embeddings
                                                                                  multi-modal         i.e., p≤ 0.05.are∧significantly
                                                                                                                                =⇒ multi-modal  better
337      embeddings
      than  unimodal are       significantly
                           video   models (VM),     better   than
                                                          i.e.,  p≤unimodal           speech models
                                                                        0.05. ∧ indicates                   (SM), multi-modal
                                                                                                   cases where      i.e., p≤ 0.05.embeddings
338   are significantly better than unimodal speech models (SM), i.e., p≤ 0.05.
339      (ImageBind), jointly pretrained multi-modal (TVLT), and the average from individual video and
340      speech models.
      However,                  The results
                    the pretrained         modelare      shown forbrain
                                                      embedding            whole       brain (Fig.
                                                                                   alignment            2 Left), and also
                                                                                                   is significantly      betterforthanaverage
                                                                                                                                           randomlyacross
341
         languagemodels.
      initialized     and visualThisROIs
                                       shows  (Fig.that2the
                                                          Right).     Results forfrom
                                                               representations           individual     ROIs are in Fig.
                                                                                                these multi-modal        models3. are significant
         Baseline
      enough          comparison.
                for learning      non-trivialTo compare
                                                    alignment    thewith
                                                                       brainthepredictivity
                                                                                  fMRI recordings   of multi-modal
                                                                                                            of multi-modal and unimodal
                                                                                                                                 stimuli. models
342
         against baseline performance, we employ two baselines: (i) randomly generated vector embeddings
343   C ROSS   - MODAL           . J OINTLY                              MULTI - MODAL                         VS . U NIMODAL           MODELS .VM,
         to predict   brainVS  activity,    and PRETRAINED
                                                   (ii) randomly initialized              models     for ImageBind,
                                                                                                   MODELS                  TVLT, Unimodal
344      and Unimodal         SM. Fig.Fig.  2 (Left)     displays      theresults
                                                                             comparison          of average    normalized       brain
      Whole     brain analysis.                  2 (Left)     displays                 for whole      brain analysis,      where    thealignment
                                                                                                                                          IB Concatof
345
      barrandomly      generated
           plot corresponds        to vectors,
                                       results for   pretrained       and randomly
                                                        representations                       initialized models.
                                                                                 from a cross-modal                       From TVLT
                                                                                                               model, while       Fig. 2 Joint
                                                                                                                                             (Left),barwe
346      observe    that   randomly       initialized      models       show     significantly       better
      plot corresponds to results for representations from a jointly pretrained multi-modal model. From       alignment      than   random       vectors.
347      However,
      Fig.  2 (Left), the
                        we pretrained         model embedding
                              make the following           observations:    brain (i) alignment
                                                                                       At the whole   is significantly
                                                                                                          brain level, the  better    than randomly
                                                                                                                               Wilcoxon        signed-
348      initialized
      rank   test showsmodels.     Thisdifferences
                             that the      shows that in    theembeddings
                                                                  representations    fromfrom the these    multi-modal
                                                                                                   IB Concat      and TVLT  models     are significant
                                                                                                                                  models       are not
349      enough forsignificant.
      statistically      learning non-trivial          alignment with
                                       (ii) The multi-modal                    the fMRIshow
                                                                         embeddings            recordings
                                                                                                     improved  of multi-modal
                                                                                                                  brain alignment    stimuli.
                                                                                                                                          compared
350   to unimodal models. Specifically, cross-modal embeddings are significantly better than both unimodal
         C ROSS
      video   and- MODAL        VS . J OINTLY PRETRAINED MULTI - MODAL MODELS VS . U NIMODAL MODELS .
                    speech models,          while jointly pretrained embeddings are significantly better than speech
351
352      WholeThis
      models.      brain     analysis.
                         implies    that cross-modal
                                             Fig. 2 (Left)embeddings
                                                                 displays results    contain      additional
                                                                                           for whole     braininformation
                                                                                                                analysis, where  beyond the IBtheConcat
                                                                                                                                                   two
353   modalities,     while embeddings
         bar plot corresponds         to resultsfrom         a jointly pretrained
                                                      for representations            from amodel        do not model,
                                                                                                cross-modal       providewhileextraTVLTinformation
                                                                                                                                               Joint bar
354   beyond    unimodal visual
         plot corresponds               information
                                 to results                but do contain
                                                 for representations           from additional
                                                                                         a jointlyinformation
                                                                                                      pretrained beyond
                                                                                                                    multi-modalunimodal  model.speech.
                                                                                                                                                    From
         Fig. 2 (Left), we make the following observations: (i) At the whole brain level, the Wilcoxon signed-
355   Whole language and visual region analysis. We also present average normalized brain alignment
         rank test shows that the differences in embeddings from the IB Concat and TVLT models are not
356   results across language and visual regions in Figs. 2 (Right). The Wilcoxon signed-rank test shows that
         statistically significant. (ii) The multi-modal embeddings show improved brain alignment compared
357   the differences in embeddings from the IB Concat and TVLT models are not statistically significant
         to unimodal models. Specifically, cross-modal embeddings are significantly better than both unimodal
358   when averaged across language and visual regions. Similar to whole brain performance, in the
         video and speech models, while jointly pretrained embeddings are significantly better than speech
359   language regions, cross-modal embeddings are significantly better than both unimodal video and
         models. This implies that cross-modal embeddings contain additional information beyond the two
      speech models, while jointly pretrained embeddings are significantly better than unimodal speech
360      modalities, while embeddings from a jointly pretrained model do not provide extra information
      models. In contrast, for the visual regions, the normalized brain alignment of cross-modal and jointly
361      beyond unimodal visual information but do contain additional information beyond unimodal speech.
      pretrained embeddings is similar to the performance of unimodal video models. This implies that
362
        Whole
      when    we language
                   average across and visual
                                          visual region
                                                    regions,analysis.
                                                                  there is no  Weadditional
                                                                                      also present  information      beyond unimodal
                                                                                                        average normalized                      video
                                                                                                                                    brain alignment
363
      features.    However,
         results across         when and
                            language      compared
                                                visual to     unimodal
                                                         regions             speech
                                                                      in Figs.           features,
                                                                                  2 (Right).      Theboth    multi-modal
                                                                                                        Wilcoxon               embeddings
                                                                                                                     signed-rank       test shows showthat
364   significant    improvement.
         the differences      in embeddings from the IB Concat and TVLT models are not statistically significant
365      when averaged across language and visual regions. Similar to whole brain performance, in the
366   ROI-Level
         language Analysis         of Joint embeddings
                      regions, cross-modal             embeddings    fromare  multi-modal
                                                                                   significantly   models.       Since
                                                                                                       better than    bothwe unimodal
                                                                                                                              didn’t observe videoany and
367   significant    difference     at the   whole      brain   level     and   when      averaged
         speech models, while jointly pretrained embeddings are significantly better than unimodal     across   language      and   visual    regions,
                                                                                                                                                  speech
368   between
         models.cross-modal
                    In contrast,and        jointly
                                     for the    visualpretrained
                                                          regions,multi-modal
                                                                        the normalized      models,
                                                                                                brain we    attemptof
                                                                                                        alignment      tocross-modal
                                                                                                                           seek if thereand   anyjointly
                                                                                                                                                    any
369
      differences
         pretrainedwhen       we pay a iscloser
                        embeddings             similarlooktoatthetheperformance
                                                                       individual ROIs.           We present
                                                                                           of unimodal           results
                                                                                                             video         for language
                                                                                                                     models.      This impliesregions that
      such  as Angular
         when    we average  gyrus   (AG),visual
                                  across       the posterior
                                                       regions,temporal
                                                                     there is lobe        (PTL), and
                                                                                  no additional           the inferiorbeyond
                                                                                                       information        frontal gyrus
                                                                                                                                    unimodal (IFG)video
                                                                                                                                                     in
370
      Fig.  3. Additionally,
         features.   However,we    when cover     visual regions
                                             compared        to unimodallike early
                                                                                 speech visual    cortexboth
                                                                                             features,     (EVC),    scene visual
                                                                                                                multi-modal             areas (PPA)
                                                                                                                                 embeddings         show
371
      and  middle temporal
         significant               gyrus (MT), as well as early auditory cortex (AC). In this figure, we also report
                        improvement.
372   the average normalized brain alignment of each modality obtained from multi-modal models. Unlike
373   theROI-Level
           whole brain       analysis,
                         analysis          we observe
                                      of joint     embeddingssome differences
                                                                        from multi-modal  betweenmodels.
                                                                                                       cross-modal Since andwejointly
                                                                                                                                didn’tpretrained
                                                                                                                                           observe any
374   models     in several
         significant            language
                        difference     at theand whole visual
                                                           brainROIs.
                                                                    level and Results
                                                                                    whenfor      other ROIs
                                                                                             averaged     acrossare    in Fig.and
                                                                                                                   language      7 invisual
                                                                                                                                          Appendix.
                                                                                                                                                 regions,
375   Our   observations
         between               are asand
                     cross-modal          follows:
                                              jointly (i)     Cross-modal
                                                         pretrained                 IB Concat
                                                                           multi-modal               embeddings
                                                                                               models,     we attempt  aretosignificantly
                                                                                                                              seek if therebetter are any
376   than  TVLT Joint
         differences     when embeddings
                                 we pay a closer  in semantic
                                                         look at regions         such asROIs.
                                                                     the individual           AG and We PCC,
                                                                                                          presentasresults
                                                                                                                     well asforthe    multi-modal
                                                                                                                                   language       regions
377   processing     region MT.
         such as Angular       gyrus (ii)(AG),
                                           Conversely,        TVLTtemporal
                                                   the posterior         Joint embeddings
                                                                                      lobe (PTL),   areand
                                                                                                         significantly
                                                                                                             the inferiorbetter   than
                                                                                                                            frontal       IB Concat
                                                                                                                                       gyrus    (IFG) in
      embeddings        in dmPFCwe
         Fig. 3. Additionally,          regions.      This indicates
                                            cover visual       regions like   thatearly
                                                                                     while     bothcortex
                                                                                            visual    cross-modal
                                                                                                              (EVC), and scenejointly
                                                                                                                                 visualpretrained
                                                                                                                                           areas (PPA)

                                                                                                            77
       Published as aas
       Under review   conference paper
                        a conference   at ICLR
                                     paper      2025
                                           at ICLR 2025


378
                                                                                                 0.6                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                    0.6                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *^                *^
379


                                                                    Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                           Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Normalized brain alignment
                                                                                                                                                                                                              *^                                                                                               *^ *^
                                                                                                 0.5   *^                                                                                               0.5                                                                                    0.5                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                    ^ ^                                                                                            ^         ^ *^                                                                                                                                            *^    *^
380                                                                                              0.4                                                                                                    0.4                                                                                    0.4                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ^
381                                                                                              0.3                                                                                                    0.3              ^                                                                     0.3                                                                  0.3


382                                                                                              0.2                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                  0.2


383                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                  Whole brain
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Language: AG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Language: PTL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Language: IFG


384
                                                                                           0.6                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                    0.6                                                                  0.6
                                                              Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                     Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Normalized brain alignment
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ^              ^ ^                                                                     *^ ^
                                                                                                                   *^ *^                                                                                                                                                                                       ^ ^
                                                                                           0.5                                                                                                    0.5                                                                                    0.5                                                                  0.5
385                                                                                                    ^ ^                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                           0.4                                                                                                    0.4              ^                                                                     0.4                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ^
386                                                                                        0.3                                                                                                    0.3                                                                                    0.3                                                                  0.3

387                                                                                        0.2                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                  0.2


388                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                    Visual: EVC
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Visual: PPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Visual: MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Auditory: AC

389
       Figure  3: Average
           Figure           normalized
                   3: Average   normalizedbrain
                                            brainalignment
                                                  alignmentforforvideo
                                                                   video and    audio modalities
                                                                           and audio   modalitiesfrom
                                                                                                    frommulti-modal
                                                                                                            multi-modalandand
390
       individual  modality    features across   whole    brain and    several  ROIs   of language    (AG,
           individual modality features across whole brain and several ROIs of language (AG, PTL and IFG),   PTL   and  IFG),
391
       visual (EVC,    PPA   and  MT)   and  auditory    cortex (AC).
           visual (EVC, SV and MT) and auditory cortex (AC).*^Error bars  Error  bars  indicate  the  standard   error of
                                                                                   *^ indicate the standard error of the
                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                        Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Normalized brain alignment
                                                        0.6                                                                                                     0.6                                                                                                          0.6                                                                                       0.6
                           Normalized brain alignment


392    mean   across  participants.  ∗ indicates
                                              *^
                                                   cases   where   multi-modal       embeddings    are  significantly  better
           mean   across
                      *^ participants.
                             ^ ^       ∗ indicates   cases
                                                 ^ ^ *^
                                                        0.5
                                                            where  multi-modal*^*^ embeddings
                                                                                                *^
                                                                                                  are significantly better                                      0.5                                                                                                          0.5                                                                                       0.5

393    thanthan
            unimodal
                unimodalvideo
                           videomodels  (VM),
                                   models (VM),i.e.,
                                                  i.e.,p≤   0.05. ∧∧ indicates
                                                        p≤0.05.
                                                        0.4                       caseswhere
                                                                      indicates cases
                                                                                                       *^
                                                                                         wheremulti-modal
                                                                                                multi-modal
                                                                                                          ^     embeddings
                                                                                                              embeddings                                        0.4                                                                                                          0.4                                                                                       0.4

394    are significantly  better
           are significantly      than
                             better    unimodal
                                    than unimodal ^speech
                                                     speechmodels
                                                        0.3  models (SM),      i.e., p≤
                                                                        (SM), i.e.,  p≤ 0.05.3
                                                                                         0.05                                                                   0.3                                                                                                          0.3                                                                                       0.3

395                                                     0.2                                                                                                     0.2                                                                                                          0.2                                                                                       0.2


396    and the
      330        cross-modal
             middle      temporal     IBgyrus
                                           Concat      embeddings
                                                    (MT),
                                                        0.1
                                                               as welldemonstrate
                                                                           as early auditory  superior      brain(AC).
                                                                                                       cortex        alignment
                                                                                                                             In this compared
                                                                                                                                         figure, we  to unimodal
                                                                                                                                                          also report
                                                                                                                                                                0.1                                                                                                          0.1                                                                                       0.1
      331   video-based
       the average              models inbrain
                         normalized             areasalignment
                                                          such as theofAG,   each PTL,     IFG, and
                                                                                      modality           PCC. Moreover,
                                                                                                     obtained                     TVLT-jointmodels.
                                                                                                                     from multi-modal
                                                                                                            Whole brain
                                                                                                                                                     embeddings Unlike                                             Language: AG                                                                             Language: PTL                                                         Language: IFG

397
            show notable
       the whole
      332                          enhancements
                       brain analysis,            we observein the someAG, PTL,         IFG, PCC,
                                                                               differences               dmPFC
                                                                                                    between            and EVC regions.
                                                                                                                   cross-modal         and jointly    In contrast,
                                                                                                                                                           pretrained
                     Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                  Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Normalized brain alignment
                                              0.6                                                                                                         0.6                                                                                                         0.6                                                                                           0.6

398         compared         to unimodal        speech-based           models,     allResults
                                                                                         multi-modal
                                                                                                *^ ^       embeddings         display      significantly       better F.
       models
      333
                   in several
                            ^^
                                      language
                                     *^ *^
                                              0.5
                                                       and visual
                                                               ^        ^ROIs.
                                                                          ^                        for other
                                                                                                         ^^        ROIs are       in Fig.
                                                                                                                                 *^
                                                                                                                                               7 in Appendix
                                                                                                                                                          0.5                                                                                                         0.5                                                                                           0.5

399         brain    alignment,        except     the    OV    (object    visual    processing)
       Our observations are as follows: (i) Cross-modal IB Concat ^embeddings are significantly
      334                                     0.4                ^                                     region.      Overall,    this   observation
                                                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                                                              ^
                                                                                                                                                          suggests
                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                  better                                                                                              0.4                                                                                           0.4

400    thanthat
      335
              TVLTintegrating         multiple modalities
                         Joint embeddings     0.3
                                                         in semantic  leadsregions
                                                                              to transferring
                                                                                           such asinformation
                                                                                                       AG and PCC,       fromasone  wellmodality       to another,
                                                                                                                                            as the multi-modal
                                                                                                                                                          0.3                                                                                                         0.3                                                                                           0.3

401   336   resulting in improved brain predictability. Based on these, it can be inferred that these multi-modal
       processing
      337
                        region MT. (ii) Conversely, TVLT Joint embeddings are significantly better than IB Concat
                                              0.2

            models can indeed learn multi-modal linkages that are relevant to the brain.
                                                                                                                                                          0.2                                                                                                         0.2                                                                                           0.2


402    embeddings in dmPFC regions. This indicates that while both cross-modal and jointly pretrained
                                              0.1
                                                                                                            Visual: EVC
                                                                                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Visual: PPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Visual: MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Auditory: AC

403         When subjects
       multi-modal
      338                  models   engage
                                        perform  withsimilarly
                                                         multi-modalityat a macrostimuli,     wethere
                                                                                         level,     observeare that     multi-modal
                                                                                                                  individual               embeddings
                                                                                                                                  differences         at micro showlevel.
404     Figure
       This
      339        3: Averagemotivated
            improvements
              observation           innormalized
                                        semanticus        brain
                                                           to doalignment
                                                        regions     such   as the
                                                                     further        for
                                                                                      AG,
                                                                                 detailed  video
                                                                                             PCC    and
                                                                                                      andaudio
                                                                                                analysis    dmPFC,   modalities
                                                                                                               in Sec.    and    andfrom
                                                                                                                           6.2 syntactic        multi-modal
                                                                                                                                        6.3. regions
                                                                                                                                                Resultssuch         and
                                                                                                                                                                   as
                                                                                                                                                              for each
405     individual
            the PTL
       unimodal
      340               modality
                         and IFG.
                      video      and eachfeatures
                                         Overall,      across     whole
                                                        we findspeech
                                                  unimodal                    brain
                                                                              modeland
                                                                    that multi-modal       forseveral
                                                                                               information
                                                                                                individual ROIs    isof  language
                                                                                                                      processed
                                                                                                                   ROIs    are in Fig.in(AG, 8 inaPTL
                                                                                                                                          only       few and     IFG),
                                                                                                                                                            regions.
                                                                                                                                                     Appendix        F.
            Furthermore,
       visual
      341       (EVC, PPA         several
                                      and MT) regions, andincluding
                                                              auditory the       SV (scene
                                                                            cortex       (AC). visual       area),indicate
                                                                                                   Error bars          EVC (early        visual cortex),
                                                                                                                                  the standard          error ATL
                                                                                                                                                                of the
406
       ROI-Level
        mean
      342       acrossanalysis
            (anterior      temporal
                            participants.oflobe),
                                             modality-specific
                                                      IFGOrb, MFG,
                                                   ∗ indicates        cases embeddings
                                                                               and dmPFC,
                                                                               where              extracted         from multi-modal
                                                                                                     exhibit embeddings
                                                                                           multi-modal            similar    brainare  alignment    models.
                                                                                                                                           significantlywith bothWhile
                                                                                                                                                                 better
407    considering         both      joint    and each          modality        embeddings            fromcases multi-modal           models, we            make the
        thanunimodal
      343     unimodal      and    multi-modal
                                video     models        embeddings.
                                                       (VM),      i.e., p≤ 0.05.          ∧ indicates                  where multi-modal               embeddings
408    following      observations            fromunimodal
                                                        Fig. 3: (1)       Cross-modal            IB video
        are significantly         better than                         speech      models (SM),           i.e., embeddings
                                                                                                                 p≤ 0.05             exhibit improved brain
409    alignment compared to unimodal video in the AG and MT regions with the exceptions of the PTL
      344   6.3 How
        processing      regionis theMT. brain     alignment ofTVLT
                                            (ii) Conversely,             multi-modal
                                                                                Joint        features affected
                                                                                          embeddings                      by the elimination
                                                                                                              areprocessing
                                                                                                                    significantly       better     thanofIBahandling
                                                                                                                                                               Concat
410    and   AC regions.           Notably,        in the AC, which is              an early       auditory                         area    primarily
        embeddings
      345            particular
                            in   dmPFC modality?
                                              regions.        This     indicates       that   while     both     cross-modal          and     jointly     pretrained
411    sound-related information rather than higher cognitive functions (such as language processing),                                                            audio
412     multi-modal models
       embeddings           yield        perform
                                      higher      brainsimilarly       at a macro
                                                            predictivity        than     level,
                                                                                          video   there   are individual
                                                                                                    embeddings.                  differencesthis
                                                                                                                          Interestingly,             at micro     level.
                                                                                                                                                         differential
       ThisToobservation
      346
       effect
                understand motivated
               is not observed
                                   the contribution
                                          when       us to of doeach
                                                                   furthermodality
                                                                               detailed  to the   multi-modal
                                                                                             analysis      in Sectionsbrain alignment
                                                                                                                              6.2 and 6.3.     for multi-modal
413   347   naturalistic        stimulus,       wecomparing
                                                      perform residual  ImageBind analyses audio byembeddings
                                                                                                      removing the       to unimodality
                                                                                                                             unimodal         audio     embeddings.
                                                                                                                                                  features     from
414    These
        ROI-Level
      348        findings
            multi-modal  Analysissuggest        that     video
                                          of Modality-specific
                                 joint representations             modality
                                                                  as wellembeddingsinformation
                                                                              as multi-modal             contributes
                                                                                                  extracted
                                                                                                       video orfrom          more
                                                                                                                      audiomulti-modal significantly
                                                                                                                              representations           fromtojoint
                                                                                                                                                   models.        brain
                                                                                                                                                                While
415    alignment       in
            representations the   context
                                      and       of
                                            measure  ImageBind
                                                           the           concatenated
                                                                 differences       in   brain  embeddings
        considering both joint and each modality embeddings from multi-modal models, we make the
      349                                                                                       alignment           derived
                                                                                                                  before    and from
                                                                                                                                  after   cross-modal
                                                                                                                                           removal             models.
                                                                                                                                                         modality-
416
       (2)  TVLT
        following
      350              video
            specificobservations
                        features. embeddings
                                        Fig. from
                                              4 displays show
                                                        Fig.    3: improved
                                                               the   normalized
                                                                    (1)             brain
                                                                          Cross-modal  brainalignment
                                                                                               alignment
                                                                                                IB video for     in language
                                                                                                                     the AG, (AG)
                                                                                                                embeddings         PTL,
                                                                                                                                    exhibit  PCC,
                                                                                                                                            and   visualdmPFC
                                                                                                                                                 improved   regions  and
                                                                                                                                                                  brain
       EVC     regions,
            (MT).
        alignment
      351             We       with
                             note
                        compared        other
                                    a decrease    regions
                                          to unimodal           displaying
                                                      in brainvideo
                                                                  alignment
                                                                          in theforsimilar
                                                                                     AG  both    normalized
                                                                                            andthe MT AGregions
                                                                                                            and MT   brain    alignment
                                                                                                                         regions
                                                                                                                       with    the following
                                                                                                                                      exceptions unimodal    thevideo
                                                                                                                                                      theofremoval PTL
417
       embeddings.
        andofAC
      352       video
                    regions. Interestingly,
                          embeddings
                                   Notably,   from  while
                                                   in  the    the PTL
                                                        cross-modality
                                                             AC,     which  is models,
                                                                               known
                                                                               is   an earlyfor   auditory
                                                                                             whereas
                                                                                                  auditory the processing,
                                                                                                                 removal
                                                                                                                 processing         it also
                                                                                                                              of audio
                                                                                                                                   area        contributes
                                                                                                                                            embeddings
                                                                                                                                            primarily             to the
                                                                                                                                                                does
                                                                                                                                                            handling
418         not affect
       integration
        sound-related
      353               of the    brain
                             visual     andalignment.
                              information     auditory
                                                  rather than  On higher
                                                              inputs.theTheother    hand, for
                                                                                 improved
                                                                               cognitive            jointly pretrained
                                                                                                  alignment
                                                                                                functions          of video
                                                                                                                (such           models,
                                                                                                                                embeddings
                                                                                                                         as language          removal hereofindicates
                                                                                                                                             processing),       both
                                                                                                                                                                 audio
419         video
       that
      354    visualand
        embeddings           audio higher
                        information
                            yield      embeddings brainpartially
                                              enhances                   impacts
                                                               the processing
                                                            predictivity       thanthe      brainembeddings.
                                                                                         capabilities
                                                                                          video      alignment.
                                                                                                            in thisWe       observe
                                                                                                                        region.      (3)similar
                                                                                                                          Interestingly,         thisfindings
                                                                                                                                           Consistent         withforthe
                                                                                                                                                        differential
420         language ROIs
       cross-modality
      355                             such as
                                 models,       in  PTL,
                                                    jointly MFG,       ATL, PCC
                                                                pretrained        TVLT   andmodels,
                                                                                               visual regions
                                                                                                            TVLT       EVC,
                                                                                                                       video    OV     and FV, assignificantly
                                                                                                                                 embeddings              shown in
        effect is not observed when comparing ImageBind audio embeddings to unimodal audio embeddings.
421         Figs. 8 and
       outperform
      356
                         TVLT   9 inaudio
                                       Appendix.embeddings,These results
                                                                       exceptsuggest
                                                                                  in   PTLthat      thereThese
                                                                                               region.       is additional       information
                                                                                                                       observations          indicate beyond
                                                                                                                                                           that   the
                                                                                                                                                                  video
       These
      357
                 findings
            unimodal
                                 suggest that
                            embeddings
                                                        video in
                                                considered
                                                                   modality
                                                                       this  study
                                                                                   information
                                                                                       that  is
                                                                                                        contributes
                                                                                                 processed       in  the
                                                                                                                            moreand
                                                                                                                           visual
                                                                                                                                       significantly
                                                                                                                                           language
                                                                                                                                                             to brain
                                                                                                                                                          regions.
422    information
        alignment in is     theadvantageous
                                  context of ImageBind   for both concatenated
                                                                         cross-modal and             jointly pretrained
                                                                                              embeddings            derived from    models,
                                                                                                                                         cross-modalwhereas       audio
                                                                                                                                                              models.
423    embeddings
       (2) Qualitative
      358   TVLT video     mainly       benefit
                                analysis.
                                   embeddings  We the      PTL improved
                                                     compute
                                                         show      region.
                                                                   the   percentage brain  decrease
                                                                                              alignment in alignment
                                                                                                                in the AG,  for each
                                                                                                                                  PTL,voxel PCC,    following
                                                                                                                                                       dmPFCthe     and
424     EVC
      359   removal
               regions,   of unimodal
                               with othervideo    regions embeddings
                                                                displaying   from     the IBnormalized
                                                                                   similar       Concat (cross-modality)
                                                                                                                     brain alignment    and the      TVLT Joint
                                                                                                                                                unimodal         video
425    6.2  (jointly
               W HICH
        embeddings.
      360               pretrained
                               BRAIN model),
                             Interestingly,REGIONS      with
                                                    while       projections
                                                              the
                                                             PROCESSPTL isUNI     onto
                                                                                   - AND
                                                                               known       the  brain
                                                                                            forMULTI     surface
                                                                                                  auditory- MODAL     averaged
                                                                                                                 processing,       itacross
                                                                                                                          INFORMATION           participants,
                                                                                                                                                   ?
                                                                                                                                       also contributes          toasthe
426
            depictedofinvisual
        integration
      361                      Fig. 5.and Theauditory
                                                 colorbarinputs.
                                                               shows the  Thepercentage
                                                                                improved decreasealignmentinof      brain
                                                                                                                       videoalignment,
                                                                                                                               embeddings    where      redindicates
                                                                                                                                                     here    voxels
427     thatindicate
       From
      362      Fig. 3,
             visual      a we
                            higher
                        information    percentage
                                  observe                 decrease
                                                 that multi-modal
                                              enhances                  and white
                                                               the processing video voxels
                                                                                         embeddingsindicate
                                                                                         capabilities           areas
                                                                                                            inexhibit   where
                                                                                                                          improved
                                                                                                                 this region.     unimodal brainvideo
                                                                                                                                    (3) Consistent         features
                                                                                                                                                     alignment
                                                                                                                                                             with the not
       only
      363   doinnot
                  the contribute
                         whole          any shared
                                     brain    but    also information
                                                             in  various    within
                                                                              language, the multi-modal
                                                                                                visual     and   context.    We observe
                                                                                                                   multi-modal          regions.that For
                                                                                                                                                       removal     of
                                                                                                                                                             instance,
428     cross-modality models, in jointly pretrained TVLT models, TVLT video embeddings significantly
       the  cross-modal
        outperform        TVLT   IBaudio
                                       Concat       embeddingsexcept
                                                embeddings,              demonstrate
                                                                                  in PTLsuperior
                                                                                               region. Thesebrain alignment
                                                                                                                       observations    compared
                                                                                                                                            indicatetothat  unimodal
                                                                                                                                                                 video
429
       video-based
        information models              in areas such
                            is advantageous              for as   thecross-modal
                                                               both      AG, PTL, 8IFG,       andand     PCC.pretrained
                                                                                                     jointly       Moreover,models, TVLT-joint          embeddings
                                                                                                                                                  whereas        audio
430
       show    notablemainly
        embeddings             enhancements
                                        benefit theinPTL     the region.
                                                                    AG, PTL, IFG, PCC, dmPFC and EVC regions. In contrast,
431
       compared to unimodal speech-based models, all multi-modal embeddings display significantly better
       brain alignment, except the LOC (object visual processing) region. The LOC region is highly

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
          Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

 32
 33
                 Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                Normalized brain alignment
                                              0.6                                                                                            0.6
 34

                                                    Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                   Normalized brain alignment
                                                                                 0.6                                                                                            0.6



 35                                           0.5                                0.5                                                         0.5                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                        IB Concat
                                                                                                                                                                                                          IB Concat               TVLT Joint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TVLT Joint
                                                                                                                                                                                                        IB Concat - IB Video      TVLT Joint - TVLT Video
                                                                                 0.4                                                                                            0.4                       IB Concat - IB Video TVLT JointTVLT     Joint - TVLT Video
 36                                           0.4                                                                                            0.4                                                        IB Concat - IB Audio
                                                                                                                                                                                                        IBIB Concat
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Concat      - IB Audio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  - Unimodal VM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             - TVLT Audio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TVLT JointTVLT  Joint VM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             - Unimodal  - TVLT Audio
                                                                                 0.3                                                                                            0.3                     IBIB Concat
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Concat      - Unimodal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  - Unimodal SM   VM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TVLT JointTVLT  Joint SM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             - Unimodal  - Unimodal VM
 37                                           0.3                                                                                            0.3                                                         IB Concat - Unimodal SM          TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM
                                                                                 0.2                                                                                            0.2

 38                                           0.2                                0.1
                                                                                                                                             0.2                                0.1
                                                                                                 Language: AG                                                                              Visual: MT
 39                                           0.1                                                                                            0.1
          Figure 4: Residual analysis: Average normalized brain alignment was computed across participants
                                                                                  Language: AG                                                                                        Visual: MT
 40                        Figure 4: Residual analysis: Average normalized brain alignment was computed across participants
        before
  Residual     and after Average
             analysis:   removal   ofnormalized
                           before and
                                      video  and audio
                                       after removalbrain
                                                         embeddings
                                                             alignment
                                                      of video
                                                                         from
                                                                and audio was
                                                                              bothcomputed
                                                                                    jointly
                                                                            embeddings
                                                                                             pretrained
                                                                                                 across
                                                                                          from both
                                                                                                         and  cross-
                                                                                                          participants
                                                                                                     jointly pretrained and cross-
 41
        modality models. Error  bars
                           modality   indicate
                                     models.   the
                                              Errorstandard  error  of
                                                    bars indicate the  the  mean
                                                                       standard   across  participants. “-” symbol
nd
 42 after removal of video
          represents residuals.   and   audio    embeddings        from     botherror of the mean
                                                                                   jointly         across participants.
                                                                                             pretrained     and cross-  “-” symbol
                         represents residuals.
  models. Error bars indicate
 43                                the standard error of the mean across participants. “-” symbol
        When subjects engage with multi-modality    stimuli,  we observe  that to
                                                                                multi-modal   embeddings
                                                                                                      When show
 s residuals.
 44                      specialized
       improvements in semantic
                                     for processing visual
                                    regions   such visual
                                                           information
                                                    as the features
                                                           AG, PCC
                                                                       related
                                                                       and dmPFC,
                                                                                  object recognition.
                                                                                        and syntactic
                                                                                                           audio information is
                                                                                                       regions  such asless pronounced
 45                        integrated, the specific                 crucial  for LOC region   alignment  may become
       the PTL   and IFG. Overall,
                           in the   we   find
                                  embeddings, that multi-modal
                                                  leading  to     information
                                                              slightly reduced    is processed
                                                                                   alignment    in  only
                                                                                              compared   a  few
                                                                                                           to   regions.
                                                                                                              unimodal   visual models.
bjects
46     engage with
       Furthermore,     multi-modality
                      several regions,         stimuli,
                                        including  the    we(scene
                                                        PPA     observe
                                                                     visual that   multi-modal
                                                                              area),  EVC  (early     embeddings
                                                                                                   visual cortex), ATL  show
47                         However,    overall, our  findings suggests   that  integrating  multiple  modalities  leads  to transferring
ments  in semantic
       (anterior       regions
                  temporal  lobe),such
                                   IFGOrb,
                           information    as the
                                         from  MFG,
                                              one  AG, andPCC
                                                   modality      andexhibit
                                                            dmPFC,
                                                             to        dmPFC,
                                                                another,              and
                                                                                 similar
                                                                          resulting  in    syntactic
                                                                                          brain
                                                                                        improved         regions
                                                                                                 alignment
                                                                                                  brain             such
                                                                                                              with both
                                                                                                        predictability.     as it can be
                                                                                                                        Hence,
48
and
 49
    IFG.   Overall,
       unimodal        we inferred
                            find that
                   and multi-modal       multi-modal
                                     embeddings.
                                    that                   information
                                          multi-modal models                  is processed
                                                                can indeed learn    multi-modal in   onlythat
                                                                                                 linkages   a few   regions.
                                                                                                               are relevant  to the brain.
 ore, several regions, including
 50
                                  theengage
                        When subjects    PPA with
                                              (scene   visual area),
                                                   multi-modality       EVC
                                                                   stimuli,     (earlythat
                                                                            we observe  visual  cortex),
                                                                                           multi-modal      ATL show
                                                                                                        embeddings
  temporal
 51     6.3 lobe), IFGOrb,
             H OW DOES        MFG, and
                        improvements
                       EACH MODALITY  in     dmPFC, exhibit
                                         semantic regions
                                           CONTRIBUTE     such as   similar
                                                                  the
                                                         TO THE MULTI AG,     brainBRAIN
                                                                            PCC
                                                                         - MODALand   alignment
                                                                                    dmPFC,  and     with? both such as
                                                                                                 syntactic
                                                                                           ALIGNMENT       regions
                                                    the PTL and IFG. Overall, we find that multi-modal information is processed in only a few regions.
 52and multi-modal embeddings.
                            Furthermore, several regions, including the PPA (scene visual area), EVC (early visual cortex), ATL
 53    To understand the contribution   of each lobe),
                           (anterior temporal    modality to the multi-modal
                                                       IFGOrb,                brain alignment
                                                                 MFG, and dmPFC,               for multi-modality
                                                                                      exhibit similar brain alignment with both
 54    naturalistic stimulus,  we perform
                            unimodal        residual analyses
                                      and multi-modal          by removing the unimodal model features from
                                                        embeddings.
 W DOES
 55    multi-modal   joint representations
           EACH MODALITY                     as well as multi-modal
                                     CONTRIBUTE          TO THE MULTI       - MODAL
                                                                      video or audio representations   from joint ?
                                                                                         BRAIN ALIGNMENT
 56    representations and6.3     H OWthe
                             measure    DOES   EACH MODALITY
                                           differences            CONTRIBUTE
                                                        in brain alignment      TO THE
                                                                            before       MULTI
                                                                                    and after    - MODALmodality-
                                                                                               removal    BRAIN ALIGNMENT ?

 57     specific features. To check the quality of information removal using residual analysis, We computed
 tand  the contribution
        Pearson              Towhere
                  correlationof understand
                                eachunimodal the contribution
                                        modality     to the
                                                   video      of each
                                                                    aremodality
                                                             multi-modal
                                                          features               to the
                                                                                brain
                                                                        projected       multi-modal
                                                                                     ontoalignment     brain
                                                                                                        for alignment
                                                                                           the multi-modal             for multi-modality
                                                                                                             multi-modality
                                                                                                               IB Concat
 58                          naturalistic stimulus,  we  perform  residual  analyses   by removing    the unimodal   model  features from
        feature space
 ic stimulus,
 59
                       using the residual
                 we perform       residual approach.
                                               analyses  Webyfound   correlation
                                                                removing       thetounimodal
                                                                                      be as low asmodel
                                                                                                     0.56 which   impliesfrom
                                                                                                              features
                             multi-modal   joint  representations  as well as multi-modal     video  or
        that unimodal video features are successfully removed from multi-modal representations. Fig. 4  audio  representations from joint
 dal joint
 60         representations       as   well
                             representations  as
                                               andmulti-modal        video
                                                    measure the differences
        shows normalized alignment for language (AG) and visual regions (MT).
                                                                              or  audio
                                                                              in brain      representations
                                                                                         alignment                 from
                                                                                                     before and after     joint
                                                                                                                      removal   modality-
 ations and measure the
 61                          specific features. Toincheck
                                 differences          brainthe alignment
                                                               quality of information
                                                                              before removal
                                                                                         and afterusingremoval
                                                                                                         residual analysis, We computed
                                                                                                                    modality-
 62        To check the Pearson
                              qualitycorrelation
        Cross-modal multi-modal
 eatures.                     feature
          this alignment is only
                                        models. The
                                      spaceexplained
                                 partially
                                                    where
                                        of information
                                            using the by
                                                           unimodalinvideo
                                                        alignment
                                                      residualremoval
                                                         videoapproach.
                                                                             features
                                                                       regions
                                                                           using
                                                                         We found
                                                               features. This
                                                                                 AG and are MT
                                                                                    residualprojected
                                                                                   correlation
                                                                              implies
                                                                                                        onto thehigh,
                                                                                                 is extremely
                                                                                                analysis,     Wemulti-modal
                                                                                               to be asunexplained
                                                                                      that significant
                                                                                                                      and
                                                                                                                   computed    IB Concat
                                                                                                        low as 0.56 which implies
 63
correlation   where
       alignment      unimodal
                  remains that    the video
                           afterunimodal
                                      removal features
                                          video offeatures are    projected
                                                             are successfully
                                                   video features.            ontothethe
                                                                              removed
                                                                      Conversely,           multi-modal
                                                                                         from
                                                                                        removalmulti-modal     IB Concat Fig. 4
                                                                                                  of speech representations.
                                                                                                              features
 64
pace
 65
     using   thelead
       does not   residual   approach.
                          shows
                     to a drop     normalizedWe found
                                               alignment
                                 in brain alignment,        correlation
                                                           for  language
                                                        indicating          to be
                                                                         (AG)
                                                                     that thereand as low asinformation
                                                                                    visual regions
                                                                                is additional     0.56 which
                                                                                                    (MT).          implies
                                                                                                               beyond
modal
 66   video    features
       speech features    are
                       that     successfully
                             is processed
                          Cross-modal              removed
                                            in these
                                          multi-modal regions.
                                                          models. from
                                                                  This
                                                                    The  multi-modal
                                                                       means   that in
                                                                         alignment   in     representations.
                                                                                        cross-modal
                                                                                        regions  AG   models,
                                                                                                     and MT    is    Fig. 4high, and
                                                                                                                  when
                                                                                                                  extremely
       transferring
 rmalized           knowledge
                          this    from
                               alignmentone
                                          is modality
                                             only        to
                                                   partially  another,
                                                             explained
           alignment for language (AG) and visual regions (MT).        the
                                                                        by  model
                                                                           video    relies
                                                                                 features. more
                                                                                            This  heavily
                                                                                                 implies   on
                                                                                                         that    visual
                                                                                                              significant unexplained
 67
       information. As a result, the model becomes more focused on video inputs rather than audio inputs.
                                                    alignment remains after the removal of video features. Conversely, the removal of speech features
 68     This likely reflects  the
 odal multi-modal             doesmodel’s
                           models.    not lead
                                           Thepreference
                                                      a drop for
                                                  toalignment      using
                                                               in brain   the detailed
                                                                     in alignment,
                                                                         regions          visual
                                                                                             andfeatures
                                                                                        indicating
                                                                                       AG                   isthat
                                                                                                      that there
                                                                                                     MT            isalign   closely
                                                                                                                       additional
                                                                                                                extremely             with and beyond
                                                                                                                                     information
                                                                                                                                    high,
69      brain activity in regions
                              speechAG      and MT,
                                         features    thatleading   to the in
                                                           is processed    observed     high alignment.
                                                                               these regions.     This means that in cross-modal models, when
 ment is only partially transferring
70                             explainedknowledgeby videofrom    features.      This implies
                                                                      one modality       to another, that
                                                                                                        thesignificant
                                                                                                              model relies unexplained
                                                                                                                                more heavily on visual
71
        Jointly  pretrained
 t remains after the removal    multi-modal
                              information. of video models.     The
                                                           features.
                                                As a result,         alignment
                                                                the model          in
                                                                          Conversely,  regions
                                                                             becomes morethe      AG   and
                                                                                                     removal
                                                                                                focused      MT
                                                                                                           on videois
                                                                                                                    ofextremely
                                                                                                                          speech
                                                                                                                        inputs        high,
                                                                                                                                      features
                                                                                                                                 rather than audio inputs.
        and this alignmentThis  is partially     explained      by  both   video   and    audio   features.     Unlike      cross-modal
 lead torepresentations,
72         a drop in brain         alignment,
                            thebrain
                                 TVLT
                                     likely reflects indicating
                                           model                         that
                                                        the model’s preference
                                                      learns aAG more            there    is
                                                                                    for using additional        information
                                                                                                the detailed visual      features thatbeyond
                                                                                                                                         align closely with
                                       activity  in regions         and balanced
                                                                         MT, leading representation
                                                                                         to the observed  of high
                                                                                                              bothalignment.
                                                                                                                      video and audio
eaturesfeatures.
73        that isThis
                   processed          in theseinformation
                         leads to integrated         regions. from  Thisboth means      that in
                                                                                 modalities,         cross-modal
                                                                                                 making    the model less   models,
                                                                                                                                 sensitivewhen
 ng knowledge
74      to the loss offrom    Jointly
                               onefrom
                        features          pretrained
                                        modality
                                           a specificto   multi-modal
                                                              another,
                                                           modality.   Asmodels.
                                                                            athe     The
                                                                                       we alignment
                                                                                   model
                                                                               result,         reliesonly
                                                                                            observe      in regions
                                                                                                          more          AG
                                                                                                                     heavily
                                                                                                               a small        andinMT
                                                                                                                           drop     on  isvisual
                                                                                                                                     brain extremely high,
75      alignment  when       andmodality
                           either    this alignment
                                                is        is partially
                                                    removed.     This   explained
                                                                       suggests      bythe
                                                                                  that    both   video
                                                                                             model    is and   audio more
                                                                                                         capturing      features.    Unlike cross-modal
                                                                                                                               high-level
 on. As a result, the model              becomes more
                              representations,                    focused       on avideo     inputs rather           than audio         inputs.
76      abstract and semantic       information the    thatTVLT    model learns
                                                            goes beyond                morefeatures
                                                                              the specific    balanced   ofrepresentation
                                                                                                             just one modality. of bothWe video and audio
 y
77
   reflects
        observe similar findings for language ROIs such as PTL, MFG, ATL, PCC and visual regions EVC,with
             the  model’s      preference
                              features.    This    for
                                                  leads  using
                                                          to      the
                                                             integrateddetailed
                                                                         information visual
                                                                                         from   features
                                                                                                both          that
                                                                                                       modalities,    align
                                                                                                                      making    closely
                                                                                                                                 the  model   less sensitive
 vity
78    in  regions   AG     andto   MT,
                                  the      leading
                                        loss of features to   the
                                                             from  observed
                                                                   a specific      high
                                                                                 modality. alignment.
                                                                                             As   a result,
        LOC and OFA, as shown in Figs. 9 and 10 in Appendix. These results suggest that there is additional  we  observe      only  a small  drop   in brain
                         alignment when either modality is removed. This suggests that the model is capturing more high-
 79    information beyond the unimodal embeddings considered in this study that is processed in the visual
 retrained
 80
             multi-modal
       and language
                         levelmodels.
                    regions.
                              abstract andThe  alignment
                                           semantic         in regions
                                                    information           AG and
                                                                that goes beyond theMT   is extremely
                                                                                    specific               high,
                                                                                             features of just one modality.
                         We observe similar findings for language ROIs such as PTL, MFG, ATL, PCC and visual regions
alignment      is partiallyEVC,explained       by both     video      and9 audio  10 infeatures.     Unlike      cross-modal
81      Qualitative analysis.    WeLOC    and OFA,
                                     compute        as shown
                                               the percentage   in Figs.
                                                                decrease     andalignment
                                                                             in         Appendix
                                                                                           for eachG.voxel
                                                                                                       Thesefollowing
                                                                                                               results suggest
                                                                                                                          the that there is
 ations,removal
82        the TVLT       model
                  of unimodal      learns
                             additional
                                 video        a morebeyond
                                        information
                                        embeddings      balanced
                                                      from    theIB
                                                             the         representation
                                                                   unimodal
                                                                       Concat   embeddings    of both
                                                                                             considered
                                                                                 (cross-modality)         video
                                                                                                     and in
                                                                                                         thethis
                                                                                                              TVLT   and
                                                                                                                  study     audio
                                                                                                                         that
                                                                                                                       Joint  is processed in
 This
83     leads   to integrated the information
                                 visual and       from
                                             language     both
                                                       regions.   modalities,        making     the   model
        (jointly pretrained model), with projections onto the brain surface averaged across participants, as    less   sensitive
 s of features
84                from
        depicted in  Fig. a
                          5. specific
                             The
                             Qualitativemodality.
                                  colorbaranalysis. WeAs
                                            shows the       a result,
                                                        percentage
                                                         compute           we observe
                                                                    thedecrease   in brain
                                                                         percentage         only   a small
                                                                                           alignment,
                                                                                      decrease          where
                                                                                               in alignment     drop
                                                                                                              forred    in
                                                                                                                      voxels
                                                                                                                   each     brain
                                                                                                                        voxel   following the
        indicate a higher  percentage   decrease  and white   voxels    indicate  areas  where
t when either modality is removed. This suggests that the model is capturing more high-level
85                           removal  of unimodal   video  embeddings       from   the IB Concatunimodal    video
                                                                                                  (cross-modality)  features
                                                                                                                       and   the TVLT Joint
        do not contribute any shared information within the multi-modal context. We observe that removal of
and semantic information that goes beyond the specific features of just one modality. We
 imilar findings for language ROIs such as PTL, MFG, ATL,                            9 PCC and visual regions EVC,
                                                               9
 OFA, as shown in Figs. 9 and 10 in Appendix. These results suggest that there is additional
 on beyond the unimodal embeddings considered in this study that is processed in the visual
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Percent decrease of brain alignment after removal of unimodal embeddings from different
multimodal models. (Left) Removal of unimodal VM embeddings from IB-Concat. (Middle)
Removal of unimodal VM embeddings from jointly pretrained TVLT. (Right) Removal of unimodal
SM embeddings from TVLT Joint. The color bar indicates the percent of decrease where darker shade
of red denotes higher and white denotes zero. LH: Left Hemisphere and RH: Right Hemisphere.
(jointly pretrained model), with projections onto the brain surface averaged across participants, as
depicted in Fig. 5. The colorbar shows the percentage decrease in brain alignment, where red voxels
indicate a higher percentage decrease and white voxels indicate areas where unimodal video features
do not contribute any shared information within the multi-modal context. We observe that removal of
unimodal video features leads to a significant drop (40-50%) in performance in the visual regions for
IB Concat, and in language regions (PTL & MFG) for TVLT Joint.

7    D ISCUSSION
Using multi-modal model representations, including both cross-modal and jointly pretrained types,
we evaluated how these representations can predict fMRI brain activity when participants are engaged
in multi-modality naturalistic stimuli. Further, we compared both multi-modal and unimodal rep-
resentations and observed their alignment with both unimodal and multi-modal brain regions. This
is achieved by removing information related to unimodal stimulus features (audio and video) and
observing how this perturbation affects the alignment with fMRI brain recordings acquired while
participants are engaged in watching multi-modality naturalistic movies.
Our analysis of multi-modal brain alignment yields several important conclusions: (1) The improved
brain alignment of the multi-modal models over unimodal models, across several language, visual, and
auditory regions is only partially attributable to the video and audio stimulus features presented to the
model. A deeper understanding of these models is required to shed light on the underlying information
processing of both unimodal and multi-modal information. (2) Cross-modal representations have
significantly improved brain alignment in language regions such as AG, PCC and PTL. This variance
can be partially attributed to the video features alone, rather than removal of auditory features. (3)
Video embeddings from multi-modal models exhibit higher brain alignment than audio embeddings,
except in the PTL and AC regions. This suggests that audio-based models may encode weaker
brain-relevant semantics, as similar findings are observed in a recent study (Oota et al., 2024a). (4)
Both cross-modal and jointly pretrained models demonstrate significantly improved brain alignment
with language regions (AG, PCC, PTL and IFG) compared to visual regions when analyzed against
unimodal video data. In contrast, when compared to unimodal audio-based models, all multi-modal
embeddings display significantly better brain alignment, with the exception of the LOC region. This
underscores the capability of multi-modal models to capture additional information—either through
knowledge transfer or integration between modalities—crucial for multi-modal brain alignment.
The model training protocol of TVLT appears more in line with how humans learn during devel-
opment when they experience multiple modalities simultaneously and the learning is mediated by
the experience of joint inter-modal associations. It is unlikely that the human system experiences
these modalities in isolation, except in cases of congenital conditions where the inputs from a specific
modality are not accessible. Given that the brain alignment observed in TVLT model in a language
region like AG is less sensitive to loss of information from specific modalities, we believe that AG
serves as a multi-modal convergent buffer integrating spatio-temporal information from multiple
sensory modalities to process narratives (Dong & Toneva, 2023b; Humphreys & Tibon, 2023). The
results of high alignment found in AG even in IB-Concat but more brittle with respect to loss of
information from a specific modality are also interesting. It would be interesting to study patterns
of activation in AG in patients who acquired visual or auditory function later in their life (Hölig
et al., 2023) to see if one observes such brittleness in the representations acquired. We make the code
publicly available1 . Lastly, we discuss limitations of our work in Appendix O.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8       E THICS S TATEMENT
We did not create any new neural recordings data as part of this work. We used the
Movie10 dataset which is publicly available without any restrictions. Movie10 dataset
can be downloaded from https://github.com/courtois-neuromod/movie10/tree/
33a97c01503315e5e09b3ac07c6ccadb8b887dcf. Please read their terms of use2 for more
details.
We do not foresee any harmful uses of this technology.

R EFERENCES
Richard Antonello, Javier S Turek, Vy Vo, and Alexander Huth. Low-dimensional structure in the
  space of language representations is reflected in brain responses. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:8332–8344, 2021.
Richard Antonello, Aditya Vaidya, and Alexander Huth. Scaling laws for language encoding models
  in fmri. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Georg Heigold, Chen Sun, Mario Lučić, and Cordelia Schmid.
 Vivit: A video vision transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
 Computer Vision, pp. 6836–6846, 2021.
Kirolos Ataallah, Xiaoqian Shen, Eslam Abdelrahman, Essam Sleiman, Deyao Zhu, Jian Ding, and
  Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt4-video: Advancing multimodal llms for video understanding with
  interleaved visual-textual tokens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03413, 2024.
Khai Loong Aw and Mariya Toneva. Training language models to summarize narratives improves
  brain alignment. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Alan Baade, Puyuan Peng, and David Harwath. Mae-ast: Masked autoencoding audio spectrogram
  transformer. Interspeech 2022, 2022.
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A framework
  for self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020.
Cordell M Baker, Joshua D Burks, Robert G Briggs, Andrew K Conner, Chad A Glenn, Kathleen N
  Taylor, Goksel Sali, Tressie M McCoy, James D Battiste, Daniel L O’Donoghue, et al. A connec-
  tomic atlas of the human cerebrum—chapter 7: the lateral parietal lobe. Operative Neurosurgery,
  15(suppl_1):S295–S349, 2018.
Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
  approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal statistical society: series B (Methodological),
  57(1):289–300, 1995.
Stefania Bracci and Hans P Op de Beeck. Understanding human object vision: a picture is worth a
  thousand representations. Annual Review of Psychology, 74:113–135, 2023.
Charlotte Caucheteux and Jean-Rémi King. Brains and algorithms partially converge in natural
  language processing. Communications Biology, 5(1):134, 2022.
William Jay Conover. Practical nonparametric statistics, volume 350. john wiley & sons, 1999.
Colin Conwell, Jacob S Prince, Kendrick N Kay, George A Alvarez, and Talia Konkle. What can 1.8
  billion regressions tell us about the pressures shaping high-level visual representation in brains and
  machines? bioRxiv, pp. 2022–03, 2022.
Fatma Deniz, Anwar O Nunez-Elizalde, Alexander G Huth, and Jack L Gallant. The representation
  of semantic information across human cerebral cortex during listening versus reading is invariant
  to stimulus modality. Journal of Neuroscience, 2019.
    2
        https://docs.cneuromod.ca/en/latest/ACCESS.html


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rutvik H Desai, Usha Tadimeti, and Nicholas Riccardi. Proper and common names in the semantic
  system. Brain Structure and Function, 228(1):239–254, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019.
Adrien Doerig, Tim C Kietzmann, Emily Allen, Yihan Wu, Thomas Naselaris, Kendrick Kay,
  and Ian Charest. Semantic scene descriptions as an objective of human vision. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.11737, 2022.
Dota Tianai Dong and Mariya Toneva. Interpreting multimodal video transformers using brain
  recordings. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Multimodal Representation Learning: Perks and Pitfalls,
  2023a.
Dota Tianai Dong and Mariya Toneva. Vision-language integration in multimodal video transformers
  (partially) aligns with the brain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07766, 2023b.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Michael Eickenberg, Alexandre Gramfort, Gaël Varoquaux, and Bertrand Thirion. Seeing it all:
 Convolutional network layers map the function of the human visual system. NeuroImage, 152:
 184–194, 2017.
Stella Frank, Emanuele Bugliarello, and Desmond Elliott. Vision-and-language or vision-for-
  language? on cross-modal influence in multimodal transformers. In Proceedings of the 2021
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 9847–9857, 2021.
Isabel Gauthier, Thomas W James, Kim M Curby, and Michael J Tarr. The influence of conceptual
   knowledge on visual discrimination. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 20(3-6):507–523, 2003.
Christopher R Genovese. A bayesian time-course model for functional magnetic resonance imaging
  data. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95(451):691–703, 2000.
Rohit Girdhar, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Zhuang Liu, Mannat Singh, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Armand
  Joulin, and Ishan Misra. Imagebind: One embedding space to bind them all. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15180–15190, 2023.
Matthew F Glasser, Timothy S Coalson, Emma C Robinson, Carl D Hacker, John Harwell, Essa
 Yacoub, Kamil Ugurbil, Jesper Andersson, Christian F Beckmann, Mark Jenkinson, et al. A
 multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature, 536(7615):171–178, 2016.
Ariel Goldstein, Zaid Zada, Eliav Buchnik, Mariano Schain, Amy Price, Bobbi Aubrey, Samuel A
  Nastase, Amir Feder, Dotan Emanuel, Alon Cohen, et al. Shared computational principles for
  language processing in humans and deep language models. Nature Neuroscience, 25(3):369–380,
  2022.
Cordula Hölig, Maria JS Guerreiro, Sunitha Lingareddy, Ramesh Kekunnaya, and Brigitte Röder.
  Sight restoration in congenitally blind humans does not restore visual brain structure. Cerebral
  Cortex, 33(5):2152–2161, 2023.
Gina F Humphreys and Roni Tibon. Dual-axes of functional organisation across lateral parietal cortex:
  the angular gyrus forms part of a multi-modal buffering system. Brain Structure and Function,
  228(1):341–352, 2023.
Alexander G Huth, Wendy A De Heer, Thomas L Griffiths, Frédéric E Theunissen, and Jack L
  Gallant. Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that tile human cerebral cortex. Nature, 532
  (7600):453–458, 2016.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander G Huth, Shinji Nishimoto, An T Vu, and T Dupre La Tour. Gallant lab natural short clips
  3t fmri data. G-Node doi, 10, 2022.
Shailee Jain and Alexander G Huth. Incorporating context into language encoding models for fmri.
  In NIPS, pp. 6629–6638, 2018.
Liunian Harold Li, Mark Yatskar, Da Yin, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. Visualbert: A simple
  and performant baseline for vision and language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03557, 2019.
Juliette Millet, Charlotte Caucheteux, Yves Boubenec, Alexandre Gramfort, Ewan Dunbar, Christophe
  Pallier, Jean-Remi King, et al. Toward a realistic model of speech processing in the brain with
  self-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:33428–33443,
  2022.
Camille K Milton, Vukshitha Dhanaraj, Isabella M Young, Hugh M Taylor, Peter J Nicholas, Robert G
  Briggs, Michael Y Bai, Rannulu D Fonseka, Jorge Hormovas, Yueh-Hsin Lin, et al. Parcellation-
  based anatomic model of the semantic network. Brain and Behavior, 11(4):e02065, 2021.
Yuko Nakagi, Takuya Matsuyama, Naoko Koide-Majima, Hiroto Yamaguchi, Rieko Kubo, Shinji
  Nishimoto, and Yu Takagi. The brain tells a story: Unveiling distinct representations of semantic
  content in speech, objects, and stories in the human brain with large language models. bioRxiv, pp.
  2024–02, 2024.
Subba Reddy Oota and Mariya Toneva. What aspects of nlp models and brain datasets affect brain-nlp
  alignment? In 2023 Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience, 2023.
Subba Reddy Oota, Jashn Arora, Veeral Agarwal, Mounika Marreddy, Manish Gupta, and Bapi
  Surampudi. Neural language taskonomy: Which nlp tasks are the most predictive of fmri brain
  activity? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 3220–3237, 2022a.
Subba Reddy Oota, Jashn Arora, Vijay Rowtula, Manish Gupta, and Raju S Bapi. Visio-linguistic
  brain encoding. In COLING, pp. 116–133, 2022b.
Subba Reddy Oota, Manish Gupta, and Mariya Toneva. Joint processing of linguistic properties in
  brains and language models. NeurIPS, 2023a.
Subba Reddy Oota, Agarwal Veeral, Marreddy Mounika, Gupta Manish, and Raju Surampudi Bapi.
  Speech taskonomy: Which speech tasks are the most predictive of fmri brain activity? In 24th
  INTERSPEECH Conference, 2023b.
Subba Reddy Oota, Emin Çelik, Fatma Deniz, and Mariya Toneva. Speech language models lack
  important brain-relevant semantics. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8503–8528. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 2024a. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.462.
Subba Reddy Oota, Zijiao Chen, Manish Gupta, Bapi Raju Surampudi, Gaël Jobard, Frédéric
  Alexandre, and Xavier Hinaut. Deep neural networks and brain alignment: Brain encoding and
  decoding (survey). Transactions on Machine Learning Research Journal, 2024b.
Sara F Popham, Alexander G Huth, Natalia Y Bilenko, Fatma Deniz, James S Gao, Anwar O Nunez-
  Elizalde, and Jack L Gallant. Visual and linguistic semantic representations are aligned at the
  border of human visual cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 24(11):1628–1636, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. Image, 2:T2, 2021.
Aniketh Janardhan Reddy and Leila Wehbe. Can fmri reveal the representation of syntactic structure
  in the brain? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:9843–9856, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Martin Schrimpf, Jonas Kubilius, Ha Hong, Najib J Majaj, Rishi Rajalingham, Elias B Issa, Kohitij
 Kar, Pouya Bashivan, Jonathan Prescott-Roy, Franziska Geiger, et al. Brain-score: Which artificial
 neural network for object recognition is most brain-like? BioRxiv, pp. 407007, 2018.
Martin Schrimpf, Idan Asher Blank, Greta Tuckute, Carina Kauf, Eghbal A Hosseini, Nancy Kan-
 wisher, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Evelina Fedorenko. The neural architecture of language:
 Integrative modeling converges on predictive processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
 Sciences, 2021.
Marie St-Laurent, Basile Pinsard, Oliver Contier, Katja Seeliger, Valentina Borghesani, Julie Boyle,
 Pierre Bellec, and Martin Hebart. cneuromod-things: a large-scale fmri dataset for task-and
 data-driven assessment of object representation and visual memory recognition in the human brain.
 Journal of Vision, 23(9):5424–5424, 2023.
V Subramaniam, C Wang, A Barbu, G Kreiman, and B Katz. Revealing vision-language integration
  in the brain with multimodal networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. Lxmert: Learning cross-modality encoder representations from transform-
  ers. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
  pp. 5100–5111, 2019.
Jerry Tang, Meng Du, Vy Vo, Vasudev Lal, and Alexander Huth. Brain encoding models based on
  multimodal transformers can transfer across language and vision. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Zineng Tang, Jaemin Cho, Yixin Nie, and Mohit Bansal. Tvlt: Textless vision-language transformer.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9617–9632, 2022.
Mariya Toneva and Leila Wehbe. Interpreting and improving natural-language processing (in
 machines) with natural language-processing (in the brain). Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Mariya Toneva, Tom M Mitchell, and Leila Wehbe. Combining computational controls with natural
 text reveals aspects of meaning composition. Nature Computational Science, 2(11):745–757, 2022.
Zhan Tong, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Limin Wang. Videomae: Masked autoencoders are data-
  efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:10078–10093, 2022.
Greta Tuckute, Jenelle Feather, Dana Boebinger, and Josh H McDermott. Many but not all deep
  neural network audio models capture brain responses and exhibit correspondence between model
  stages and brain regions. Plos Biology, 21(12):e3002366, 2023.
Aditya Vaidya, Shailee Jain, and Alexander Huth. Self-supervised models of audio effectively
  explain human cortical responses to speech. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  21927–21944. PMLR, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.
Aria Wang, Michael Tarr, and Leila Wehbe. Neural taskonomy: Inferring the similarity of task-derived
  representations from brain activity. NeurIPS, 32:15501–15511, 2019.
Aria Y Wang, Kendrick Kay, Thomas Naselaris, Michael J Tarr, and Leila Wehbe. Better models of
  human high-level visual cortex emerge from natural language supervision with a large and diverse
  dataset. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(12):1415–1426, 2023.
Leila Wehbe, Brian Murphy, Partha Talukdar, Alona Fyshe, Aaditya Ramdas, and Tom Mitchell.
  Simultaneously uncovering the patterns of brain regions involved in different story reading subpro-
  cesses. PloS one, 11, 2014.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in
  natural language processing: system demonstrations, pp. 38–45, 2020.
Shengqiong Wu, Hao Fei, Leigang Qu, Wei Ji, and Tat-Seng Chua. Next-gpt: Any-to-any multimodal
  llm. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Daniel LK Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles F Cadieu, Ethan A Solomon, Darren Seibert, and James J
  DiCarlo. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual
  cortex. PNAS, 111(23):8619–8624, 2014.
Rowan Zellers, Jiasen Lu, Ximing Lu, Youngjae Yu, Yanpeng Zhao, Mohammadreza Salehi, Aditya
  Kusupati, Jack Hessel, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Merlot reserve: Neural script knowledge
  through vision and language and sound. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16375–16387, 2022.
Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language
  model for video understanding. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 543–553, 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    OVERVIEW OF A PPENDIX S ECTIONS
       • Section B: Cross-subject prediction accuracy
       • Section C: Detailed sub-ROIs of language, visual and auditory regions
       • Section D: Details of pretrained Transformer models
       • Section E: Implementation details for reproducibility.
       • Section F: Effectiveness of multi-modal vs unimodal representations for various brain
         regions
       • Section G: How is the brain alignment of multi-modal features affected by the elimination
         of a particular modality?
       • Section H: Layerwise brain alignment
       • Section I: Why the choice of ridge regression instead of more complex machine learning
         models?
       • Section J: Extended Related Works
       • Section K: Baseline Analysis: Scrambling Inputs to Multi-modal Models
       • Section L: Whole Brain, Language and Visual ROIs analysis: Shared and Unique variance
         between Multi-modal and Unimodal models
       • Section M: Multi-modal versus unimodal effects
       • Section N: Impact of diverse model architectures on performance comparison
       • Section O: Limitations.


B    C ROSS - SUBJECT PREDICTION ACCURACY

We estimate cross-subject prediction accuracy in three settings: (i) training with The Bourne
supremacy and testing with Life data, (ii) training with The wolf of wall street and testing with
Life data, and (iii) training with both The Bourne supremacy and The wolf of wall street and testing
with Life data. We present the average cross-subject prediction accuracy across voxels for the
Movie10 fMRI dataset and across the three settings in Fig. 6.


C    D ETAILED SUB -ROI S OF LANGUAGE , VISUAL AND AUDITORY REGIONS

The data covers seven brain regions of interest (ROIs) in the human brain with the following sub-
divisions: (i) early visual (EV: V1, V2, V3, V3B, and V4); (ii) object-related areas (LO1 and LO2);
(iii) face-related areas (OFA), (iv) scene-related areas (PPA), (v) middle temporal (MT: MT, MST,
LO3, FST and V3CD), (vi) late language regions, encompassing broader language regions: angular
gyrus (AG: PFm, PGs, PGi, TPOJ2, TPOJ3), lateral temporal cortex (LTC: STSda, STSva, STGa,
TE1a, TE2a, TGv, TGd, A5, STSdp, STSvp, PSL, STV, TPOJ1), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG: 44, 45,
IFJa, IFSp) and middle frontal gyrus (MFG: 55b) (Baker et al., 2018; Milton et al., 2021; Desai et al.,
2023).


D    D ETAILS OF PRETRAINED T RANSFORMER MODELS

Details of each pretrained Transformer model are reported in Table 1 in Appendix. From the table, we
can clearly observe that both multi-modal models (ImageBind and TVLT) maintain similar backbone
architectures for videos but differ in their backbone architecture for embedding audio as well as in
the training strategies. For the TVLT model, video embeddings are captured from the ViT model,
while audio embeddings are generated from Mel Spectrograms and jointly pretrained within a single
Transformer encoder. In contrast, the ImageBind model uses the ViT model as the backbone for
Images and Videos, while the AST model is used for Audio; these individual encoders are used and
learn a common embedding space.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          Whole Brain: Cross-subject prediction accuracy
                                                         0.12


                               Avg Pearson Correlation
                                                          0.1


                                                         0.08


                                                         0.06



                                                                           All                        Bourn                          Wolf



                                                         0.18
                                                                Cross-subject prediction accuracy
                               Avg Pearson Correlation


                                                         0.16

                                                         0.14

                                                         0.12

                                                          0.1

                                                         0.08

                                                         0.06
                                                                AG
                                                                     ATL
                                                                           PTL
                                                                                 IFG
                                                                                       MFG
                                                                                             IFGOrb
                                                                                                      PCC
                                                                                                            dmPFC
                                                                                                                    EVC
                                                                                                                          LO
                                                                                                                               FFA
                                                                                                                                     PPA
                                                                                                                                           MT
                                                                                                                                                AC



Figure 6: Cross-subject prediction accuracy: (top) across whole brain, (bottom) across language,
visual and auditory regions.

         Table 1: Pretrained Transformer-based Encoder Models. All models have 12 layers.
Model     Pretraining   data Pretraining Method          # Param- Dataset                      Layers Backbone
Name      modality                                       eters
ImageBind Video & Audio      Cross-model multi-modal 132 M Audioset, Ego4D, SUN 12                    ViT for Images and Videos,
                             Transformer                          RGB-D                               AST for audio
TVLT      Video & Audio      Jointly pretrained on video 88 M     HowTo100M, YTTempo- 12              ViT for video embeddings,
                             and audio (Masked auto en-           ral180M                             and Spectrogram for audio
                             coder)                                                                   embeddings
ViT-B     Image              Vision Transformer          86 M     ImageNet                     12     Transformer encoder
VideoMAE Video               Masked autoencoder for 87 M          Kinetics, Epic Kitchens 100, 12     ViT-B
                             video inputs                         Something-Something v2
ViViT     Video              Video vision Transformer    86 M     Kinetics, Epic Kitchens 100, 12     ViT-B
                                                                  Something-Something v2
Wav2Vec Speech               Speech-based Transformer 95 M        Librispeech                  12     Transformer encoder
2.0-base                     model
AST       Speech             Audio Spectrogram Trans- 86 M        AudioSet, ESC-50 and 12             Initialized with ViT-B
                             former                               Speech commands                     weights

E    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS FOR REPRODUCIBILITY.


All experiments were conducted on a machine with 1 NVIDIA GeForce-GTX GPU with 16GB GPU
RAM. We used bootstrap ridge-regression (Appendix I) with MSE loss function; L2-decay (λ) varied
from 101 to 103 . Best λ was chosen by tuning on validation data that comprised a randomly chosen
10% subset from train set used only for hyper-parameter tuning.


                                                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                             Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Normalized brain alignment
                        0.6                                                                             0.6                                                                          0.6                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *^
                              *^                                                                              *^        ^
                        0.5
                                      ^                                                                 0.5                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                           *^      *^                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ^ *^
                                                                   ^                                                                                                                                                            ^
                        0.4                                                                             0.4                                                                          0.4                                                                            0.4


                        0.3                                                                             0.3                                                                          0.3                                                                            0.3


                        0.2                                                                             0.2                                                                          0.2                                                                            0.2


                        0.1                                                                             0.1                                                                          0.1                                                                            0.1
                                   Language: ATL                                                                   Language: IFGOrb                                                             Language: MFG                                                                  Language: PCC
                                      Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                        Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Normalized brain alignment
                                                              0.6                                                                               0.6                                                                        0.6

                                                                                                  *^
                                                              0.5      ^       ^                                                                0.5   ^                                                                    0.5             ^^
                                                                                                                                                            ^                                                                       ^^
                                                              0.4                                                                               0.4                                                                        0.4


                                                              0.3                                                                               0.3                                                                        0.3


                                                              0.2                                                                               0.2                                                                        0.2


                                                              0.1                                                                               0.1                                                                        0.1
                                                                           Language: dmPFC                                                                Visual: LOC                                                                    Visual: OFA


Figure 7: Average normalized brain alignment for per video and audio modalities from multi-modal
and individual modality features across whole brain and several ROIs of language (ATL, IFGOrb,
MFG, PCC, dmPFC) and visual (LOC, OFA). The points overlaid on the bars represent the normalized
brain alignment scores of the six participants.
F                             E FFECTIVENESS OF MULTI - MODAL VS UNIMODAL REPRESENTATIONS FOR
                              VARIOUS BRAIN REGIONS


Average normalized brain alignment for per video and audio modalities from multi-modal and
individual modality features across whole brain and several ROIs of language (ATL, IFGOrb, MFG,
PCC, dmPFC) and visual (LOC, OFA) are shown in Fig. 7. Our observations are as follows: (i)
Cross-modal IB Concat embeddings are significantly better than TVLT Joint embeddings in semantic
regions such as AG and PCC, as well as the multi-modal processing region MT. (ii) Conversely,
TVLT Joint embeddings are significantly better than IB Concat embeddings in dmPFC regions. This
indicates that while both cross-modal and jointly pretrained multi-modal models perform similarly at
a macro level, there are individual differences at micro level.
We now present the results for per unimodal video model and per speech model in Fig. 8. Similar to
the average results of unimodal video and speech models, we observe that multi-modal models exhibit
better normalized brain alignment than individual unimodal video and speech models across language
and visual regions. Among unimodal speech models, the AST model shows better normalized brain
alignment than the Wav2vec2.0 model. Among unimodal video models, each unimodal video model
displays notably consistent performance across regions.



G                             H OW IS THE BRAIN ALIGNMENT OF MULTI - MODAL FEATURES AFFECTED
                              BY THE ELIMINATION OF A PARTICULAR MODALITY ?


To understand the contribution of each modality to the multi-modal brain alignment for multi-modal
naturalistic stimulus, we perform residual analyses by removing the unimodality features from
multi-modal joint representations as well as multi-modal video or audio representations from joint
representations and measure the differences in brain alignment before and after removal modality-
specific features. Figs. 9 and 10 display the normalized brain alignment for language ROIs such
as PTL, MFG, ATL, PCC and visual regions EVC, LOC and OFA. We note a decrease in brain
alignment for these regions following the removal of video embeddings from cross-modality models,
whereas the removal of audio embeddings does not affect the brain alignment. On the other hand, for
jointly pretrained models, removal of both video and audio embeddings partially impacts the brain
alignment.


                                                                                                                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Random      TVLT        ViViT   Wav2Vec2.0                                      Random       TVLT         ViViT   Wav2Vec2.0


   Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                   Normalized brain alignment
                                   IB Concat   VideoMAE    ViT-B   AST                                             IB Concat    VideoMAE     ViT-B   AST
                             0.6                                                                             0.6
                                          *^                                                                                    *^
                             0.5
                                               ^                                                             0.5

                             0.4                                                                             0.4

                             0.3                                                                             0.3

                             0.2                                                                             0.2

                             0.1                                                                             0.1
                                                 Language: AG                                                                     Language: PTL

                                   Random      TVLT        ViViT   Wav2Vec2.0                                      Random       TVLT         ViViT   Wav2Vec2.0
   Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                   Normalized brain alignment
                                   IB Concat   VideoMAE    ViT-B   AST                                             IB Concat    VideoMAE     ViT-B   AST
                             0.6                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                          *^
                             0.5          *^ ^                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                ^
                             0.4                                                                             0.4

                             0.3                                                                             0.3

                             0.2                                                                             0.2

                             0.1                                                                             0.1
                                                 Language: ATL                                                                    Language: PCC

                                   Random      TVLT        ViViT   Wav2Vec2.0                                      Random       TVLT         ViViT   Wav2Vec2.0
   Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                   Normalized brain alignment


                                   IB Concat   VideoMAE    ViT-B   AST                                             IB Concat    VideoMAE     ViT-B   AST
                             0.6                                                                             0.6

                             0.5
                                          *^ *^                                                              0.5               ^ ^
                             0.4                                                                             0.4

                             0.3                                                                             0.3

                             0.2                                                                             0.2

                             0.1                                                                             0.1
                                                 Language: IFG                                                                   Language: dmPFC

                                   Random      TVLT        ViViT   Wav2Vec2.0                                      Random       TVLT        ViViT    Wav2Vec2.0
Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                Normalized brain alignment


                                   IB Concat   VideoMAE    ViT-B   AST                                             IB Concat    VideoMAE    ViT-B    AST
                        0.6                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                           ^
                        0.5                    ^                                                        0.5                     ^
                                           ^
                        0.4                                                                             0.4

                        0.3                                                                             0.3

                        0.2                                                                             0.2

                        0.1                                                                             0.1
                                                   Visual: EVC                                                                       Visual: MT

Figure 8: Average normalized brain alignment for video and audio modalities from multi-modal
and individual modality features across whole brain and several ROIs of language (AG, ATL, PTL,
IFG, PCC, dmPFC) and visual (EVC, MT). Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean across
participants.
H                               L AYERWISE BRAIN ALIGNMENT

We now plot the layer-wise normalized brain alignment for the Unimodal models and TVLT joint
model, as shown in Fig. 11. Observation from Fig. 11 indicates a consistent drop in performance from
early to lower layers, specifically for both TVLT joint and unimodal video models. The key finding


                                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        IB Concat                                           TVLT Joint                                                     IB Concat                  TVLT Joint
                                        IB Concat - IB Video                                TVLT Joint - TVLT Video                                        IB Concat - IB Video       TVLT Joint - TVLT Video
                                        IB Concat - IB Audio                                TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio                                        IB Concat - IB Audio       TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio
                                        IB Concat - Unimodal VM                             TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM                                       IB Concat - Unimodal VM    TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM
                                        IB Concat - Unimodal SM                             TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM                                       IB Concat - Unimodal SM    TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM


     Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                        Normalized brain alignment
                                  0.6                                                                                                                0.6

                                  0.5                                                                                                                0.5

                                  0.4                                                                                                                0.4

                                  0.3                                                                                                                0.3

                                  0.2                                                                                                                0.2

                                  0.1                                                                                                                0.1
                                                         Language: ATL                                                                                                       Language: PTL


                                        IB Concat                                           TVLT Joint                                                     IB Concat                  TVLT Joint
                                        IB Concat - IB Video                                TVLT Joint - TVLT Video                                        IB Concat - IB Video       TVLT Joint - TVLT Video
                                        IB Concat - IB Audio                                TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio                                        IB Concat - IB Audio       TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio
                                        IB Concat - Unimodal VM                             TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM                                       IB Concat - Unimodal VM    TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM
                                        IB Concat - Unimodal SM                             TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM                                       IB Concat - Unimodal SM    TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM
     Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                        Normalized brain alignment
                                  0.6                                                                                                                0.6

                                  0.5                                                                                                                0.5

                                  0.4                                                                                                                0.4

                                  0.3                                                                                                                0.3

                                  0.2                                                                                                                0.2

                                  0.1                                                                                                                0.1
                                                         Language: IFG                                                                                                       Language: MFG


                                        IB Concat                                           TVLT Joint                                                     IB Concat                  TVLT Joint
                                        IB Concat - IB Video                                TVLT Joint - TVLT Video                                        IB Concat - IB Video       TVLT Joint - TVLT Video
                                        IB Concat - IB Audio                                TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio                                        IB Concat - IB Audio       TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio
                                        IB Concat - Unimodal VM                             TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM                                       IB Concat - Unimodal VM    TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM
                                        IB Concat - Unimodal SM                             TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM                                       IB Concat - Unimodal SM    TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM
     Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                        Normalized brain alignment


                                  0.6                                                                                                                0.6

                                  0.5                                                                                                                0.5

                                  0.4                                                                                                                0.4

                                  0.3                                                                                                                0.3

                                  0.2                                                                                                                0.2

                                  0.1                                                                                                                0.1
                                                       Language: IFGOrb                                                                                                      Language: PCC


                                                                                                IB Concat                                              TVLT Joint
                                                                                                IB Concat - IB Video                                   TVLT Joint - TVLT Video
                                                                                                IB Concat - IB Audio                                   TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio
                                                                                                IB Concat - Unimodal VM                                TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM
                                                                                                IB Concat - Unimodal SM                                TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM
                                                             Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                          0.6

                                                                                          0.5

                                                                                          0.4

                                                                                          0.3

                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                Language: dmPFC


Figure 9: Residual analysis for ATL, PTL, IFG, MFG, IFGOrb, PCC and dmPFC regions: Average
normalized brain alignment was computed across participants before and after removal of video and
audio embeddings from both jointly pretrained and cross-modality models. The points overlaid on
the bars represent the normalized brain alignment scores of the six participants. “-” symbol represents
residuals.
here is that our results that TVLT joint embeddings showcase improved brain alignment across all the
layers compared to unimodal video and speech embeddings.


                                                                                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   IB Concat                                               TVLT Joint                                                      IB Concat                     TVLT Joint
                                   IB Concat - IB Video                                    TVLT Joint - TVLT Video                                         IB Concat - IB Video          TVLT Joint - TVLT Video
                                   IB Concat - IB Audio                                    TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio                                         IB Concat - IB Audio          TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio
                                   IB Concat - Unimodal VM                                 TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM                                        IB Concat - Unimodal VM       TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM
                                   IB Concat - Unimodal SM                                 TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM                                        IB Concat - Unimodal SM       TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM
Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                       Normalized brain alignment
                             0.6                                                                                                                    0.6

                             0.5                                                                                                                    0.5

                             0.4                                                                                                                    0.4

                             0.3                                                                                                                    0.3

                             0.2                                                                                                                    0.2

                             0.1                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                     Visual: EVC                                                                                                                 Visual: LOC


                                   IB Concat                                               TVLT Joint                                                      IB Concat                     TVLT Joint
                                   IB Concat - IB Video                                    TVLT Joint - TVLT Video                                         IB Concat - IB Video          TVLT Joint - TVLT Video
                                   IB Concat - IB Audio                                    TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio                                         IB Concat - IB Audio          TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio
                                   IB Concat - Unimodal VM                                 TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM                                        IB Concat - Unimodal VM       TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM
                                   IB Concat - Unimodal SM                                 TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM                                        IB Concat - Unimodal SM       TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM
Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                                                       Normalized brain alignment
                             0.6                                                                                                                    0.6

                             0.5                                                                                                                    0.5

                             0.4                                                                                                                    0.4

                             0.3                                                                                                                    0.3

                             0.2                                                                                                                    0.2

                             0.1                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                     Visual: PPA                                                                                                                 Visual: OFA


                                                                                               IB Concat                                              TVLT Joint
                                                                                               IB Concat - IB Video                                   TVLT Joint - TVLT Video
                                                                                               IB Concat - IB Audio                                   TVLT Joint - TVLT Audio
                                                                                               IB Concat - Unimodal VM                                TVLT Joint - Unimodal VM
                                                                                               IB Concat - Unimodal SM                                TVLT Joint - Unimodal SM
                                                        Normalized brain alignment


                                                                                     0.6

                                                                                     0.5

                                                                                     0.4

                                                                                     0.3

                                                                                     0.2

                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                  Auditory: AC

Figure 10: Residual analysis for EVC, LOC, PPA, OFA and AC regions: Average normalized brain
alignment was computed across participants before and after removal of video and audio embeddings
from both jointly pretrained and cross-modality models. The points overlaid on the bars represent the
normalized brain alignment scores of the six participants. “-” symbol represents residuals.
I                              W HY THE CHOICE OF RIDGE REGRESSION INSTEAD OF MORE COMPLEX
                               MACHINE LEARNING MODELS ?



Since fMRI brain recordings have a low signal-to-noise ratio, and pretrained language models are
trained in a non-linear fashion, the model representations are rich and complex. To understand the
relationship between brain activity and various stimuli, a large body of brain encoding literature
over the past two decades Wehbe et al. (2014); Huth et al. (2016); Jain & Huth (2018); Toneva &
Wehbe (2019); Schrimpf et al. (2021); Caucheteux & King (2022); Antonello et al. (2024); Vaidya
et al. (2022); Millet et al. (2022); Oota et al. (2023a; 2024a); Wang et al. (2023) has preferred ridge
regression due to its simplicity. Ridge regression is a linear model, making it easier to interpret and
understand compared to more complex models. Further, the regularization in ridge regression helps
manage the noise effectively, leading to more robust and reliable models.


                                                                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          Unimodal VM       Unimodal SM       TVLT Joint Embeddings
                                                0.5


               Avg Normalized Brain Alignment   0.4


                                                0.3
                                                      1      2    3     4      5    6     7      8    9    10   11    12
                                                                                Layer Depth

Figure 11: Normalized brain alignment across layers for multi-modal model (TVLT joint embeddings)
and unimodal video and speech models.
J   E XTENDED R ELATED W ORKS
Tang et al. (2024) demonstrate the use of multi-modal models in a cross-modal experiment to assess
how well the language encoding models can predict movie-fMRI responses and how well the vision
encoding models can predict narrative story-fMRI. Nakagi et al. (2024) analyzed fMRI related to
video content viewing and found distinct brain regions associated with different semantic levels,
highlighting the significance of modeling various levels of semantic content simultaneously.
Subramaniam et al. (2024) utilized vision-language models based on image frame-text pairs, despite
the stimuli being continuous movies. While effective for certain tasks, this approach may overlook
the temporal dynamics inherent in videos. Additionally, their use of stereoencephalography (sEEG),
although offers high temporal resolution, is limited in spatial resolution and typically restricted to
specific brain regions where the electrodes are implanted. Finally, their study focused on multi-modal
integration in a cross-modal model setting and did not explore jointly pretrained settings. Additionally,
each participant watched a different movie while their sEEG activity was recorded, therefore the
input stimuli varied widely across participants. In contrast, our study leverages video-audio models
that capture the temporal events in videos, providing richer and more dynamic representations of the
stimuli. By incorporating audio data, we preserve acoustic information that may be lost in text-based
transcriptions. Moreover, we utilize fMRI data, which offers whole-brain coverage and higher spatial
resolution, enabling a more comprehensive analysis of the brain activity. Our approach also considers
both cross-modal and jointly pretrained multi-modal models, offering a more nuanced understanding
of how different modalities interact and integrate information in the brain.

K    BASELINE A NALYSIS : S CRAMBLING I NPUTS TO M ULTI - MODAL M ODELS
We conducted an additional baseline experiment where we kept the trained weights unchanged and
shuffled the movie stimuli into a scrambled order as input to the two multi-modal models: cross-modal
and jointly-pretrained models, as shown in Fig. 12 as “IB Concat Shuffle” and “TVLT Joint Shuffle”
respectively.
From Fig. 12, we observe that embeddings from multi-modal models exhibit significantly better
brain alignment compared to both randomly initialized models and when passing scrambled clips as
input. Furthermore, when comparing scrambled input to pretrained models with randomly initialized
models, the scrambled input shows improved alignment over random initialization. Overall, this
sanity check confirms that representations from multi-modal models maintain meaningful alignment
with brain activity, even when the stimulus order is scrambled, highlighting their robustness and
effectiveness.


                                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            Random                  IB Concat
                                                            IB Concat Random        IB Concat Shuffle
                                                            TVLT Joint              TVLT Joint Random
                                                            TVLT Joint Shuffle


                         Normalized brain alignment
                                                      0.6

                                                      0.5          *^                      *^
                                                      0.4

                                                      0.3

                                                      0.2

                                                      0.1
                                                                                 Whole brain


Figure 12: The plot compares the average normalized brain alignment across the whole brain under
three conditions: (i) pretrained models, (ii) randomly initialized models, and (iii) pretrained multi-
modal models using scrambled videos as input. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean
across participants. ∗ indicates cases where multi-modal embeddings are significantly better than
randomly initialized models, i.e., p≤ 0.05. ∧ indicates cases where multi-modal embeddings are
significantly better than scrambled videos as input to multi-modal models, i.e., p≤ 0.05.
L    W HOLE B RAIN , L ANGUAGE AND V ISUAL ROI S ANALYSIS : S HARED AND
     U NIQUE VARIANCE BETWEEN M ULTI - MODAL AND U NIMODAL MODELS

Residual Analysis on the Brain: The features can be removed from the model representations, or
from the brain recordings. Conceptually, the results of these approaches should be the same because
when the feature is removed completely from either the input or/and the target, it would not be able to
further impact the observed alignment. However, practically, brain recordings are noisier than model
representations and so estimating the removal regression model will be more difficult especially with
fMRI data of low SNR. Thus residual analysis on the brain is less effective. Therefore, we opt to
remove features from the model representations where we can exercise more control.
Unique Variance Calculation: We now build two voxelwise joint encoding models: (i) that includes
both unimodal and cross-modal features, (ii) that includes both unimodal and jointly-pretrained
features. Using these joint encoding models and prior encoding models, we compute the unique
variance explained by each model i.e. unimodal and cross-modal, unimodal and jointly-pretrained
models. Also, we compute the shared variance between these models. The results are shown in
Figs. 13, 14 and 15 for the whole brain, language network and visual network, respectively. We
make the following observations from Figs. 13, 14 and 15: (i) It can be clearly seen that the shared
variance between jointly-pretrained (TVLT) model and the unimodal models is significantly lower
than that observed between cross-modal (IB Concat) versus unimodal models. This result is in line
with the earlier results on residual analysis where IB Concat showed larger drop in performance
when unimodal information is removed as compared to that of TVLT model (see Fig. 4). Specifically,
we can see that there is a larger drop in performance for removal of video features as compared to
that with removal of speech features. (ii) For the visual network, as shown in Fig. 15, we observe
that the unique explained variance between TVLT and unimodal VMs is comparable, while the
cross-modal model IB Concat exhibits a higher unique explained variance compared to unimodal
VMs. In contrast to unimodal VMs, both cross-modal and jointly pre-trained models demonstrate
higher unique explained variance compared to unimodal SMs.


M     M ULTI - MODAL VERSUS UNIMODAL EFFECTS

Multi-modal effects: In general, multi-modal models have better predictivity in the language regions
(see Fig. 2).
Unimodal effects: Unimodal models have higher predictivity in the early sensory regions (visual and
auditory). Such patterns of results are expected.
Critical Differences: However, critical differences are also observed. Although multi-modal models
perform with around 50% alignment (Fig. 3) in high-level visual regions (PPA, MT), they seem to


                                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    0.323        0.258         0.204             0.363         0.192         0.18


                                          Unimodal VM                                   Unimodal SM
                     IB-Concat                                    IB-Concat


                       0.492     0.074       0.319                  0.504      0.089       0.28


                                            Unimodal VM                                  Unimodal SM
                        TVLT                                         TVLT


Figure 13: Whole Brain Analysis: Shared and Unique Variance explained between Cross-modal
(IBConcat) and Unimodal models (VM, SM), Jointly-pretrained (TVLT) and Unimodal models (VM,
SM). In each plot, Pink Area (Left Circle - Intersection) represents the unique variance explained
by the multi-modal model that is not shared with the unimodal model. Green Area (Right Circle
- Intersection) represents the unique variance explained by the unimodal model that is not shared
with the Multi-modal model. Light Brown Intersection (Overlap) represents the shared variance
between the multi-modal and unimodal model. It indicates the extent to which both models explain
overlapping neural variance in the whole brain.


                     0.332       0.218          0.18
                                                                    0.438     0.013      0.347



                                          Unimodal VM                                     Unimodal SM
                     IB-Concat                                 IB-Concat


                       0.475      0.068      0.277                  0.473       0.071      0.239


                                            Unimodal VM                                   Unimodal SM
                         TVLT                                         TVLT


Figure 14: Language Network: Shared and Unique Variance explained between Cross-modal (IB
Concat) and Unimodal models (VM, SM), Jointly-pretrained (TVLT) and Unimodal models (VM,
SM). In each plot, Pink Area (Left Circle - Intersection) represents the unique variance explained
by the multi-modal model that is not shared with the unimodal model. Green Area (Right Circle
- Intersection) represents the unique variance explained by the unimodal model that is not shared
with the Multi-modal model. Light Brown Intersection (Overlap) represents the shared variance
between the multi-modal and unimodal model. It indicates the extent to which both models explain
overlapping neural variance in the whole brain.


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      0.31        0.194       0.206
                                                                 0.433    0.078     0.321


                                          Unimodal VM                              Unimodal SM
                      IB-Concat                               IB-Concat


                       0.409      0.077     0.368                0.416     0.063     0.24


                                                                                   Unimodal SM
                        TVLT               Unimodal VM             TVLT


Figure 15: Visual Network: Shared and Unique Variance explained between Cross-modal (IB Concat)
and Unimodal models (VM, SM), Jointly-pretrained (TVLT) and Unimodal models (VM, SM).
In each plot, Pink Area (Left Circle - Intersection) represents the unique variance explained by
the multi-modal model that is not shared with the unimodal model. Green Area (Right Circle -
Intersection) represents the unique variance explained by the unimodal model that is not shared
with the Multi-modal model. Light Brown Intersection (Overlap) represents the shared variance
between the multi-modal and unimodal model. It indicates the extent to which both models explain
overlapping neural variance in the whole brain.
perform less (around 40% alignment) in the early visual region (EVC). These patterns are also seen
in the auditory regions (AC versus PTL). Thus, there seem to be both patterns of similarity as well as
critical dissimilarities observed in the comparative analyses.
Residual analysis: For cross-modality models, the alignment in regions AG and MT is extremely
high, and this alignment is only partially explained by video features (Fig. 4). This implies that
significant unexplained alignment remains after the removal of video features. Conversely, the
removal of speech features does not lead to a drop in brain alignment, indicating that there is
additional information beyond speech features that is processed in these regions. The EVC region is
well-predicted by unimodal video models, showing similar levels of predictivity with multi-modal
models. A recent study by [Oota et al. 2024] explored the type of information in language models
that predicts brain activity and found that low-level features in these models drive predictivity, such
as speech-based language models predicting the visual cortex or text models predicting the auditory
cortex.
When unimodal video model (VM) features are regressed out of multi-modal models, there is no
performance drop in EVC but a drop in regions like PPA and LOC, suggesting that multi-modal
models do not solely rely on corresponding unimodal features but also contain unexplained variance
in EVC. Additionally, removing low-level features like motion energy may impact EVC performance.
Interestingly, regressing out unimodal VM features does not affect speech-related information in
multi-modal models, as speech models also exhibit brain predictivity in EVC.

N    I MPACT OF DIVERSE MODEL ARCHITECTURES ON PERFORMANCE
     COMPARISON

Several prior brain encoding studies in the literature compared a variety of language/speech models
(differing in their size, architecture, training dataset, etc.) and their brain alignment.
Schrimpf et al. (2021) investigated 43 language models ranging from distributed word embeddings
models like Word2Vec, GloVe, FastText, to Sequence models such as RNN, LSTM, Contextualized
models like ELMo, Transformer models like BERT, GPT-2 and Transformer-XL with its variations


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


such as base, small, and larger models. Although all these models have different architectures, training
datasets, Schrimpf et al. (2021) considered each model as a subject and computed normalized brain
predictivity, i.e., what percentage the model explains the variance given a ceiling value for each
voxel. Similarly, Toneva & Wehbe (2019) used four different language models such as ELMo, BERT,
USE and Transformer-XL and compared the explained variance of each model while doing brain
alignment. Further, Aw & Toneva (2023) use four longer-context language models such as BART,
Big-Bird, Longformer and Long-T5 and verify the deeper understanding of language models and
brain alignment by the amount of variance explained by each model. Similarly, Antonello et al.
(2021) used 101 language models including both pretrained and task-based language models and
compared the amount of explained variance in the brain by extracting the semantic representations
and whether these representations are closer to brain-level semantics. Recently, Oota & Toneva
(2023); Oota et al. (2024a) used four text-based language models such as BERT, GPT-2, FLAN-T5
and BART, speech-based language models such as Wav2Vec2.0 and Whisper and verified the amount
of explained variance in the brain at different language regions.
It is important to observe that all the above studies utilize a number of language models that are
different in training architecture and training datasets, however the primary goal of all these studies
is to investigate how close the semantic representations captured by each model aligns with brain-
relevant semantics.
The extensive precedent in the literature, from studies comparing 43 models (Schrimpf et al., 2021)
to those examining 101 models (Antonello et al., 2021), demonstrates that this approach is both valid
and valuable for understanding the relationship between artificial and biological language processing.

O    L IMITATIONS
The low alignment scores clearly show that despite the increasing popularity of multi-modal models
in tackling complex tasks such as visual question answering, we are still far from developing a model
that fully encapsulates the complete information processing steps involved in handling multi-modal
naturalistic information in the brain. In the future, by fine-tuning these multi-modal models on
specific tasks such as generating captions for videos, we can better leverage their alignment strengths.
Further, multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) (Zhang et al., 2023; Ataallah et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2024) that align visual features from video frames into the LLM embedding space via
a trainable linear projection layer, offer promise for enhanced multi-modal capabilities. Lastly,
although we observe differences between the models (that we experimented with in this work) in
terms of architectural variability and variability in pretraining methods, this suggests that future
work could benefit from more tightly controlled comparisons to better isolate the effects of these
factors. Addressing this limitation would provide deeper insights into how model design and training
strategies impact brain alignment, particularly in the context of multi-modal stimuli datasets.
It is to be noted that there exist a relatively large number of vision-language or vision-alone or
language-alone or speech-alone models as compared to video-audio models that is the primary focus
of the current investigation. Therefore the current effort needs to take into consideration the sparsity
of video-audio model availability. Despite this limitation, the current paper reports comparison across
three video-only, two speech-only, one jointly-pretrained video-audio, and one cross-modal multi-
modal model – to the best of our knowledge, this is by far the largest cohort of comparative analysis
of multi-modal models and their alignment with brain representations resulting from multi-modal
stimuli.


                                                  26
