Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PN-GAIL: L EVERAGING N ON - OPTIMAL I NFORMA -
TION FROM I MPERFECT D EMONSTRATIONS

 Qiang Liu, Huiqiao Fu, Kaiqiang Tang & Chunlin Chen∗
 School of Management and Engineering
 Nanjing University
 Nanjing, China
 {qiangliu, hqfu, kqtang}@smail.nju.edu.cn, clchen@nju.edu.cn

 Daoyi Dong
 The Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute
 University of Technology Sydney
 Sydney, Australia
 daoyidong@gmail.com



                                               A BSTRACT
             Imitation learning aims at constructing an optimal policy by emulating expert
             demonstrations. However, the prevailing approaches in this domain typically pre-
             sume that the demonstrations are optimal, an assumption that seldom holds true
             in the complexities of real-world applications. The data collected in practical sce-
             narios often contains imperfections, encompassing both optimal and non-optimal
             examples. In this study, we propose Positive-Negative Generative Adversarial Im-
             itation Learning (PN-GAIL), a novel approach that falls within the framework of
             Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL). PN-GAIL innovatively lever-
             ages non-optimal information from imperfect demonstrations, allowing the dis-
             criminator to comprehensively assess the positive and negative risks associated
             with these demonstrations. Furthermore, it requires only a small subset of labeled
             confidence scores. Theoretical analysis indicates that PN-GAIL deviates from the
             non-optimal data while mimicking imperfect demonstrations. Experimental re-
             sults demonstrate that PN-GAIL surpasses conventional baseline methods in deal-
             ing with imperfect demonstrations, thereby significantly augmenting the practical
             utility of imitation learning in real-world contexts. Our codes are available at
             https://github.com/QiangLiuT/PN-GAIL.


1       I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved significant success in addressing sequen-
tial decision-making problems (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Xia et al., 2020; Zha et al., 2021). Its primary
goal is to optimize policies to maximize cumulative rewards. However, designing an appropriate
reward function can be quite challenging; a poorly designed reward function can lead to suboptimal
performance of RL agents. In contrast, Imitation Learning (IL) presents a more practical approach,
as it learns solely from demonstrations, eliminating the need for explicitly defined reward functions.
Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016), which employs the frame-
work of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), directly learns a policy
from demonstrations. Following the development of GAIL, many variants have been proposed to
enhance algorithmic performance across different problem domains (Li et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2018;
Dadashi et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2024).
The imitation learning methods mentioned above can learn an optimal policy given optimal demon-
strations. However, most imitation learning methods tend to fail when faced with data filled with
imperfect demonstrations. Especially in the real world, the assumption that the provided demonstra-
tions are of high quality may not always be valid (Yang et al., 2024). For instance, due to factors
    ∗
        Corresponding author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


such as fatigue and distractions, decisions made by human experts may not always be optimal. In
such cases, simply assigning equal weight to all data can lead to a decrease in the quality of the
learned policy. Therefore, we need a method that can extract useful information from imperfect
demonstrations to learn an optimal policy.
Existing methods for imitation learning from imperfect demonstrations can be broadly divided into
two categories: weighting-based methods (Wu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021b;a; Tangkaratt et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023) and ranking-based methods (Brown et al., 2019; 2020;
Chen et al., 2021; Huo et al., 2023; Taranovic et al., 2022). Weighting-based methods achieve
imitation of optimal demonstrations through reweighting different demonstrations, while ranking-
based methods aim to guide the recovery of the reward function with additional ranking information,
thereby learning an optimal policy based on the rewards. In contrast, weighting-based methods are
more computationally efficient since they do not require trajectory sorting. Additionally, they are
more flexible to use, as they do not necessitate demonstrations to be in a trajectory form.
In order to solve the problem of learning from imperfect demonstrations using GAIL, Wu et al.
(2019) proposed two methods: two-step importance weighting IL (2IWIL) and generative adver-
sarial IL with imperfect demonstration and confidence (IC-GAIL). The former trains a classifier to
forecast confidence scores and subsequently proceeds with weighted imitation learning, employing
a two-step learning approach. The latter introduces an end-to-end learning method but at a slower
pace of learning. However, as discussed in Section 4.1, 2IWIL is susceptible to the influence of
preferences inherent in imperfect demonstrations during training. In the learning process of the
discriminator, 2IWIL tends to assign a higher “reward” to the state-action pair with a greater prob-
ability of occurrence in imperfect demonstrations. This discrepancy in “rewards” diverges from our
intended objectives, potentially resulting in the acquisition of a suboptimal policy.
To tackle the aforementioned challenge, we propose a new method, Positive-Negative Generative
Adversarial Imitation Learning (PN-GAIL), building upon the framework of GAIL. Different from
2IWIL, we leverage non-optimal information from imperfect demonstrations, enabling the discrim-
inator to weigh both positive and negative risks of imperfect demonstrations comprehensively and
requiring only a small subset of labeled confidence scores. In this way, it can provide more accurate
rewards for subsequent RL methods. Theoretical analysis reveals that PN-GAIL not only mimics
imperfect demonstrations but also avoids imitating non-optimal ones, illustrating the ability of PN-
GAIL to learn an optimal policy. Additionally, to get more accurate confidence scores, we propose
an improved semi-supervised confidence classifier. Experiments on six control tasks are conducted
to show the efficiency of our method in dealing with imperfect demonstrations compared to baseline
methods. In particular, the main contributions of this work are threefold:

     1. We propose a new method called PN-GAIL, which can leverage non-optimal information
        to learn an optimal policy from imperfect demonstrations.
     2. We theoretically analyze the output of the optimal discriminator in PN-GAIL, demonstrat-
        ing that PN-GAIL learns an optimal policy by deviating from the non-optimal demonstra-
        tions.
     3. We demonstrate the efficiency of our method across six control tasks, with results showing
        superior performance compared to other baseline methods.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Imitation Learning Imitation learning methods can learn an optimal policy when given optimal
demonstrations. Behavior cloning (BC) (Pomerleau, 1988) learns policies directly through a su-
pervised learning paradigm and is mostly used in autonomous driving tasks (Hawke et al., 2020).
While straightforward, it suffers from compounded errors due to covariate shift (Ross & Bagnell,
2010) and typically demands extensive data for effective training. Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(IRL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008) first seeks to recover the underlying reward function
and then learns a policy through RL. On the other hand, GAIL views an imitation learning problem
through the lens of occupancy measures (Puterman, 2014), and can learn a policy directly from the
demonstrations. GAIL has demonstrated success across various imitation tasks, including multi-
agent scenarios (Song et al., 2018), robot control (Peng et al., 2021), human motion simulation (Wei
et al., 2021), and imitation of driver behavior (Bhattacharyya et al., 2022; Ruan & Di, 2022). How-


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ever, these methods presuppose access to optimal demonstrations. When provided with imperfect
demonstrations, they struggle to learn a good policy.

Weighting-based imitation learning from imperfect demonstrations Weighting-based imita-
tion learning from imperfect demonstrations learns an optimal policy by reweighting different
demonstrations and amplifying the significance of the optimal ones. 2IWIL and IC-GAIL (Wu et al.,
2019) first propose to reweight imitation learning based on confidence. WGAIL (Wang et al., 2021b)
connects confidence with the agent policy and discriminator without requiring additional prior infor-
mation on confidence. However, it needs a high proportion of optimal demonstrations in imperfect
demonstrations. VILD (Tangkaratt et al., 2020) employs a variational method to jointly estimate
demonstration quality and reward, but it assumes that the quality of demonstrations be correlated
with variance. CAIL (Zhang et al., 2021) guides confidence estimation by introducing trajectory
ranking. UID (Wang et al., 2023) treats imperfect demonstrations as unlabeled data, based on the
idea of PU Learning (Du Plessis et al., 2014), mitigating the impact of non-optimal demonstrations.
Nevertheless, this relies on the assumption that non-optimal demonstrations within the imperfect
demonstrations can well match agent demonstrations. Additionally, some studies address imper-
fect demonstrations in offline imitation learning (Sasaki & Yamashina, 2020; Xu et al., 2022; Kim
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). However, these methods either similarly assume that
the proportion of the optimal demonstrations is dominant, or require an additional set of optimal
demonstrations.

Ranking-based imitation learning from imperfect demonstrations Ranking-based imitation
learning from imperfect demonstrations utilizes additional ranking information to guide the recovery
of the reward function, thereby learning a policy based on the rewards. T-REX (Brown et al., 2019)
infers the reward function from the given ranking trajectories and expects the reward function to
conform to the given ranking order. However, this approach demands a substantial quantity of rank-
ing trajectories to enhance its generalization capacity. D-REX (Brown et al., 2020) automatically
generates ranking trajectories by introducing varying degrees of noise. SSRR (Chen et al., 2021)
revises the structure of the reward function in D-REX to accommodate different levels of noise in-
fluence better. LERP (Huo et al., 2023) views suboptimal demonstrations as additive noise on the
reward function, establishing a quantifiable relationship between noise and reward based on D-REX.
However, the automatic generation of the ranking trajectories requires the assumption that the tra-
jectory will receive lower rewards with the addition of noise, which is not necessarily true in cases
where random demonstrations exist. AILP (Taranovic et al., 2022) necessitates the teacher’s access
to the true reward function, thereby providing real-time correct ranking between two trajectories.
Nevertheless, this condition is challenging to meet in practice.

3   P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we provide a brief background on RL, GAIL, and 2IWIL.

Reinforcement learning We consider the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Sutton &
Barto, 2018). An MDP typically comprises six components, denoted as M = ⟨S, A, P, R, ρ0 , γ⟩,
where S is the state space, A is the action space, P(st+1 |st , at ) is the transition probability from
state st and action at at time step t to state st+1 at time step t + 1, R(s, a) is the reward func-
tion, ρ0 is the distribution of initial states, and γ ∈ (0, 1) stands for the discount factor. In an
RL process, P∞the agent aims to learn a policy π(a|s) to maximize its expected discounted rewards
Es0 ∼ρ0 ,π [ t=0 γ t R(st , at )]. For any given policy π, there exists a corresponding occupancy mea-
sure ρπ : S × A → R, establishing a one-to-one relationship between them.

GAIL and 2IWIL GAIL integrates GANs framework into imitation learning, leading the follow-
ing min-max optimization problem by minimizing the Jensen-Shannon divergence between pθ and
pE (Ke et al., 2021):
                min max E(s,a)∼pθ [log Dw (s, a)] + E(s,a)∼pE [log(1 − Dw (s, a))],                (1)
                  θ    w

where pθ and pE are the corresponding normalized occupancy measures for the agent policy πθ and
the expert policy πE , respectively. The discriminator Dw attempts to discern these distributions from


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


πE and πθ , while πθ aims to “trick” the discriminator, thereby minimizing E(s,a)∼pθ [log Dw (s, a)].
Ultimately, the output of the discriminator, − log Dw (s, a), serves as a reward, which can then be
utilized to learn the policy πθ through RL methods such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), PPO
(Schulman et al., 2017) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
Since GAIL assigns the same weights to all demonstrations, if the given demonstrations are non-
optimal, then the learned policy will also be non-optimal. To address this issue, 2IWIL considers
the following setup:
                                                              i.i.d.
                                   Dc ≜ {(xc,i , ri )}ni=1
                                                        c
                                                           ∼ q(x, r),
                                                     i.i.d.
                                   Du ≜ {xu,i }ni=1
                                                 u
                                                    ∼ p(x),
where x is the state-action pair, r denotes confidence score, indicating the probability that x belongs
to the optimal demonstrations, q(x, r) = p(x)pr (r|x) and pr (ri |x) = δ(ri − r(x)) is Dirac delta
function. Dc and Du represent confidence data and unlabeled data, respectively.
2IWIL first trains a probabilistic classifier, which forecasts the confidence scores of demonstrations
in Du through semi-conf (SC) classification, leveraging the knowledge of confidence scores in Dc .
The probabilistic classifier is trained with the loss function as follows:
       RSC,ℓ (g) = Ex,r∼q [rℓ(g(x)) + (1 − r)ℓ(−g(x)) − βℓ(−g(x))] + Ex∼p [βℓ(−g(x))],                 (2)
where g is a prediction function, ℓ is a loss function which uses logistic loss and β = ncn+n
                                                                                            u
                                                                                              u
                                                                                                . After
obtaining confidence scores for all demonstrations, 2IWIL uses Bayes’ rule to reweight the GAIL
objective. The final objective becomes

                                                        r(x)
                  min max Ex∼pθ [log Dw (x)] + Ex∼p          log(1 − Dw (x)) ,               (3)
                    θ    w                               η
where η is a class-prior, denoting the proportion of optimal demonstrations within the imperfect
demonstrations, and p is the corresponding normalized occupancy measures for Dc and Du .

4     A PPROACH
In this section, we begin by elucidating the motivation behind our method. We illustrate the problem
of 2IWIL through an example and then introduce our method PN-GAIL with theoretical analysis.
Details of derivations and proofs in this section can be found in Appendix B.

4.1   M OTIVATION

2IWIL aims to reweight demonstrations based on confidence, assigning greater weights to those with
high confidence so that the discriminator can give higher rewards. However, it is worth noting that
this weighting behavior can be influenced by the preferences inherent in imperfect demonstrations.
As shown in Fig. 1, the top half of the graph represents the actual confidence scores, while the
bottom half represents the equivalent weights during the discriminator’s training. When imperfect
demonstrations favor a low-confidence state-action pair, we consider the goals of GAIL, 2IWIL:

                                                         r(x)
                 min max Ex∼pθ [log Dw (x)] + Ex∼p            log(1 − Dw (x)) .
                   θ    w                                  η

GAIL assigns the same weights to all given demonstrations, which means r(x)            η   ≡ 1.0. For the
given expert demonstrations, we only need to consider the second term of the above equation, which
                          p(x) r(x)                                                                   r(x)
                       P
can be expanded as:              η log(1 − Dw (x)). Here, the coefficient of log(1 − Dw (x)) is η .
Therefore, if there is a higher probability of x1 appearing in imperfect demonstrations, e.g., p(x1 ) =
5p(xother ) (assuming that the probabilities of other state-action pairs are the same), then, for x1 , the
coefficient of log(1 − Dw (x)) is p(x1 ) r(xη 1 ) = p(xother ) 5r(x
                                                                 η
                                                                    1)
                                                                       . This can also be explained as that
the probability of x1 appearing is the same as for other demonstrations, but the confidence score is
5 times higher, since η is constant across all demonstrations. In the case of GAIL, since r(x)   η ≡ 1.0,
the confidence score becomes 5 times of the original, which is calculated as 1.0 × 5 = 5.0. This


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     GAIL                                       2IWIL                                     PN-GAIL(ours)
               True                                      0.5                                            0.5                                         0.5
                                            0.2                                                                                     0.2
            confidence          0.2                                        0.2
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                       0.7                                         0.7                                         0.7
                                           0.2                                        0.2                                         0.2
                    0.4                                            0.4                                              0.4
                                    0.2                0.8                     0.2                 0.8                     0.2                0.8
                    0.3                                            0.3                                              0.3
                                                 0.9                                        0.9                                         0.9
                                    0.2                                        0.2                                          0.2


                              0.5                                        0.5
           Equivalent                                                                                                                           0.5
                                             5.0                                      1.0                                           0.2
            weights                 5.0                                   1.0                                             0.2
                                                        1.0                                       0.7                                         0.7
                                           5.0                                       1.0                                          0.2
                        1.0                                       0.4                                               0.4
                                     5.0               1.0                 1.0                    0.8                      0.2                0.8
                        1.0                                       0.3                                               0.3
                                                 1.0                                       0.9                                          0.9
                                     5.0                                   1.0                                             0.2


                                                 High-confidence data                                         Low-confidence data


Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the difference between PN-GAIL, 2IWIL and GAIL. The top half
of the graph is the actual confidence score, the bottom half is the equivalent weight when training
the discriminator, and the red line is distinguished by a threshold of 0.5.


can lead to low-confidence data being treated as high-confidence data, not aligning with the actual
situation. In addition, for a clearer explanation, we also provide a simple example.
Suppose a state s1 has two actions x1 (s1 , a1 ) and x2 (s1 , a2 ). In Fig. 1, the circle with a confidence
score of 0.8 represents x2 , and the five circles with a confidence score of 0.2 all represent x1 , which
means p(x1 ) = 5p(x2 ), indicating a higher probability of x1 occurring in imperfect demonstrations.
It is clear that x2 is better than x1 . However, in imperfect demonstrations where p(x1 ) = 5p(x2 )
and the prior η is the same, according to Eq. (3), the equivalent weight of x1 will be 1.0 compared to
x2 (0.2 × 5 = 1.0). This means that the discriminator will consider x1 to be more likely the optimal
demonstration than x2 , resulting in a poor policy.

4.2   P OSITIVE -N EGATIVE G ENERATIVE A DVERSARIAL I MITATION L EARNING

To tackle the problem above, we propose Positive-Negative Generative Adversarial Imitation Learn-
ing (PN-GAIL). This method leverages non-optimal information from imperfect demonstrations,
allowing the discriminator to comprehensively assess the positive and negative risks associated with
these demonstration. By doing so, it mitigates the influence of preferences inherent in imperfect
demonstrations on the discriminator, thus ensuring that its evaluations better reflect actual condi-
tions. This, in turn, provides more accurate rewards for the subsequent RL process, leading to the
learning of a better policy.
We begin by focusing on the training of the discriminator, denoting optimal demonstrations as pos-
itive examples and non-optimal demonstrations as negative examples. In 2IWIL, the discriminator
only considers the positive risk of imperfect demonstrations, while ignoring negative risk. Therefore,
the discriminator will heavily prioritize the positive risk training for state-action pairs frequently
appearing in imperfect demonstrations, leading to incorrect results. For this reason, we aim to incor-
porate the negative risk into the training of the discriminator when dealing with imperfect demon-
strations. Specifically, following Xu & Denil (2021), let (X, Y ) represent the input and output of a
binary classification problem, where X denotes the state-action pair and Y ∈ {0, 1}. We label opti-
mal data as 0 and non-optimal data as 1. The imperfect demonstrations is denoted as D, comprising
Dopt (optimal demonstrations) and Dnon (non-optimal demonstrations), where D = Dopt + Dnon .
We aim to train a discriminator Dw using a loss function ϕ : R × {0, 1} → R. Utilizing the labeled
risk operator as follows:
                                                         y
                                                        RD w
                                                             (D) = ED [ϕ(Dw (x), y)].                                                                     (4)
We expect the discriminator to provide accurate evaluation scores for both the dataset generated
by the agent policy and the given imperfect demonstrations. To achieve this, we consider the risk
associated with the dataset generated by the agent policy and the risk associated with the imperfect


                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


demonstrations, respectively. The overall risk of the discriminator is
                               pn                1               pn
                             RD  w
                                   (Dπθ , D) = RD  w
                                                     (Dπθ ) + RD   w
                                                                     (D),                   (5)
where Dπθ is the demonstrations generated by agent policy πθ . We can write the risk associated
with the imperfect demonstrations as the sum of positive and negative risks:
                pn          pn                       0                     1
              RD w
                   (D) = RD   w
                                (Dopt , Dnon ) = ηRD   w
                                                         (Dopt ) + (1 − η)RD w
                                                                               (Dnon ),     (6)
where η = p(y = 0) is a class-prior, denoting the proportion of optimal demonstrations within the
imperfect demonstrations.
Based on Eq. (6), the overall risk of the discriminator can be rewritten as
                 pn                 1               0                       1
                RD w
                     (D, Dπθ ) = RD   w
                                        (Dπθ ) + ηRD  w
                                                        (Dopt ) + (1 − η)RD   w
                                                                                (Dnon ).            (7)
Replacing the loss function with the standard logistic loss and tidying up the statement, the objective
of the discriminator becomes
      max Ex∼pθ [log Dw (x)] + ηEx∼popt [log(1 − Dw (x))] + (1 − η)Ex∼pnon [log Dw (x)] . (8)
        w
Since r(x) denotes the probability that x belongs to the optimal demonstrations, which means
r(x) = p(y = 0|x) and 1 − r(x) = p(y = 1|x), according to the Bayes’ rule we have
                                  r(x)p(x)                                 (1 − r(x))p(x)
        popt (x) = p(x|y = 0) =             , pnon (x) = p(x|y = 1) =                     . (9)
                                       η                                       1−η
Then we can rewrite the objective of the discriminator in the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1. Based on Eq. (9), the objective of the discriminator can be rewritten as
   max Ex∼pθ [log Dw (x)] + Ex∼p [r(x) log(1 − Dw (x))] + Ex∼p [(1 − r(x)) log Dw (x)] . (10)
    w

The agent receives a reward equivalent to − log Dw (x), and then the final objective to be optimized
becomes
  min max Ex∼pθ [log Dw (x)] + Ex∼p [r(x) log(1 − Dw (x))] + Ex∼p [(1 − r(x)) log Dw (x)] .
    θ    w
                                                                                                           (11)
Furthermore, recall that 2IWIL adopts a two-step learning approach, where Dc and Du represent
confidence data and unlabeled data, respectively. To get more accurate confidence scores, we refine
the semi-conf (SC) classification proposed in 2IWIL, which is trained by minimizing the following
risk:
      RSC,ℓ (g) = Ex,r∼q [rℓ(g(x)) + (1 − r)ℓ(−g(x)) − βℓ(−g(x))] + Ex∼p [βℓ(−g(x))].                      (12)
We note that for a state-action pair x occurring solely in Dc , once 1 − r − β < 0, where r > 1 − β,
the coefficient of ℓ(−g(x)) becomes negative. In order to minimize the risk, the classifier would
then forecast g(x) as positive infinity, leading to an excessively high estimation of confidence for
demonstrations in Dc . Concurrently, Eq. (12) tends to predict data in Du as negative, resulting in an
underestimated confidence for demonstrations in Du . To balance this effect, we propose balanced
semi-conf (BSC) classification. We introduce Ex∼p [αℓ(g(x))] − Ex∼q [αℓ(g(x))], the theoretical
value of which is 0 since Dc and Du are drawn from the same distribution p(x). The final risk is as
follows:
            RBSC,ℓ (g) = Ex,r∼q [rℓ(g(x)) + (1 − r)ℓ(−g(x)) − αℓ(g(x)) − βℓ(−g(x))]
                                                         + Ex∼p [αℓ(g(x)) + βℓ(−g(x))],                    (13)
where the loss function ℓ uses the logistic loss. Next, similar to 2IWIL, we seek to derive the optimal
values of α and β for minimizing the variance of the empirical unbiased estimator R       bBSC,ℓ (g) through
the following theorem.
Theorem 4.2. Let  Pndc1 denote Var(ℓ(−g(x))), d2 denote Var(ℓ(g(x))),Pnc         σcov1 denote the covari-
ance between n1c i=1    ri (ℓ (g (xc,i )) − ℓ (−g (xc,i ))) and n1c i=1     ℓ (−g (xc,i )), σcov2 denote the
                        Pnc                                                      Pnc
covariance between n1c i=1     (1 − ri ) (ℓ (−g (xc,i )) − ℓ (g (xc,i ))) and n1c i=1    ℓ (g (xc,i )), cov de-
note Cov (ℓ (−g (x)) , ℓ (g (x))). The estimator RBSC,ℓ (g) has the minimum variance when
                                                    b
                    nu     d1 cov − cov 2 nu       d1 σcov2 − covσcov1 nc nu
              α=         −                       +                            ,
                 nc + nu   d1 d2 − cov 2 nc + nu       d1 d2 − cov 2  nc + nu
                    nu     d2 cov − cov 2 nu       d2 σcov1 − covσcov2 nc nu
              β=         −             2
                                                 +                            .
                 nc + nu   d1 d2 − cov nc + nu         d1 d2 − cov 2  nc + nu

                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since d1 , d2 , σcov1 , σcov2 , cov are difficult to calculate, in practice, we assume that these covariances
are sufficiently small for computational convenience. Consequently, we have α = ncn+n             u
                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                      and β =
  nu
nc +nu . During    the  training  process,   as we  assume   that  the data from  Dc and D u  are  drawn from
the same distribution p(x), we guarantee this condition via the clip function (see more details in
Appendix C.2).

4.3   T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS
                                                               ∗
We consider the reward given by the optimal discriminator Dw     (x). In 2IWIL, when the discrimi-
                                       ∗
nator is optimal, the reward is − log Dw (x) = log ((rp + ηpθ ) / (ηpθ )). Consequently, if imperfect
demonstrations exhibit a pronounced preference for a certain state-action pair, it results in a sig-
nificantly higher probability of p compared to other state-action pairs. The discriminator tends to
provide an inflated reward, hindering the learning of an optimal policy. Conversely, in our method,
we first give the following theorem:
                                                                        ∗
Theorem 4.3. Given a fixed agent policy πθ , the optimal discriminator Dw (x) of Eq. (11) can be
written as

                                         ∗          (1 − r)p + pθ
                                        Dw (x) =                  .                                     (14)
                                                       p + pθ
                                             ∗
As a result, when the optimal discriminator Dw (x) is given, the optimization of πθ is equivalent to
minimizing

                   2JSD(pθ ||p) − KL(pθ ||p1 ) − (1 − η)KL(pnon ||p1 ) + C,                    (15)
                                                                            h          i
                                                                                 ηp
where p1 = (pθ + (1 − η)pnon )/(2 − η), C = ηEx∼popt log popt + (1 −
         h               i
η)Ex∼pnon log (1−η)p
                  p
                     non
                           + log(2 − η) − (1 − η) log(1 − η)/(2 − η) − 2 log 2, which is a constant
for πθ .

According to Theorem 4.3, since p1 is a weighted sum of pθ and pnon , subtracting the second
and third terms of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence is equivalent to letting pθ deviate from
pnon . Thus, PN-GAIL aims to align pθ with p and ensure that pθ deviates from pnon . This illus-
trates that our method is able to avoid mimicking non-optimal data within imperfect demonstrations,
thereby solely imitating the optimal ones. Additionally, the reward given by the optimal discrim-
          ∗                               ∗
inator Dw   (x) in our method is − log Dw   (x) = log ((p + pθ ) / ((1 − r)p + pθ )). In cases where
imperfect demonstrations exhibit a pronounced preference for a certain state-action pair, resulting
in a significantly higher probability p compared to other state-action pairs, the presence of the term
(1 − r)p in the denominator mitigates the impact of an excessively high p. Furthermore, even in
extreme scenarios where p is much greater than pθ , the maximum reward provided by the discrimi-
nator in our method is −log(1−r), rather than approaching positive infinity as in 2IWIL. As a result,
in PN-GAIL, the discriminator can offer more accurate rewards, thereby facilitating the subsequent
RL process to learn a better policy.
In the following theorem, we demonstrate that the estimation error of Eq. (13) is bounded, indicating
that we can obtain a classifier by minimizing RbBSC,ℓ . We provide the estimation error bound with
Rademacher complexity (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002).
Theorem 4.4. Denote G as the hypothesis class being utilized and Rn (G) as the Rademacher com-
plexity of the function class G with a sample size of n. Assume that the loss function ℓ is ρℓ -Lipschitz
continuous, and there exists a constant Cℓ > 0 such that for any g ∈ G, supx∈X ,y∈{±1} |ℓ(yg(x))| ≤
Cℓ . Define ĝ as the minimizer of RbBSC,ℓ (g) over g ∈ G and g ∗ as the minimizer of RBSC,ℓ (g) over
g ∈ G. For δ ∈ (0, 1), with probability at least 1 − δ when repeatedly sampling data to train ĝ, we
have

   RBSC,ℓ (ĝ) − RBSC,ℓ (g ∗ ) ≤16ρL ((3 + α − β)Rnc (G) + (α + β)Rnu (G))
                                          r
                                             log(12/δ)              −1            −1

                                   + 4CL                (3 + α − β)nc 2 + (α + β)nu 2 .                 (16)
                                                 2

                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.4   OVERALL A LGORITHM

Through the aforementioned classifier, we can obtain the confidence scores for all demonstrations
in the unlabeled data Du . Subsequently, we treat both Dc and Du as imperfect demonstrations
and optimize the discriminator Dw . Finally, we utilize Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO)
(Schulman et al., 2015) to learn a policy πθ based on the rewards provided by the discriminator. The
pseudocode for the overall algorithm can be found in Appendix A.

5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we validate our method by conducting experiments on six control tasks, including
Pendulum-v1 and five challenging MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) environments. We aim to answer
three questions: (1) Is 2IWIL influenced by the preferences inherent in imperfect demonstrations,
and can our method alleviate such influence? (2) Does our proposed BSC outperform the SC pro-
posed in 2IWIL? (3) How robust is our method?

Task setup We conduct experiments across six environments (Pendulum-v1, Ant-v2, Walker2d-
v2, Hopper-v2, Swimmer-v2, and HalfCheetah-v2). Each experiment is conducted using five differ-
ent random seeds. Additionally, to better showcase the performance of imitation, we normalize the
cumulative rewards of the policies, where 1.0 represents the optimal policy and 0.0 represents the
random policy. Due to space constraints, we place the details of the experiments, the performance
of the optimal and the random policies and the uncropped figures of Ant-v2 in Appendix C.1, C.4.

Demonstrations For the Pendulum-v1 environment, we train an optimal policy πopt and an inter-
mediate policy π1 using TRPO. To highlight the preferences inherent in imperfect demonstrations,
we aim for a higher proportion of samples to be drawn from π1 . In that way, we ensure that the
number of demonstrations generated by π1 is four times that of πopt , resulting in a final demonstra-
tions ratio of πopt : π1 = 1 : 4, which are then merged together. Afterward, all demonstrations
are annotated with confidence scores, utilizing normalized rewards. For the Ant-v2, Walker2d-v2,
Hopper-v2, Swimmer-v2, and HalfCheetah-v2 environments, to maintain fairness, we directly uti-
lize the demonstrations and confidence scores provided by the code of 2IWIL. During the practical
experiments across all six environments, 20% of the given demonstrations are randomly selected to
be assigned confidence scores, which means that the label ratio is 0.2.

Baselines We choose GAIL, 2IWIL, IC-GAIL, and WGAIL as our baseline methods. Among
these methods, since GAIL and WGAIL do not require confidence information, we only provide
them with demonstrations. Furthermore, we conduct ablation experiments, including 2IWIL: Orig-
inal 2IWIL. PN-GAIL\BSC: PN-GAIL with semi-conf (SC) classification. PN-GAIL\PN: 2IWIL
with balanced semi-conf (BSC) classification. PN-GAIL: Our final method. All methods are trained
jointly using both Dc and Du . Meanwhile, we also test the performance of CAIL, ranking-based
methods (T-REX, D-REX) and f-IRL (Ni et al., 2021) by constructing trajectory rankings from con-
fidence scores in the Pendulum-v1 and Ant-v2 environments (due to the demonstrations provided
by the 2IWIL’s code is not in trajectory form). The results can be seen in Appendix C.3.

5.1   P ERFORMANCE

In our experiments, we use different numbers of Dc + Du for different tasks, and the specific values
are shown in Appendix C.1. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 show the normalized average returns during training.
The results in Fig. 2 demonstrate that our method outperforms other baseline methods, achieving
the highest returns in all six environments. Of particular note is its performance in Pendulum-v1.
Here, imperfect demonstrations exhibit a preference for certain state-action pairs with lower con-
fidence scores, adversely affecting the learning process of 2IWIL and leading to a poor policy. In
contrast, our method addresses this issue by incorporating the negative risk of imperfect demonstra-
tions. Experimental results demonstrate that our method is able to learn a near-optimal policy in the
Pendulum-v1 environment while other baseline methods fail.
We observe that the performance of GAIL generally falls below that of other methods. This is
because GAIL treats all demonstrations as optimal, unable to allocate distinct weights to different


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Normalized average returns of PN-GAIL and baseline methods during training. The x-axis
is the number of training steps.


Figure 3: Normalized average returns of ablation experiments during training. The x-axis is the
number of training steps.


demonstrations. However, in Walker2d-v2, neither 2IWIL nor IC-GAIL outperforms GAIL. We feel
this might be due to the relatively low average confidence of demonstrations in Walker2d-v2. Mean-
while, we notice that WGAIL performs worse than GAIL in Walker2d-v2, which we attribute to its
assumption of a higher proportion of optimal demonstrations within the imperfect demonstrations.
Since the demonstrations provided in Walker2d-v2 do not align with this assumption, the confidence
estimation of WGAIL would no longer be accurate.
Additionally, Fig. 3 shows the normalized average returns of the ablation experiments. In Fig. 3, the
large difference between the performance of PN-GAIL and PN-GAIL\PN indicates that there is a
preference in the imperfect demonstrations, resulting in the poor performance of the 2IWIL follow-
up method. The large performance gap between the performance of PN-GAIL and PN-GAIL\BSC
indicates that the prediction confidence of SC classification is not accurate enough, which affects
the subsequent training. If the performance gap is not significant, it means that the above problems
are not obvious or do not affect the final results. Our method outperforms other methods across all
environments, thus confirming the performance enhancement brought by incorporating the negative
risk of imperfect demonstrations and employing balanced semi-conf (BSC) classification.

5.2   ACCURACY OF CLASSIFIER

By comparing PN-GAIL with PN-GAIL\BSC as depicted in Fig. 3, it is clear that the performance
of PN-GAIL can be improved by using the BSC classifier. This observation demonstrates the supe-
rior capability of the BSC classifier over the SC classifier in accurately predicting confidence scores.
To illustrate the disparity between these two classifiers more clearly, we calculate the Mean Abso-
lute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the prediction confidence scores. Here,
MAE represents the average of absolute errors, while RMSE denotes the square root of the average
of squared differences between predicted and true values. As shown in Table 1, the MAE and RMSE
of the BSC classifier are notably lower than those of the SC classifier, indicating that the predictions
of the BSC classifier are closer to the ground truth. Consequently, BSC classifier provides more
accurate confidence scores for subsequent imitation learning.

5.3   ROBUSTNESS OF PN-GAIL

To test the robustness of our method, We evaluate the performance of PN-GAIL at different label
ratios in Ant-v2 and Hopper-v2 environments, the results are shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (b). As the
label ratio decreases, PN-GAIL exhibits only a marginal decline in performance. This indicates that


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                    Table 1: Accuracy of classifier measured by MAE and RMSE.

    Classifier                                  Metrics                           Ant-v2                           HalfCheetah-v2                                         Hopper-v2                                          Pendulum-v1                                     Swimmer-v2                                  Walker2d-v2
                                                 MAE                   0.213 ± 0.023                               0.184 ± 0.011                                        0.307 ± 0.025                                        0.126 ± 0.014                                  0.362 ± 0.049                               0.132 ± 0.015
                SC
                                                 RMSE                  0.345 ± 0.033                               0.272 ± 0.009                                        0.519 ± 0.022                                        0.164 ± 0.013                                  0.595 ± 0.040                               0.246 ± 0.032
                                                 MAE                   0.056 ± 0.011                               0.057 ± 0.012                                        0.169 ± 0.126                                        0.097 ± 0.006                                  0.286 ± 0.179                               0.014 ± 0.002
          BSC
                                                 RMSE                  0.212 ± 0.026                               0.175 ± 0.013                                        0.371 ± 0.138                                        0.138 ± 0.005                                  0.472 ± 0.188                               0.101 ± 0.010


                                                           $QW Y                                                                                           +RSSHU Y                                                                                                 3HQGXOXP Y


                                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
     $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                 /DEHO UDWLR                                                                           /DEHO UDWLR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1RLVH


                                                             6WHSV                                                                                                 6WHSV                                                                                                            6WHSV
                                                              (a)                                                                                                       (b)                                                                                                                    (c)
Figure 4: (a) Ant-v2 experiments with different label ratios. (b) Hopper-v2 experiments with differ-
ent label ratios. (c) Pendulum-v1 experiments with different standard deviations of Gaussian noise.


PN-GAIL is not highly dependent on the label ratio, maintaining excellent performance even as the
label ratio decreases.
In practice, considering that confidence scores are typically provided by human annotators, varia-
tions in their standards for labeling confidence may arise due to individual differences and factors
such as fatigue. To assess the robustness of our method against noise in confidence scores, we con-
duct additional experiments. In Pendulum-v1, we introduce Gaussian noise to the confidence scores:
r̂(x) = clip[0,1] (r(x) + ϵ), where ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), clip[l,u] (v) = min{max{v, l}, u}. As shown in
Fig. 4 (c), the numbers indicate the standard deviations of Gaussian noise. Even when confidence
scores are subject to noise, our method still demonstrates satisfactory performance, indicating its
robustness to noisy confidence scores.
We also test the performance of PN-GAIL in two scenarios: first, by reducing the number of unla-
beled demonstrations; and second, by observing how PN-GAIL performs when the average optimal-
ity of imperfect demonstrations changes. Due to space constraints, we present the details of these
experiments and the corresponding figures in Appendix C.3.


6                    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we proposed a novel algorithm termed PN-GAIL for imitation learning from imperfect
demonstrations. PN-GAIL leverages non-optimal information embedded in these demonstrations,
enabling the discriminator to weigh both positive and negative risks in a holistic manner. This
approach facilitates the assignment of more refined reward signals. To enhance the precision of
confidence estimation, we have integrated an advanced semi-supervised confidence classifier into
our framework. Our theoretical investigations demonstrate that PN-GAIL is not merely capable of
mimicking imperfect demonstrations but also adept at circumventing the imitation of suboptimal be-
haviors, thereby ensuring the acquisition of an optimal policy. Comprehensive experimental results
indicate that our approach surpasses existing baselines in performance and exhibits remarkable ro-
bustness, thereby establishing a robust foundation for the practical deployment of imitation learning
in real-world scenarios.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos.
72394363 & 62073160), the Nanjing University Integrated Research Platform of the Ministry of
Education-Top Talents Program and the Australian Research Council (FT220100656).


                                                                                                                                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1, 2004.

Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and
  structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Nov):463–482, 2002.

Raunak Bhattacharyya, Blake Wulfe, Derek J Phillips, Alex Kuefler, Jeremy Morton, Ransalu
  Senanayake, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Modeling human driving behavior through generative
  adversarial imitation learning. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 24(3):
  2874–2887, 2022.

Daniel Brown, Wonjoon Goo, Prabhat Nagarajan, and Scott Niekum. Extrapolating beyond sub-
  optimal demonstrations via inverse reinforcement learning from observations. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 783–792. PMLR, 2019.

Daniel S Brown, Wonjoon Goo, and Scott Niekum. Better-than-demonstrator imitation learning via
  automatically-ranked demonstrations. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 330–359. PMLR,
  2020.

Letian Chen, Rohan Paleja, and Matthew Gombolay. Learning from suboptimal demonstration via
  self-supervised reward regression. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1262–1277. PMLR,
  2021.

Robert Dadashi, Leonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Pietquin. Primal wasserstein imita-
  tion learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Marthinus C Du Plessis, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Analysis of learning from positive and
 unlabeled data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.

Huiqiao Fu, Kaiqiang Tang, Yuanyang Lu, Yiming Qi, Guizhou Deng, Flood Sung, and Chunlin
  Chen. Ess-infogail: Semi-supervised imitation learning from imbalanced demonstrations. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine. Learning robust rewards with adverserial inverse rein-
  forcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 27, 2014.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Jeffrey Hawke, Richard Shen, Corina Gurau, Siddharth Sharma, Daniele Reda, Nikolay Nikolov,
   Przemysław Mazur, Sean Micklethwaite, Nicolas Griffiths, Amar Shah, et al. Urban driving
   with conditional imitation learning. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
   Automation (ICRA), pp. 251–257. IEEE, 2020.

Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.

Liangyu Huo, Zulin Wang, and Mai Xu. Learning noise-induced reward functions for surpassing
  demonstrations in imitation learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence, volume 37, pp. 7953–7961, 2023.

Liyiming Ke, Sanjiban Choudhury, Matt Barnes, Wen Sun, Gilwoo Lee, and Siddhartha Srinivasa.
  Imitation learning as f-divergence minimization. In Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XIV:
  Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics 14, pp.
  313–329. Springer, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Geon-Hyeong Kim, Seokin Seo, Jongmin Lee, Wonseok Jeon, HyeongJoo Hwang, Hongseok Yang,
  and Kee-Eung Kim. Demodice: Offline imitation learning with supplementary imperfect demon-
  strations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Yunzhu Li, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Infogail: Interpretable imitation learning from visual
  demonstrations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Ziniu Li, Tian Xu, Zeyu Qin, Yang Yu, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Imitation learning from imperfection:
  Theoretical justifications and algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024.
Tianwei Ni, Harshit Sikchi, Yufei Wang, Tejus Gupta, Lisa Lee, and Ben Eysenbach. f-irl: Inverse
  reinforcement learning via state marginal matching. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 529–
  551. PMLR, 2021.
Xue Bin Peng, Ze Ma, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Amp: Adversarial
  motion priors for stylized physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG),
  40(4):1–20, 2021.
Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 1, 1988.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings of the
   thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 661–668. JMLR
   Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Kangrui Ruan and Xuan Di. Learning human driving behaviors with sequential causal imitation
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 4583–
  4592, 2022.
Fumihiro Sasaki and Ryota Yamashina. Behavioral cloning from noisy demonstrations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Jiaming Song, Hongyu Ren, Dorsa Sadigh, and Stefano Ermon. Multi-agent generative adversarial
   imitation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Voot Tangkaratt, Bo Han, Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan, and Masashi Sugiyama. Variational imitation
  learning with diverse-quality demonstrations. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 9407–9417. PMLR, 2020.
Aleksandar Taranovic, Andras Gabor Kupcsik, Niklas Freymuth, and Gerhard Neumann. Adversar-
  ial imitation learning with preferences. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012.
Yunke Wang, Chang Xu, and Bo Du. Robust adversarial imitation learning via adaptively-selected
  demonstrations. In IJCAI, pp. 3155–3161, 2021a.
Yunke Wang, Chang Xu, Bo Du, and Honglak Lee. Learning to weight imperfect demonstrations.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10961–10970. PMLR, 2021b.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yunke Wang, Bo Du, and Chang Xu. Unlabeled imperfect demonstrations in adversarial imitation
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 10262–
  10270, 2023.
Hua Wei, Dongkuan Xu, Junjie Liang, and Zhenhui Jessie Li. How do we move: Modeling human
  movement with system dynamics. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence, volume 35, pp. 4445–4452, 2021.
Yueh-Hua Wu, Nontawat Charoenphakdee, Han Bao, Voot Tangkaratt, and Masashi Sugiyama. Imi-
  tation learning from imperfect demonstration. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 6818–6827. PMLR, 2019.
Fei Xia, Chengshu Li, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Or Litany, Alexander Toshev, and Silvio Savarese.
  Relmogen: Leveraging motion generation in reinforcement learning for mobile manipulation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.07792, 2020.
Danfei Xu and Misha Denil. Positive-unlabeled reward learning. In Conference on Robot Learning,
  pp. 205–219. PMLR, 2021.
Haoran Xu, Xianyuan Zhan, Honglei Yin, and Huiling Qin. Discriminator-weighted offline imitation
  learning from suboptimal demonstrations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  24725–24742. PMLR, 2022.
Hanlin Yang, Chao Yu, Siji Chen, et al. Hybrid policy optimization from imperfect demonstrations.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Lantao Yu, Tianhe Yu, Jiaming Song, Willie Neiswanger, and Stefano Ermon. Offline imitation
  learning with suboptimal demonstrations via relaxed distribution matching. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37, pp. 11016–11024, 2023.
Daochen Zha, Jingru Xie, Wenye Ma, Sheng Zhang, Xiangru Lian, Xia Hu, and Ji Liu. Douzero:
  Mastering doudizhu with self-play deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 12333–12344. PMLR, 2021.
Songyuan Zhang, Zhangjie Cao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Yanan Sui. Confidence-aware imitation learn-
  ing from demonstrations with varying optimality. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:12340–12350, 2021.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy
  inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendices
A     A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 PN-GAIL
 1: Input: Imperfect demonstrations and confidence Dc = {(xc,i , ri )}n                   nu
                                                                        i=1 , Du = {xu,i }i=1
                                                                         c

                                                                       nu           nu
 2: Train a probabilistic classifier by minimizing Eq. (13) with α = nc +nu , β = nc +nu
 3: Predict confidence scores {r̂u,i }n              nu
                                      i=1 for {xu,i }i=1
                                        u

 4: for i = 0, 1, 2, ... do
 5:     Sample trajectories τθ ∼ πθ , τe ∼ {Dc , Du }
 6:     Update Dw by maximizing Eq. (11)
 7:     Update πθ by TRPO with reward − log Dw (x)
 8: end for



B     D ERIVATIONS AND PROOFS
B.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

Theorem. Based on Eq. (9), the objective of the discriminator can be rewritten as
      max Ex∼pθ [log Dw (x)] + Ex∼p [r(x) log(1 − Dw (x))] + Ex∼p [(1 − r(x)) log Dw (x)] .
       w


Proof. Since popt (x) = p(x|y = 0) = r(x)p(x)
                                        η     , pnon (x) = p(x|y = 1) = (1−r(x))p(x)
                                                                             1−η     , we have
                                                 Z
                ηEx∼popt [log(1 − Dw (x))] = η popt (x) log(1 − Dw (x))dx
                                                 Z
                                                     r(x)
                                           =η             p(x) log(1 − Dw (x))dx
                                                      η
                                               Z
                                           = p(x)r(x) log(1 − Dw (x))dx

                                            = Ex∼p [r(x) log(1 − Dw (x))] ,
                                                     Z
               (1 − η)Ex∼pnon [log Dw (x)] = (1 − η) pnon (x) log Dw (x)dx

                                                       1 − r(x)
                                                     Z
                                           = (1 − η)            p(x) log Dw (x)dx
                                                         1−η
                                             Z
                                           = p(x)(1 − r(x)) log Dw (x)dx

                                            = Ex∼p [(1 − r(x)) log Dw (x)] ,
According to Eq. (8), the objective of the discriminator can be rewritten as
      max Ex∼pθ [log Dw (x)] + Ex∼p [r(x) log(1 − Dw (x))] + Ex∼p [(1 − r(x)) log Dw (x)] .
       w


B.2    D ERIVATION OF BALANCED SEMI - CONF (BSC) CLASSIFICATION

Recall that in 2IWIL:
           RSC,ℓ (g) = Ex,r∼q [rℓ(g(x)) + (1 − r)ℓ(−g(x))]
                                                                                        

                    = Ex,r∼q rℓ(g(x)) + (1 − r)ℓ(−g(x)) + βℓ(−g(x)) − βℓ(−g(x))
                                                           |         {z        }
                                                                               =0



                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By introducing Ex∼p [αℓ(g(x))] − Ex∼q [αℓ(g(x))] with theoretical values of 0, we have
                                                                                                              

RBSC,ℓ (g) = Ex,r∼q rℓ(g(x)) + (1 − r)ℓ(−g(x)) + αℓ(g(x)) − αℓ(g(x)) + βℓ(−g(x)) − βℓ(−g(x))
                                                  |        {z       } |           {z        }
                                                                      =0                          =0
            = Ex,r∼q [rℓ(g(x)) + (1 − r)ℓ(−g(x)) − αℓ(g(x)) − βℓ(−g(x))] + Ex∼p [αℓ(g(x)) + βℓ(−g(x))].

B.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2

Theorem. P Let d1 denote Var(ℓ(−g(x))), d2 denote Var(ℓ(g(x))),            σcov1 denote the covariance
             nc                                               Pnc
between n1c i=1  ri (ℓ (g (xc,i )) − ℓ (−g (xc,i ))) and n1c i=1     ℓ (−g (xc,i )), σcov2 denote the co-
                     Pnc                                                      Pnc
variance between n1c i=1    (1 − ri ) (ℓ (−g (xc,i )) − ℓ (g (xc,i ))) and n1c i=1    ℓ (g (xc,i )), cov de-
note Cov (ℓ (−g (x)) , ℓ (g (x))). The estimator RBSC,ℓ (g) has the minimum variance when
                                                    b

                    nu     d1 cov − cov 2 nu       d1 σcov2 − covσcov1 nc nu
              α=         −                       +                            ,
                 nc + nu   d1 d2 − cov 2 nc + nu       d1 d2 − cov 2  nc + nu
                    nu     d2 cov − cov 2 nu       d2 σcov1 − covσcov2 nc nu
              β=         −                       +                            .
                 nc + nu   d1 d2 − cov 2 nc + nu       d1 d2 − cov 2  nc + nu


Proof. Denote
                h            i
    µ ≜ EDc ,Du R bBSC,ℓ (g) ,
             "     nc
                                     #      "     nu
                                                                   #
               1 X                            1 X
   µ1 ≜ EDc           ℓ (−g (xc,i )) = EDu           ℓ (−g (xu,i )) = Ex∼p [ℓ(−g(x))],
               nc i=1                         nu i=1
             "     nc
                                   #      "     nu
                                                                #
               1 X                          1 X
   µ2 ≜ EDc           ℓ (g (xc,i )) = EDu          ℓ (g (xu,i )) = Ex∼p [ℓ(g(x))],
               nc i=1                       nu i=1
   d1 ≜ VarDc [ℓ (−g (xc ))] = VarDu [ℓ (−g (xu ))] = Var [ℓ (−g (x))] ,
   d2 ≜ VarDc [ℓ (g (xc ))] = VarDu [ℓ (g (xu ))] = Var [ℓ (g (x))] ,
            "      nc
                                                  #       "     nu
                                                                                                 #
               1 X                                           1 X
    ω ≜ EDc           ℓ (−g (xc,i )) ℓ (g (xc,i )) = EDu             ℓ (−g (xu,i )) ℓ (g (xu,i )) = Ex∼p [ℓ(−g(x))ℓ(g(x))],
              nc i=1                                        nu i=1
 cov ≜ CovDc (ℓ (−g (xc )) , ℓ (g (xc ))) = CovDu (ℓ (−g (xu )) , ℓ (g (xu ))) = Cov (ℓ (−g (x)) , ℓ (g (x))) = ω − µ1 µ2 ,
                 nc                                           nc
                                                                                !
             1 X                                          1 X
σcov1 ≜ Cov         ri (ℓ (g (xc,i )) − ℓ (−g (xc,i ))) ,         ℓ (−g (xc,i )) ,
             nc i=1                                       nc i=1
                 nc                                                  nc
                                                                                     !
             1 X                                                 1 X
σcov2 ≜ Cov         (1 − ri ) (ℓ (−g (xc,i )) − ℓ (g (xc,i ))) ,        ℓ (g (xc,i )) .
             nc i=1                                              nc i=1

Next, we adopt the symbols defined above to express several formulas that will be used:
                          !2                                                                    
            nc                               nc                     nc X
                                                                       i−1
        1  X                       1        X                      X
EDc           ℓ(−g(xc,i ))  = 2 EDc           ℓ(−g(xc,i ))2 + 2         ℓ(−g(xc,i ))ℓ(−g(xc,j ))
        nc i=1                     nc       i=1                    i=1 j=1

                                   1                                                        2

                                = 2 nc Ex∼p ℓ(−g(x))2 + nc (nc − 1)Ex∼p [ℓ(−g(x))]

                                   nc
                                   1
                                =     Var(ℓ(−g(x))) + µ21
                                   nc
                                   1
                                =     d1 + µ21 .                                              (17)
                                   nc

                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Similarly, we obtain

                                                !2 
                            nu
                          1 X                       = 1 d1 + µ21 ,
               EDu               ℓ(−g(xu,i ))                                                         (18)
                         nu i=1                        nu
                                           !2 
                           nc
                         1 X                   = 1 d2 + µ22 ,
               EDc               ℓ(g(xc,i ))                                                          (19)
                         nc i=1                    nc
                                           !2 
                             nu
                          1 X                       1
               EDu              ℓ(g(xu,i ))  =       d2 + µ22 ,                                      (20)
                         nu i=1                    nu
                     "       nu
                                             !        nu
                                                                      !#
                          1 X                     1 X                       1
               EDu              ℓ(−g(xu,i ))              ℓ(g(xu,i ))    =    cov + µ1 µ2 ,            (21)
                         nu i=1                  nu i=1                    nu
                     "       nc
                                             !       nc
                                                                    !#
                         1 X                     1 X                       1
               EDc              ℓ(−g(xc,i ))             ℓ(g(xc,i ))    =    cov + µ1 µ2 .             (22)
                         nc i=1                  nc i=1                   nc



We also have

          "    nc
                                                         !         nu                       nc
                                                                                                            !#
           1 X                                                 1 X                     1 X
EDc ,Du            r(xi )(ℓ(g(xc,i )) − ℓ(−g(xc,i )))                 ℓ(−g(xu,i )) −           ℓ(−g(xc,i ))
           nc i=1                                            nu i=1                   nc i=1
        "      nc
                                                         !#        "       nu
                                                                                             !#
            1 X                                                        1 X
= EDc              r(xi )(ℓ(g(xc,i )) − ℓ(−g(xc,i )))        EDu                ℓ(−g(xu,i ))
           nc i=1                                                     nu i=1
               "        nc
                                                                 !        nc
                                                                                            !#
                    1 X                                               1 X
        − EDc               r(xi )(ℓ(g(xc,i )) − ℓ(−g(xc,i )))                 ℓ(−g(xc,i ))
                   nc i=1                                             nc i=1
        "      nc
                                                         !#        "      nc
                                                                                            !#
            1 X                                                        1 X
= EDc              r(xi )(ℓ(g(xc,i )) − ℓ(−g(xc,i )))        EDc               ℓ(−g(xc,i ))
           nc i=1                                                     nc i=1
               "        nc
                                                                 !        nc
                                                                                            !#
                    1 X                                               1 X
        − EDc               r(xi )(ℓ(g(xc,i )) − ℓ(−g(xc,i )))                 ℓ(−g(xc,i ))
                   nc i=1                                             nc i=1
              nc                                            nc
                                                                               !
          1 X                                           1 X
= Cov             ri (ℓ (g (xc,i )) − ℓ (−g (xc,i ))) ,         ℓ (−g (xc,i ))
          nc i=1                                        nc i=1
= −σcov1 .                                                                                             (23)



Similarly, we obtain

          "       nc
                                                             !        nu                   nc
                                                                                                              !#
              1 X                                                 1 X                  1 X
EDc ,Du              (1 − r(xi ))(ℓ(−g(xc,i )) − ℓ(g(xc,i )))            ℓ(g(xu,i )) −        ℓ(g(xc,i ))
              nc i=1                                              nu i=1               nc i=1
= −σcov2 .                                                                                             (24)



Hence, we can express the estimator variance Var(R
                                                 bBSC,ℓ (g)) as follows:


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Var(R
    bBSC,ℓ (g))
                        2
= EDc ,Du R  bBSC,ℓ (g)     − µ2
         

           1 nc                                                  nu                     nc
           X
                                                               1 X                    1 X
= EDc ,Du 
                  ri ℓ(g(xc,i )) + (1 − ri )ℓ(−g(xc,i )) +β(        ℓ(−g(xu,i )) −         ℓ(−g(xc,i )))
           nc i=1                                            nu i=1                 nc i=1
            |                      {z                    }    |                    {z                    }
                                      A                                                        B
                                                    2 
           nu                   nc              
       1 X                  1 X                   2
   +α(        ℓ(g(xu,i )) −                     −µ
                                   ℓ(g(xc,i ))) 
       nu i=1               nc i=1              
      |                  {z                  }
                             C
= EDc [A2 ] + β 2 EDc ,Du [B 2 ] + α2 EDc ,Du [C 2 ] + 2βEDc ,Du [AB] + 2αEDc ,Du [AC] + 2βαEDc ,Du [BC] − µ2
                                                           2                                         !
                                                                                     E2Dc ,Du [BC]

             2         EDc ,Du [AB] EDc ,Du [BC]                               2
= EDc ,Du [B ] β +                    +                  α + EDc ,Du [C ] −                            α2
                       EDc ,Du [B 2 ]     EDc ,Du [B 2 ]                              EDc ,Du [B 2 ]
                                                                                 E2Dc ,Du [AB]

                          EDc ,Du [AB]EDc ,Du [BC]                        2
  + 2 EDc ,Du [AC] −                                      α + E Dc ,Du [A   ] −                 − µ2
                                  EDc ,Du [B 2 ]                                 EDc ,Du [B 2 ]
                                                              |                  {z                  }
                                                                             const.w.r.t.α,β
                                                      2
            2      EDc ,Du [AB] EDc ,Du [BC]
= EDc ,Du [B ] β +                +                α
                   EDc ,Du [B 2 ]   EDc ,Du [B 2 ]
                                  !                                                                 !2
                2
                   E2Dc ,Du [BC]          EDc ,Du [AC]EDc ,Du [B 2 ] − EDc ,Du [AB]EDc ,Du [BC]
  + EDc ,Du [C ] −                   α+
                   EDc ,Du [B 2 ]                  EDc ,Du [B 2 ]EDc ,Du [C 2 ] − E2Dc ,Du [BC]
                                  !                                                             !2
                2
                   E2Dc ,Du [BC]     EDc ,Du [AC]EDc ,Du [B 2 ] − EDc ,Du [AB]EDc ,Du [BC]
  − EDc ,Du [C ] −                                                                                 +const
                   EDc ,Du [B 2 ]            EDc ,Du [B 2 ]EDc ,Du [C 2 ] − E2Dc ,Du [BC]
   |                                            {z                                               }
                                                  const.w.r.t.α,β
                                                            2
                        EDc ,Du [AB] EDc ,Du [BC]
= EDc ,Du [B 2 ] β +                   +                α
                        EDc ,Du [B 2 ]   EDc ,Du [B 2 ]
                                       !                                                                         !2
                         2                                                                                   2
                        ED   ,D  [BC]          E D   ,D   [AB]E  D   ,D  [BC]  − E  D   ,D  [AC]E  D  ,D  [B   ]
  +    EDc ,Du [C 2 ] −    c   u
                                          α−       c    u          c   u              c   u         c   u
                                                                                                                    + const.
                        EDc ,Du [B 2 ]                   EDc ,Du [B 2 ]EDc ,Du [C 2 ] − E2Dc ,Du [BC]
                                                                                                           (25)



By Eq. (21) and Eq. (22), we can obtain

                         "       nu                    nc
                                                                             !          nu                   nc
                                                                                                                           !#
                             1 X                   1 X                              1 X                  1 X
EDc ,Du [BC] = EDc ,Du              ℓ(−g(xu,i )) −        ℓ(−g(xc,i ))                     ℓ(g(xu,i )) −        ℓ(g(xc,i ))
                             nu i=1                nc i=1                           nu i=1               nc i=1
                1                              1
             =    cov + µ1 µ2 − µ1 µ2 − µ1 µ2 + cov + µ1 µ2
               nu                              nc

                  1    1
             =      +       cov.
                 nu    nc

                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By Eq. (17) and Eq. (18), we can obtain
                                                                              !2 
                                         nu                    nc
                                    1   X                   1 X
       EDc ,Du [B 2 ] = EDc ,Du            ℓ(−g(xu,i )) −         ℓ(−g(xc,i )) 
                                   nu i=1                  nc i=1
                                                    !2                                 !2 
                                     nu                                   nc
                                 1  X                                 1  X
                      = EDu             ℓ(−g(xu,i ))  + EDc               ℓ(−g(xc,i )) 
                                 nu i=1                               nc i=1
                                     "      nu
                                                           #      "     nc
                                                                                        #
                                        1 X                          1 X
                             − 2EDu            ℓ(−g(xu,i )) EDc            ℓ(−g(xc,i ))
                                        nu i=1                      nc i=1
                        1             1
                     =    d1 + µ21 + d1 + µ21 − 2µ2
                       nu            nc

                          1    1
                     =      +       d1 .
                         nu   nc

                                                                  1   1
Similarly, we can obtain EDc ,Du [C 2 ]                =         nu + nc d2 .        Hence, we have
                    2
                   E       [BC]
  EDc ,Du [C 2 ] − EDc ,Du [B 2 ]
                    D  ,D
                                    ≥ 0 since d1 d2 ≥ cov 2 . By Eq. (17) and Eq. (23), we can
                      c   u
obtain:
                                  "     nc                                          nc
                                                                                                   !
                                     1 X                                        1 X
   EDc ,Du [AB] = EDc ,Du                  r(xi )(ℓ(g(xc,i )) − ℓ(−g(xc,i ))) +        ℓ(−g(xc,i ))
                                    nc i=1                                      nc i=1
                                    nu                      nc
                                                                            !#
                                  1 X                  1 X
                                       ℓ(−g(xu,i )) −          ℓ(−g(xc,i ))
                                nu i=1                nc i=1
                                         1
                  = −σcov1 + µ21 − (        d1 + µ21 )
                                         nc
                       1
                  =−      d1 − σcov1 .
                       nc

                                                                                        E2
                                                                                                 [BC]

Similarly, EDc ,Du [AC] = − n1c d2 − σcov2 . Since EDc ,Du [B 2 ] ≥ 0, EDc ,Du [C 2 ] − EDDc ,Du
                                                                                                   2    ≥
                                                                                           c ,Du [B ]

0, and α, β ∈ R, according to Eq. (25), Var(R  bBSC,ℓ (g)) is minimized when

                            EDc ,Du [AB] EDc ,Du [BC]
                     β=−                   −                α,
                            EDc ,Du [B 2 ]   EDc ,Du [B 2 ]
                          EDc ,Du [AB]EDc ,Du [BC] − EDc ,Du [AC]EDc ,Du [B 2 ]
                     α=                                                         .
                                 EDc ,Du [B 2 ]EDc ,Du [C 2 ] − E2Dc ,Du [BC]

Substitute α, we obtain

                          EDc ,Du [AC]EDc ,Du [BC] − EDc ,Du [AB]EDc ,Du [C 2 ]
                     β=                                                         .
                                EDc ,Du [B 2 ]EDc ,Du [C 2 ] − E2Dc ,Du [BC]

Through plugging in the above formula, we have

                   nu     d1 cov − cov 2 nu       d1 σcov2 − covσcov1 nc nu
             α=         −                       +                            ,
                nc + nu   d1 d2 − cov 2 nc + nu       d1 d2 − cov 2  nc + nu
                   nu     d2 cov − cov 2 nu       d2 σcov1 − covσcov2 nc nu
             β=         −                       +                            .
                nc + nu   d1 d2 − cov 2 nc + nu       d1 d2 − cov 2  nc + nu



                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.3
                                                                        ∗
Theorem. Given a fixed agent policy πθ , the optimal discriminator Dw     (x) of Eq. (11) can be written
as
                                        ∗        (1 − r)p + pθ
                                      Dw  (x) =                  .
                                                     p + pθ
                                                ∗
As a result, when the optimal discriminator Dw    (x) is given, the optimization of πθ is equivalent to
minimizing
                     2JSD(pθ ||p) − KL(pθ ||p1 ) − (1 − η)KL(pnon ||p1 ) + C,
                                                                                 h          i
                                                                                       ηp
where p1 = (pθ + (1 − η)pnon )/(2 − η), C = ηEx∼popt log popt + (1 −
            h              i
η)Ex∼pnon log (1−η)pp
                       non
                             + log(2 − η) − (1 − η) log(1 − η)/(2 − η) − 2 log 2, which is a constant
for πθ .

Proof. Denote
V (πθ , Dw ) = Ex∼pθ [log Dw (x)] + Ex∼p [r(x) log(1 − Dw (x))] + Ex∼p [(1 − r(x)) log Dw (x)] .
              ∗
We denote Dw    (x) = arg min V (πθ , Dw ) and have
                         D
                          ∂V (πθ , Dw )    pθ       rp       (1 − r)p
                                         =    −           +            .
                               ∂D          D      1−D            D
The maximum value of V (πθ , Dw ) occurs when its partial derivative with respect to D is zero, given
by Dw = (1−r)p+p
          p+pθ
                 θ
                   . Consequently, we obtain Dw∗
                                                 (x) = (1−r)p+p
                                                            p+pθ
                                                                   θ
                                                                     .
                                  ∗
When the optimal discriminator Dw   (x) is given, V (πθ , Dw ) can be rewritten as

                          (1 − r)p + pθ                       rp                            (1 − r)p + pθ
V (πθ , Dw ) = Ex∼pθ log                    + Ex∼p r log             + Ex∼p (1 − r) log                     .
                             p + pθ                         p + pθ                             p + pθ
According to Eq. (9) and denoting p1 = (pθ + (1 − η)pnon )/(2 − η), we obtain

                          (1 − η)pnon + pθ                         ηpopt                             (1 − η)pnon + pθ
V (πθ , Dw ) = Ex∼pθ log                       + Ex∼popt η log              + Ex∼pnon (1 − η) log
                               p + pθ                             p + pθ                                  p + pθ

                                     pθ                   pθ                       ηpopt
             = Ex∼pθ − log                      + log            + ηEx∼popt log
                            (1 − η)pnon + pθ           p + pθ                      p + pθ

                                                 (1 − η)pnon             (1 − η)pnon
                   + (1 − η)Ex∼pnon − log                         + log
                                              (1 − η)pnon + pθ              p + pθ

                            pθ                        ηpopt                              (1 − η)pnon
             = Ex∼pθ log            + ηEx∼popt log              + (1 − η)Ex∼pnon log
                          p + pθ                      p + pθ                                p + pθ
                                                                                                           

                                pθ                                    pnon                 1 − η
                    − Ex∼pθ log      − log(2 − η) +(1 − η)Ex∼pnon log        + (1 − η) log
                                                                                                
                                 p1                                     p1                  2 − η
                                                                                                 
                                       | {z }
                                         const.w.r.t.πθ                         |       {z      }
                                                                                                 const.w.r.t.πθ

                           pθ                      ηpopt          p                           (1 − η)pnon
            = Ex∼pθ log           + ηEx∼popt log          + log          + (1 − η)Ex∼pnon log
                         p + pθ                       p         p + pθ                             p

                           p
                  + log          − KL(pθ ||p1 ) − (1 − η)KL(pnon ||p1 ) + C1
                        p + pθ

                           pθ                     p                      ηpopt                        (1 − η)pnon
            = Ex∼pθ log           + Ex∼p log             + ηEx∼popt log          + (1 − η)Ex∼pnon log
                         p + pθ                 p + pθ                     p                               p
                                                           |                           {z                         }
                                                                                          const.w.r.t.πθ
                 − KL(pθ ||p1 ) − (1 − η)KL(pnon ||p1 ) + C1

                             pθ                         p
            = Ex∼pθ log                + Ex∼p log                 − 2 log 2 − KL(pθ ||p1 ) − (1 − η)KL(pnon ||p1 ) + C2
                         (p + pθ )/2                (p + pθ )/2
            = 2JSD(pθ ||p) − KL(pθ ||p1 ) − (1 − η)KL(pnon ||p1 ) + C,


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                  h        i                h              i
                      ηp
where C = ηEx∼popt log popt + (1 − η)Ex∼pnon log (1−η)p
                                                     p
                                                       non
                                                             + log(2 − η) − (1 − η) log(1 −
η)/(2 − η) − 2 log 2 is a constant for πθ .


B.5     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.4

Theorem. Denote G as the hypothesis class being utilized and Rn (G) as the Rademacher complex-
ity of the function class G with a sample size of n. Assume that the loss function ℓ is ρℓ -Lipschitz
continuous, and there exists a constant Cℓ > 0 such that for any g ∈ G, supx∈X ,y∈{±1} |ℓ(yg(x))| ≤
                                   bBSC,ℓ (g) over g ∈ G and g ∗ as the minimizer of RBSC,ℓ (g) over
Cℓ . Define ĝ as the minimizer of R
g ∈ G. For δ ∈ (0, 1), with probability at least 1 − δ when repeatedly sampling data to train ĝ, we
have

      RBSC,ℓ (ĝ) − RBSC,ℓ (g ∗ ) ≤16ρL ((3 + α − β)Rnc (G) + (α + β)Rnu (G))
                                             r
                                                log(12/δ)               −1            −1

                                      + 4CL                 (3 + α − β)nc 2 + (α + β)nu 2 .
                                                    2



Proof. Like 2IWIL, since ĝ and g ∗ are the minimizers of R
                                                          bBSC,ℓ (g) and RBSC,ℓ (g), respectively,
we have

RBSC,ℓ (ĝ) − RBSC,ℓ (g ∗ ) = RBSC,ℓ (ĝ) − R                           bBSC,ℓ (g ∗ ) + R
                                                          bBSC,ℓ (ĝ) − R
                                            bBSC,ℓ (ĝ) + R                             bBSC,ℓ (g ∗ ) − RBSC,ℓ (g ∗ )

                            ≤ sup RBSC,ℓ (g) − R bBSC,ℓ (g) + 0 + sup R     bBSC,ℓ (g) − RBSC,ℓ (g)
                              g∈G                                      g∈G

                                   bBSC,ℓ (g) − RBSC,ℓ (g) .
                           ≤ 2 sup R
                                g∈G


                                                          bBSC,ℓ (g) − RBSC,ℓ (g) . We have
Hence, we just need to bound the uniform deviation supg∈G R


    bBSC,ℓ (g) − RBSC,ℓ (g)
sup R
g∈G
               n
               c
          1 X
 ≤ sup           (ri (ℓ(g(xc,i )) − ℓ(−g(xc,i ))) + (1 − β)ℓ(−g(xc,i )) − αℓ(g(xc,i )))
      g∈G nc i=1


        − Ex,r∼q [r(ℓ(g(x)) − ℓ(−g(x))) + (1 − β)ℓ(−g(x)) − αℓ(g(x))]
                     nu                                            nu
                 1 X                                           1 X
        + β sup         ℓ(−g(xu,i )) − Ex∼p [ℓ(−g(x))] + α sup        ℓ(g(xu,i )) − Ex∼p [ℓ(g(x))]
             g∈G nu i=1                                    g∈G nu i=1
              nc                                              nc
          1 X                                             1 X
 ≤ sup           ri ℓ(g(xc,i )) − Ex,r∼q [rℓ(g(x))] + sup        ri ℓ(−g(xc,i )) − Ex,r∼q [rℓ(−g(x))]
      g∈G nc i=1                                      g∈G nc i=1
                           nc                                              nu
                       1 X                                             1 X
        + (1 − β) sup         ℓ(−g(xc,i )) − Ex,r∼q [ℓ(−g(x))] + β sup        ℓ(−g(xu,i )) − Ex∼p [ℓ(−g(x))]
                   g∈G nc i=1                                      g∈G nu i=1
                     nc                                            nu
                 1 X                                           1 X
        + α sup         ℓ(g(xc,i )) − Ex,r∼q [ℓ(g(x))] + α sup        ℓ(g(xu,i )) − Ex∼p [ℓ(g(x))] .
             g∈G nc i=1                                    g∈G nu i=1



According to 2IWIL (Theorem 4.3 in Wu et al. (2019)), since the above six terms are the bounded
differences with constants CL /nc , CL /nc , CL /nc , CL /nu , CL /nc , and CL /nu , respectively, we


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


can bound them with probability at least 1 − δ/6 as
                                                                                  s
                    n
                    c
               1 X                                                                    log(12/δ)
           sup        ri ℓ(g(xc,i )) − Ex,r∼q [rℓ(g(x))] ≤ 8ρL Rnc (G) + 2CL                    ,
           g∈G nc i=1                                                                    2nc
                                                                                  s
                n
                c
           1 X                                                                        log(12/δ)
       sup        ri ℓ(−g(xc,i )) − Ex,r∼q [rℓ(−g(x))] ≤ 8ρL Rnc (G) + 2CL                      ,
       g∈G nc i=1                                                                        2nc
                                                                                  s
                   cn
              1 X                                                                     log(12/δ)
          sup        ℓ(−g(xc,i )) − Ex,r∼q [ℓ(−g(x))] ≤ 8ρL Rnc (G) + 2CL                       ,
          g∈G nc i=1                                                                     2nc
                                                                              s
                     nu
                 1 X                                                            log(12/δ)
           sup           ℓ(−g(xu,i )) − Ex∼p [ℓ(−g(x))] ≤ 8ρL Rnu (G) + 2CL               ,
           g∈G  n u i=1                                                            2nu
                                                                              s
                        nc
                    1 X                                                         log(12/δ)
             sup           ℓ(g(xc,i )) − Ex,r∼q [ℓ(g(x))] ≤ 8ρL Rnc (G) + 2CL             ,
             g∈G   n c i=1                                                         2nc
                                                                              s
                         nu
                     1 X                                                        log(12/δ)
               sup          ℓ(g(xu,i )) − Ex∼p [ℓ(g(x))] ≤ 8ρL Rnu (G) + 2CL              .
               g∈G  n u i=1                                                        2nu

In the end, we can bound the initial estimation error with probability of at least 1 − δ:
      RBSC,ℓ (ĝ) − RBSC,ℓ (g ∗ ) ≤16ρL ((3 + α − β)Rnc (G) + (α + β)Rnu (G))
                                             r
                                                log(12/δ)               −1            −1

                                      + 4CL                 (3 + α − β)nc 2 + (α + β)nu 2 .
                                                    2



C     D ETAILS OF THE E XPERIMENTS AND ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
C.1    H YPER - PARAMETERS SETTINGS AND TASK INFORMATION

All of our experiments are run on a single machine with 4 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 GPUs. For
the architectures of all neural networks, we employ two hidden layers of size 100 each, using Tanh
as the activation function. Across all tasks, we utilize the same hyper-parameters as listed in Table 2.
Table 3 shows the number of confidence data and unlabeled data used for each task, along with the
cumulative rewards corresponding to the optimal and random policies.

                                 Table 2: Hyper-parameters settings

                         Hyper-parameters                           value
                         γ                                          0.995
                         τ (Generalized Advantage Estimation)       0.97
                         Batch size                                 5, 000
                         Learning rate (Value network)              3 × 10−4
                         Learning rate (Discriminator)              1 × 10−3
                         Learning rate (Classifier)                 3 × 10−4
                         Optimizer                                  Adam



C.2    C LIP FUNCTION IN BSC

In the process of deriving Eq. (13), two terms with theoretical values of 0 are introduced:
Ex∼p [αℓ(g(x))] − Ex∼q [αℓ(g(x))] and Ex∼p [βℓ(−g(x))] − Ex∼q [βℓ(−g(x))]. If we directly min-
imize Eq. (13), the two terms may deviate far from 0. To mitigate this issue, we use the clip
function to limit the sum of these two items to a neighborhood of 0. Specifically, we denote


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Table 3: Task information

                Tasks                 nc     nu      Optimal policy     Random policy
                Ant-v2               120    480         4143.10              -72.30
                HalfCheetah-v2       500    2000        3467.32             -288.44
                Hopper-v2             20     80         3250.67               18.04
                Pendulum-v1          200    800         -116.81            -1200.96
                Swimmer-v2             5     20          348.99                2.31
                Walker-v2            400    1600        3694.13               1.91


R1 = Ex∼p [αℓ(g(x))] − Ex∼q [αℓ(g(x))] + Ex∼p [βℓ(−g(x))] − Ex∼q [βℓ(−g(x))]. According
to Eq. (13), the final empirical risk can be written as
                                 R
                                 bBSC,ℓ (g) = R
                                              bC (g) + clip[−ϵ,ϵ] R
                                                                  b1 ,

where
                                     nc
                        bC (g) = 1
                                    X
                        R               [ri ℓ(g(xc,i )) + (1 − ri )ℓ(−g(xc,i ))] .
                                 nc i=1

In Walker2d-v2, the epoch for classifier training is set to 50000, with ϵ configured to 0.05. In other
experiments, the epoch for classifier training is 25000, with ϵ configured to 0.01.

C.3     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS


   Figure 5: Experiments with baselines including weighting-based and ranking-based methods.

CAIL uses the average reward after training convergence, and the implementation is based on CAIL
codebase. As shown in Fig. 5, PN-GAIL outperforms other baseline methods, achieving the highest
return.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                   $QW Y


                         $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ



                                                                                                         8QODEHOHG


                                                                                     6WHSV
     Figure 6: Experiments on reducing the number of unlabeled confidence demonstrations.


We gradually reduce the proportion of unlabeled confidence demonstrations. In Fig. 6, the numbers
in the legend indicate the proportion of unlabeled data used as demonstrations. The performance of
PN-GAIL improves as the amount of unlabeled data increases, illustrating how the use of unlabeled
data can enhance the performance of our method.

                                                                            3HQGXOXP Y

                            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                2SWLPDOLW\


                                                                                    6WHSV
         Figure 7: Experiments under different optimalities of imperfect demonstrations.

We evaluate the performance of PN-GAIL under different optimalities of imperfect demonstrations
in the Pendulum-v1 environment. In Fig. 7, the numbers in the legend illustrate the proportion
of demonstrations generated by the optimal policy when collecting datasets (πopt : π1 = 2 : 3 ,
πopt : π1 = 1 : 4 , πopt : π1 = 1 : 9). The higher the proportion of demonstrations generated by the
optimal policy is, the better the performance of PN-GAIL.


                   Figure 8: Experiments with an extreme demonstration ratio.


                                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the Ant-v2 environment, we train an optimal policy πopt and an intermediate policy π1 using
TRPO. We collect demonstrations with ratio of πopt : π1 = 1 : 10 and all demonstrations use
normalized rewards to annotate confidence scores. We then evaluate the performance of PN-GAIL
and other baseline methods using the collected demonstrations. As shown in Fig. 8, under this
extreme demonstration ratio, all other methods fail, the final result is close to GAIL, and only PN-
GAIL learns valid information from the extreme demonstrations.


                Figure 9: Experiments when optimal demonstrations are dominant.

In the Ant-v2 and Pendulum-v1 environments, we conduct the experiments at the demonstration
ratio of πopt : π1 = 2 : 1. As shown in Fig. 9, it can be seen that when the optimal demonstrations
are dominant, PN-GAIL still shows robust and excellent performance.

                                                                                $QW Y

                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                       1RQ 2SWLPDO


                                                                                 6WHSV
         Figure 10: Experiments under different number of non-optimal demonstrations.

We conduct experiments with different numbers of non-optimal demonstrations in the Ant-v2 en-
vironment. In Fig. 10, the numbers in the legend indicate the proportion of non-optimal demon-
strations used as demonstrations, and the blue dotted line represents the performance of the optimal
policy. When the number of non-optimal demonstrations decreases, the performance of PN-GAIL
does not decrease significantly. We speculate that PN-GAIL does not take advantage of additional
non-optimal demonstrations now because the number of optimal demonstrations in given expert
demonstrations is sufficient to learn an optimal policy.
Since the ranking-based methods including CAIL and f-IRL all require demonstrations to be stored
in the form of a trajectory, we only evaluate them in the Pendulum-v1 and Ant-v2 environments. The
dataset used in the Pendulum-v1 environment is the same as in Fig. 2, and the dataset used in the
Ant-v2 environment is the same as in Fig. 8. The implementation of CAIL, T-REX and D-REX is
based on the CAIL codebase, and the implementation of f-IRL is based on the f-IRL codebase. All
methods use the average reward after training convergence. We construct trajectory rankings based
on confidence scores, and the average returns (only for evaluation) across all methods are shown in
Table 4. PN-GAIL outperforms other methods, achieving the highest returns.


                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Average returns of PN-GAIL, CAIL, ranking-based methods and f-IRL during training
(only for evaluation).

                     Methods               Pendulum-v1                    Ant-v2
                 PN-GAIL (Ours)        -465.978 ± 132.710           2960.458 ± 851.465
                      CAIL              -697.821 ± 91.459           2336.546 ± 735.378
                     T-REX            -1074.435 ± 258.078          -1858.025 ± 217.228
                     D-REX            -1532.958 ± 114.138          -2495.473 ± 220.703
                   FKL(f-IRL)          -698.064 ± 300.793          1563.796 ± 1372.482
                   RKL(f-IRL)          -603.760 ± 189.727           962.785 ± 816.547
                    JS(f-IRL)          -581.602 ± 185.096           882.026 ± 690.371
                  Optimal Policy                 -116.81                  4271.79

                         Table 5: The variance of the estimator R̂BSC,ℓ (g).

        Var         Ant-v2      HalfCheetah-v2     Hopper-v2     Pendulum-v1      Swimmer-v2    Walker2d-v2
     Origin       0.126±0.054    0.033±0.009      1.476±0.574   0.00064±0.00024   1.664±1.475   0.093±0.029
 PN-GAIL(Ours)    0.100±0.050    0.025±0.006      1.412±0.566   0.00013±0.00004   0.007±0.015   0.084±0.028



Origin indicates the lack of α and β (i.e., α=0 and β=0). The results in Table 5 show that the variance
of PN-GAIL is consistently smaller, demonstrating the validity of the chosen values for α and β.

C.4    U NCROPPED FIGURES OF A NT- V 2

In our experiments, we observe a decrease followed by an increase in performance within the Ant-v2
environment. For better comparison, we have cropped the figures of Ant-v2 in the main text, while
the uncropped figures are presented below:


      Figure 11: Normalized average returns of PN-GAIL and baseline methods during training.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                              $QW Y


                       $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                     237,0$/
                                                                                     31 *$,/  2XUV
                                                                                     31 *$,/?%6&
                                                                                     31 *$,/?31
                                                                                      ,:,/


                                                                                6WHSV
         Figure 12: Normalized average returns of ablation experiments during training.


                                                                                 26
