Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HUNDER K ITTENS : S IMPLE , FAST, AND
Adorable K ERNELS
 Benjamin F. Spector1 , Simran Arora1 , Aaryan Singhal1 , Arjun Parthasarathy2 ,
 Daniel Y. Fu3,4 , Christopher Ré1
 1
   Stanford University, 2 Columbia University, 3 UCSD, 4 Together AI
 {bfs, simarora, aaryan04,chrismre}@stanford.edu, arjun.p@columbia.edu, danfu@ucsd.edu

                                            A BSTRACT

         The challenge of mapping AI architectures to GPU hardware is creating a critical
         bottleneck in AI progress. Despite substantial efforts, hand-written custom kernels
         fail to meet their theoretical performance thresholds, even on well-established op-
         erations like linear attention. The diverse capabilities of GPUs suggests we might
         we need a wide variety of techniques to achieve high performance. However, our
         work explores if a small number of key abstractions can drastically simplify the
         process. We present T HUNDER K ITTENS (TK), a framework for writing perfor-
         mant AI kernels while remaining easy to use. Our abstractions map to the three
         levels of the GPU hierarchy: (1) at the warp-level, we provide 16x16 matrix tiles
         as basic data structures and PyTorch-like operations, (2) at the thread-block level,
         we provide templates for asynchronously overlapping operations, and (3) at the
         grid-level, TK helps hide block launch, tear-down, and memory costs. We show
         the value of TK by providing simple & diverse kernels that match or outperform
         prior art. We match CuBLAS and FlashAttention-3 on GEMM and attention infer-
         ence performance and outperform the strongest baselines by 10−40% on attention
         backwards, 8× on state space models, and 14× on linear attention.

1   I NTRODUCTION
AI is bottlenecked by the problem of efficiently mapping AI architectures onto accelerated GPU
hardware. There has been a Cambrian explosion of ML architectures (Ho et al., 2020; Gu & Dao,
2023); however, the performance of these architectures remains substantially below their theoretical
potential, despite substantial effort to develop kernels, or GPU implementations. Notably, kernel
support has been poor even for softmax attention, which is used throughout industry. FlashAttention-
2 (Dao, 2024) suffered a 47% performance degradation when translated to the H100 GPU, and it
took over two years from the release of the H100 to develop FlashAttention-3 (Shah et al., 2024).
We are inspired by several approaches to supporting the development of AI kernels. Ideally, we
would have a framework that supports high performance for a breadth of primitives, while being
easy to use, learn from, and maintain. High performance C++ embedded libraries like NVIDIA
CUTLASS/CuTe (NVIDIA, 2017) contain a myriad of nested templates, while compiler based ap-
proaches like Triton (Tillet et al., 2019) provide users with simpler interfaces, but fewer optimiza-
tions. We ask how broad and fast we can go by choosing a small and opinionated set of abstractions.
The main vector of growth for accelerated compute is in specialized matrix multiply units. On
the NVIDIA H100 and NVIDIA A100 GPUs, BF16 tensor cores represent 15 − 16× the FLOPs
available relative to general-purpose BF16 / FP32 compute. Consequently, any high performance
framework must prioritize keeping tensor cores at high utilization whenever possible. However, all
kernels have non-tensor operations, too (like memory loads or the softmax in attention), and it is
crucial to minimize their overhead. This proposition is at the heart of our approach.
To understand the complexities and opportunities in building a simple, yet high performance frame-
work, we examine a simplified model of GPU parallelism, further detailed in section 2.1
1. Warp-level parallelism: Modern GPUs consist of tens of thousands of hardware threads which
   execute in parallel. Threads are organized into small groups, “warps”, which execute instructions
  1
    We discuss primarily NVIDIA, but the parallelism types hold across architectures, including AMD and
Apple GPUs; we provide experiments on an Apple M2 Pro in Appendix B.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Tensor core register tiles
                                                      Load and                           Shared                          Compute
              Reg
             64 KB
                                       In TK as:      store workers                      Buﬀers                           workers
            130 TB/s                   rt<M, N>;
                                                                                          Inputs
                                                                                                       PyTorch-like operations on
                                                         Sync/Async loads and stores
                           Swizzled shared tiles                                            0       shared and register memory tiles
                                                        from HBM to Shared memory
            Shared
            227 KB                     In TK as:      // Sync load to buﬀer slot 0          1      // In-register tiles
            33 TB/s                    st<M, N>;      load(k_smem[0], K_global,
                                                                                                   rt_fl<16, kv_height> attn_t;
                                                           idx0);                           2
                                                                                                   // Tensor cores, SMEM ➔ registers
            L2 Cache                                  // Async load to buﬀer slot 1      Output    warpgroup::mm_ABt(attn_t,
                                                      tma::load_async(k_smem[1],
         50 MB, 12 TB/s
                                                           K_global, idx1, bar);
                                                                                            0      q_smem[workid],k_smem[0]);
                                     Global Tensors   // Async store from buﬀer slot 2
             HBM                                                                            1      // Use non-tensor core units
                                                      tma::store_async(O_global,
                                                                                                   exp(attn_t, attn_t);
            80 GB                                          o_smem, idx1);
            3 TB/s                                                                          2


Figure 1: T HUNDER K ITTENS explores whether a small set of abstractions can enable performant
AI kernels. Inspired by PyTorch, we first provide tiles with managed layouts and operations over
these tiles. Second, we provide program templates for coordinating asynchronous workers – e.g.,
workers that load and store data, while other workers perform computations in fast memory.

   together. Memory layouts determine how the logical data elements are mapped to physical thread
   ownership. If multiple threads try to access the same region (“bank”) of memory, this can create
   expensive serializations between the threads (called “bank conflicts”).
2. Block-level parallelism: Warps are grouped into “blocks” of threads, which can quickly share
   data. Warps execute their instructions on physical execution units, and having more warps in a
   block (called occupancy) can help run more instructions at the same time, reducing runtime. For
   example, one warp can run tensor cores for matmul, while another uses the ALU for max.
3. Grid-level parallelism. GPUs run many blocks of threads at once, which communicate through
   large but slow global memory (HBM). An on-chip shared L2 cache helps reduce memory laten-
   cies and increase bandwidth if thread blocks reuse the same data. Thread blocks also face setup
   and tear-down overheads, which can introduce “pipeline bubbles” that hurt performance.
Despite the apparent need for a myriad of techniques to leverage all these hardware capabilities, our
central technical finding is that indeed, for many AI kernels, a small number of key abstractions exist
that can simplify the process of writing high-performance kernels. Our exploration led us to develop
T HUNDER K ITTENS (TK), an AI kernel framework built around three key principles:
1. Tile data structures with managed layouts: Our interface is inspired by familiar ML frame-
   works like PyTorch and NumPy (Paszke et al., 2019), as highlighted in Figure 2. At the warp
   level, we use a 16 × 16 matrix tile as our basic data structure, maximizing compatibility with and
   encouraging the use of tensor cores. TK automatically picks the optimal memory layouts for the
   tiles to minimize bank conflicts while remaining compatible with specialized hardware instruc-
   tions, avoiding user effort. We provide a set of parallel compute primitives over tiles, based on
   the suite of operations in PyTorch (e.g., pointwise multiply, mma, exp, and cumsum over tiles).
2. Program template for asynchronous work: At the block level, TK provides a general kernel
   template for coordinating asynchronous execution across warps in a thread block, built on the
   producer-consumer paradigm (Dijkstra, 1968). The developer’s effort reduces to populating a
   few boilerplate functions within this model, using our PyTorch-like operands, and the template
   internally hides latencies through memory pipelines and synchronization primitives (Figure 1).
3. Grid scheduling for pipelining thread-blocks. At the grid level, we show TK can help devel-
   opers reduce pipeline bubbles and improve L2 cache hit rates. Our template supports a persistent
   grid, where we overlap memory loads across thread block boundaries.
We highlight the value of these abstractions for developers in two ways:
• Through our exploration, we identify a few fundamental tradeoffs between achieving different
  types of parallelism including in setting the tile layouts (warp-level), occupancy (block level),
  and block launch order (grid level). Through our ablation studies (Section 3), we show how the
  simplified interface in TK gives users the control to navigate the tradeoffs.
• We validate the TK abstractions by providing kernels that match or outperform prior kernels for
  a range of AI operations. We match CuBLAS GEMMs and FlashAttention-3 attention inference,


                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       PyTorch attention:                         T HUNDER K ITTENS attention:
  1    # imports                              1   // imports
  2    import torch                           2   using namespace kittens;
  3    import torch.nn.functional as F        3   rt_bf<16, 64> k_reg, v_reg;
  4                                           4   // load k from shared memory to register
  5                                           5   load(k_reg, k_smem[subtile]);
  6    # compute Q@K.T                        6   // compute Q@K.T
  7    att = torch.matmul(                    7   zero(att);
  8        q, k.transpose(2, 3))              8   mma_ABt(att, q_reg, k_reg, att);
  9                                           9   // compute softmax
 10    # compute softmax                     10   sub_row(att, att, max_vec);
 11    att = F.softmax(                      11   exp(att, att);
 12        att, dim=-1,                      12   div_row(att, att, norm_vec);
 13        dtype=torch.float32)              13   // convert to bf16 for mma_AB
 14                                          14   copy(att_mma, att);
 15    # convert back to bf16                15   // load v from shared memory to register
 16    att = att.to(q.dtype)                 16   load(v_reg, v_smem[subtile]);
 17                                          17   auto &v_reg_c = swap_layout_inplace(v_reg);
 18    # mma att@V                           18   // mma att@V onto o_reg
 19    output = torch.matmul(att, v)         19   mma_AB(o_reg, att_mma, v_reg_c, o_reg);


       Figure 2: A snippet of our attention kernel to show the PyTorch-like operations on tiles.

    and outperform the strongest baselines by 10 − 40% on attention backwards, up to 8× on state
    space models, and up to 14× on linear attention.
Our contributions are (1) showing a small and opinionated set of abstractions in TK that goes sur-
prisingly far for writing simple and performant kernels; and (2) providing a collection of performant
AI kernels. We hope that TK and its insights help improve the accessibility of AI kernels.

2     GPU FUNDAMENTALS
GPU tasks are divided into small programs called kernels.
A kernel typically loads data from high bandwidth memory
(HBM), performs work on it, and writes the outputs back to
HBM before concluding. Before we explain T HUNDER K IT-
TENS’s abstractions, we provide background on GPU paral-
lelism at the warp, block and grid levels. We follow NVIDIA’s
terminology and focus on the H100 SXM GPU, though the
principles apply across GPU vendors and generations.          Figure 3: The software (and
                                                              physical) GPU hierarchy.
2.1 GPU HIERARCHY

The GPU software hierarchy closely follows its physical hardware hierarchy (Figure 3). Here, we
illustrate several of its most important components and aspects.
1. Warps consist of groups of 32 consecutive threads that operate on data in small but fast reg-
   ister memory. These instructions run on physical execution units, and individual threads can
   frequently occupy multiple specialized execution pipelines (below) at once through instruction-
   level parallelism, and different warps can further occupy available execution hardware:
      (a) Load and store units, to bring data into and out of registers. Advanced GPUs have also
          introduced dedicated hardware acceleration (e.g. H100 Tensor Memory Accelerator) for
          asynchronous bulk data movement between HBM and shared memory.
      (b) General purpose compute pipelines, such as ALU for max, min, FMA for multiplies and
          adds, and XU for complex operations like exp. Throughput differs across the pipelines.
      (c) Accelerated matrix multiply hardware (tensor cores), which have most of the GPU compute.
   Threads can temporarily stall for a variety of reasons, including (but not limited to) fixed instruc-
   tion latencies, memory latencies, barriers, pipeline throttles, or instruction cache misses.
2. Thread blocks are groups of warps which together execute a kernel on a physical core, called a
   streaming multiprocessor (SM). Although each SM has just four physical execution units, up to
   64 software warps can simultaneously run on it (called “occupancy”). These collocated warps of-
   ten contend on hardware resources: registers, shared memory, issue slots, and compute pipelines,
   but together they can help keep many work streams running at the same time within each execu-
   tion unit. Warps synchronize at barriers, during which they cannot issue new work.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Importantly, warps within the same block can quickly communicate through special shared mem-
   ory (SMEM, 227 KB, 33 TB/s). To improve bandwidth, SMEM is grouped into 32 physical
   “banks” of memory, which can serve memory simultaneously. However, if different threads try
   to access the same bank at the same time (called a bank conflict), their accesses must be serial-
   ized, which both increases access latencies and reduces available bandwidth. Hopper has limit of
   255 registers per thread and attempts to request more, results in spills to the L1 cache. SMEM
   can be reallocated as an L1 cache for fast access to frequently used memory like spilled registers.
3. Grids of multiple thread blocks are launched to run the kernel. The H100 SXM GPU has 132
   physical SM’s which can run thread blocks at the same time. Although SM’s are capable of
   collocating multiple thread blocks, most AI kernels can achieve high performance by simply
   collocating more warps within a single thread block (increasing the occupancy).
   Thread blocks on the same GPU share common memory resources: large but slow high-
   bandwidth memory (80 GB, 3 TB/s), which has both the greatest latency and least bandwidth
   of all GPU memory, and a smaller but faster hardware-managed L2 cache (50 MB, 12 TB/s).
   There are overheads to scheduling blocks. First, the block launch incurs setup costs and although
   this cost must be paid at least once at the initial kernel launch, kernels that continuously launch
   many large blocks can incur further costs. Second, there are tail effect costs if the grid is sized
   poorly. If a kernel of 133 blocks is executed on an H100 with 132 physical SMs, the kernel would
   require two waves to execute, the first with full efficiency, and the second with < 1% efficiency.
   More advanced schedules using independent CUDA streams can ameliorate these tail effects,
   such as recent work on asynchronous tensor-parallel schedules Chang et al. (2024).

2.2 C OST MODEL
Summarizing the above components, we show a simplified cost model for GPU parallelism below.
This cost model is inspired by the roofline model Williams et al. (2008). The overall kernel execution
time COverall is the sum of the following costs where memory costs are a combination of the latency
and bandwidth, and compute costs are a combination of latency and throughput.

    COverall = max CHBM , CL2 , CL1 , CShared , CTensor , CALU , CFMA , CXU + CSetup + CSync
                       |           {z          } |            {z            }     |      {z      }
                                Memory                     Compute                   Overhead


This model represents the ideal case of perfect overlapping between memory, compute, and tensor
core costs. A kernel’s actual cost will lie between the max and the sum of the terms, depending
on the workload properties (i.e., some operations are inherently sequential), and the implementation
efficiency. We aim to (1) reduce these individual costs, and (2) improve their collective overlapping.
In Section 3, where we detail TK, we connect our primitives and optimizations back to these costs.

2.3   GPU PROGRAMMING FRAMEWORKS

We are inspired by a number of related efforts to simplify the development of AI kernels, such as
NVIDIA CUTLASS/CuTe (NVIDIA, 2017) and Triton (Tillet et al., 2019).
CUTLASS’s myriad of nested CUDA templates helps power highly optimized AI kernels (Shah
et al., 2024; Bikshandi & Shah, 2023a;b) and fundamentally, the same kernels are expressible in
TK and CUTLASS, since both are embedded libraries, giving users the full power of C++. We take
a complementary approach by being rather opinionated about the abstractions. We ask: (1) How
far can we get with a small set of templates? and (2) Does concision sacrifice performance? An
appealing outcome is improved accessibility to AI researchers, since it can be challenging to fully
leverage the capabilities of CUTLASS (Bikshandi & Shah, 2023b). We find that even industrially
popular kernels written in CUTLASS, like FlashAttention-3, struggle from preventable issues like
bank conflicts. We seek abstractions that manage such issues for users. Most recent AI architectures
use high level compilers instead (Dao & Gu, 2024; Yang & Zhang, 2024; Fu et al., 2023c).
Triton, PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), TVM (Chen et al., 2018), TensorFlow XLA (Abadi et al.,
2016), and others approach the problem from a compiler perspective. The frameworks are not C++
embedded, so it can be challenging to use unsupported specialized hardware instructions. It can
also be difficult to manage asynchronous execution and register usage in high level frameworks. We
explore avenues that retain the simple, PyTorch-like feel while enabling maximum performance in
the next section. An extended discussion of related work is in Appendix A.

                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     T HUNDER K ITTENS
We present T HUNDER K ITTENS (TK), a framework designed to simplify the development of high-
performance AI kernels while leveraging the full capabilities of modern GPUs. This section (1)
introduces our key programming abstractions and (2) shows how they can help developers navigate
the tradeoffs between different types of parallelism. Section 3.1 focuses on warp level, Section 3.2
on thread block level, and Section 3.3 on grid level parallelism.
As running examples in this section, we show how TK helps optimize attention (Vaswani et al.,
2017) and GEMM kernels. Section 4 demonstrates how the principles yield performant kernels for
a breadth of AI operations (e.g., attention variants, convolution, SSM, rotary).
3.1   WARP PARALLELISM WITH FAMILIAR DATA STRUCTURES AND OPERATIONS
At its core, T HUNDER K ITTENS is built on two fundamental abstractions – tile data structures
at each level of the memory hierarchy and bulk operands on tiles akin to the familiar suite of
operations in PyTorch and NumPy. We first define the abstractions, and then show they can help
developers navigate tradeoffs between the tile sizes and compute efficiency.
Programming abstractions TK is heavily inspired by PyTorch and NumPy, given their familiar-
ity to ML audiences (Paszke et al., 2019). We provide a concise set of parallel compute operations,
based on the suite of operations in PyTorch (e.g., in Figure 2). The operations are executed by a
“worker” abstraction, or a warp or warpgroup (4 warps) of threads that collaboratively own and
operate on a piece of data. TK uses a 16 × 16 matrix tile as its basic data structure, designed to
maximize compatibility with tensor cores. We provide tiles for each level of the memory hierarchy:
1. Register tiles and vectors, which are templated by type, shape, and layout. In Figure 2 we initial-
   ize a bfloat16 type tile with a column-major layout, height 16, width 64. The explicit control of
   register memory can help users reducing CMemory in Section 2.
2. Shared tiles and vectors, which are templated by type and shape.
3. Global layout descriptors: We set up HBM loads and stores as indexing into 4D tensors, where
   the dimensions can be known at runtime or compile-time (saving valuable registers).
An advantage of these tile-based abstractions is that they enable TK to statically check layouts and
operations, which is important because GPU kernels are often difficult to debug. For example, an
in-register tensor core multiply mma AB requires A to be in a row-major layout, and B to be in a
column-major layout, and TK can raise compile-time errors if these conditions are not met.


Figure 4: Shared memory bank layouts, illustrated for a 16x64 16-bit tile; each memory bank has
its own color. Top left: A naive, row-major layout. Although loading rows is efficient, loading into
a tensor core register layout suffers 8-way bank conflicts. Top right: A padded layout, which has
no bank conflicts but consumes additional memory. Bottom: Two of TK’s selected layouts, with
compile-time selection based on width. (Bank conflicts are unavoidable for some tile sizes while
maintaining good hardware support.) These layouts have 2-way and no bank conflicts, respectively.

Choosing a memory layout Layouts specify how logical data elements are mapped to physical
thread ownership. Different tile sizes, types, and hardware-accelerated instructions benefit from
different layouts, and some layouts lead to bank conflicts Our goals are:
• We want our register tiles (the fastest memory) to keep memory in the layouts used by tensor
  cores (the fastest compute). Shown in Figure 1 (Left); each color represents a different thread’s
  ownership over the data. These formats are difficult to use, further highlighted in Figure 4.


                                                  5
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     • We want to support the use of hardware-accelerated instructions (e.g., asynchronous matrix mul-
       tiply and bulk copy instructions), which also require specific shared memory layouts.
     In TK, we simplify to 3 layouts – swizzled on 32, 64, and 128 byte boundaries – and automati-
     cally assign shared tiles with layouts that minimize bank conflicts for their size and type. Seen in
     Section 4.2, even the FlashAttention-3 kernels written with CUTLASS templates can face bank con-
     flicts, hurting performance. Our approach helps minimize conflicts, reducing CShared in Section 2.
     3.2   B LOCK PARALLELISM WITH A GENERALIZED ASYNCHRONOUS TEMPLATE

     T HUNDER K ITTENS helps developers reduce overheads by coordinating how workers in a thread
     block asynchronously overlap execution. Though the GPU hierarchy might suggest that we need a
     wide variety of techniques, we propose a single concise template that we find enables high perfor-
     mance on a surprisingly broad range of AI workloads. We first define the template, which has four
     steps – load-compute-store-finish (LCSF for short) – and builds on the classical producer-consumer
     paradigm (Dijkstra, 1968; Bauer et al., 2011). We show how the LCSF template can help navigate
     the tradeoffs between occupancy and efficiency (reducing CHBM , CCompute in Section 2).
     Load function:                            Compute function:
 1   if(warpgroup::warpid() == 0) {        1   warpgroup::mm_ABt(att, scratch.q[state.id], block.k);
 2       tma::expect(inputs_arrived,       2   warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
 3           block.k, block.v);            3
 4       tma::load_async(                  4   // softmax (simplified)
 5           block.k, globals.k,           5   sub_row(att, att, max_vec);
 6           {batch, head, iter, 0},       6   exp(att, att);
 7           inputs_arrived);              7   div_row(att, att, norm_vec);
 8       tma::load_async(                  8
 9           block.v, globals.v,           9   copy(att_bf16, att);
10           {batch, head, iter, 0},      10
11           inputs_arrived);             11   warpgroup::mma_AB(state.o, att_bf16, block.v);
12   }                                    12   warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
13   else arrive(inputs_arrived);         13   arrive(inputs_finished);


     Figure 5: A simplified depiction of attention in the LCSF template to highlight the role of different
     specialized workers. Left is executed by workers that manage HBM to SRAM memory movement,
     and right by parallel compute workers, which operate in fast memory, registers and SRAM.

     Programming abstractions As per Section 2, AI kernel usually load tiles of large tensors from
     HBM to SRAM, perform computation in fast memory, store the result for the tile back to HBM, and
     repeat this for the next tiles. To use the LCSF template, the developer writes four functions:

     1. Load function. Specifies the data that load workers should load from HBM to shared memory,
        and when to signal to compute workers that this memory is ready for use.
     2. Compute function. Specifies the kernel instructions that compute workers should execute, using
        the tile data structure and operation primitives from Section 3.1.
     3. Store function. Specifies what data workers need to store to HBM.
     4. Finish function. At the end of the kernel, the workers store any final state and exit.

     TK provides abstractions to help the developer manage            M=N=K          Stages     TFLOPS
     worker overlapping and synchronization.
                                                                       4096          1         260
     1. Multi-stage buffer: The template maintains N -stage            4096          2         484
     pipelined buffers in shared memory, which are used for            4096          3         683
     loads and stores from HBM. Load/store workers add/re-             4096          4         760
     move tiles of data from the buffers, based on the status
     of compute workers. With a single stage, load workers Table 1: Pipeline buffer stages We
     would need to wait for all compute workers to finish ex- measure efficiency in TFLOPS for our
     ecuting before replacing the input tile. A 2-stage buffer GEMM kernels as we vary the number of
     can hide the HBM load (store) latency since the next pipeline buffer stages in the TK template.
     tile can asynchronously load, while the compute work-
     ers execute on the current tile. Deep buffers can reduce the synchronization required across compute
     workers, allowing them to operate on multiple tiles concurrently. TK lets the user set a single num-
     ber to specify the number of stages, and manages the setup and use of these buffers for the user. In
     Section 3.2, we vary the number of stages N ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} for our GEMM kernel.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2. Synchronization barriers: Load/store workers need to alert compute workers when new memory
is written to the input buffer. Compute workers need to alert load/store workers when tiles are
written to the output buffer, or when input tiles can be evicted from the input buffer. Within the TK
template, we provide an arrive function for workers to signal that they have finished their stage.
3. Asynchronous I/O: We wrap synchronous and asynchronous load and store instructions, including
cp.async and TMA, in the same interface. We automate tensor map descriptor creation for TMA
hardware-accelerated address generation for our global layout descriptors (gl).

Tradeoffs between occupancy and efficiency
                                                    500
                                                                 Synchronous vs LCSF Attention
TK parametrizes the number of load/store and                                    440
compute workers (or occupancy) providing a          400                375
                                                                                          341
simple way for developers tune their kernels.                                         300       300
                                                    300      268            255                     270


                                                       TFLOPs
As discussed in Section 2, higher occupancy                        216
                                                    200                                                 181
increases overlapping, but creates contention            123
over limited hardware resources (e.g., regis-                                                               103
                                                    100
ters). With fewer registers, workers need to op-
                                                      0
erate on smaller tiles of data, resulting in more           1         2        3         4         5       6
                                                                           Worker Warpgroups
instruction issues, SRAM to register I/O, and
                                                                           Synchronous        LCSF
potentially higher synchronization costs due to
the increased data partitioning across workers. Figure 6: Occupancy tradeoff: (Left) Attention
Figure 6 shows the occupancy tradeoffs for at- TFLOPs as a function of occupancy, benchmarked
tention kernels. We consider (1) a simple kernel with head dimension 64 and context length 4096.
that only uses warp level parallelism (Listing 2) We compare synchronous and LCSF kernels.
and (2) a kernel written in the LCSF template
(Listing 5). Although with both kernels, performance increases with occupancy until resource con-
tention dominates, LCSF expands the Pareto frontier beyond the naive kernel.
We find the general LCSF template to be effective across a range of AI workloads. We keep the
template lightweight and simple by making opinionated design choices. However, we don’t want
TK to get in the way of achieving peak GPU performance – TK is embedded, meaning developers
can use the full power of CUDA to extend the library as warranted.

3.3   G RID PARALLELISM WITH BLOCK LAUNCH SCHEDULING

TK makes it easier for users to quickly try varied grid layouts and coordinate thread block launches.
This can help reduce the setup and tear-down costs for each thread block (CSetup in Section 2), and
encourage memory reuse between thread blocks, to avoid slow HBM accesses (CHBM in Section 2).


Block launch costs We provide optimiza-             M=N       K     TK-No TK-Yes CuBLAS
tions to minimize launch costs, centered around
a persistent grid, where we launch thread           4096     64         93       108         69
blocks on the full set of SMs upfront, and sim-     4096     128       161       184        133
ply load the next task for the kernel within the    4096     256       271       309        242
existing block. We further eliminate pipeline       4096     512       414       450        407
bubbles by having load/store workers anticipate     4096 1024          565       600        633
the next task and pre-load memory to prepare
for future work, while the compute workers run Table 2: Persistent block launch TFLOPS for
the finish stage for the prior task. Table 2 shows TK GEMM kernels with (yes) persistent and
these optimizations for matrix multiplies.         without (no) persistent launch as we vary matrix
                                                   dimension K.

L2 reuse and block launch order Recall that thread blocks need to communicate via HBM. As
introduced in Section 2, when thread blocks reuse memory, the data is often available in L2 cache,
which is significantly faster than HBM. However, cache eviction means that these reuse qualities
depend on the order in which blocks get launched. For our attention and GEMM kernels, we measure
efficiency as we vary block order, summarized in Table 3. Block order substantially affects L2 reuse
(measured through HBM bandwidth), which in turn can control kernel performance.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Matrix Multiply (M=N=K=16384)                         Attention Forward (D=128)
      Block Order   HBM GB/s      TFLOPS                Block Order     HBM GB/s       TFLOPS
      {8, N, M/8}       982          805                  {N, H, B}         213           600
        {N, M}         3,070         392                  {B, H, N}        2,390          494

Table 3: L2 reuse: We vary the block orders and measure both consumed bandwidth from HBM
(GB/s) and efficiency (TFLOPS). For attention, we consider an optimized kernel, with an internal
tiling of 8 rows of blocks, versus a naive kernel that schedules blocks in row-major order. For
attention, we compare block order (1) sequence length N , heads H, and outermost batch B vs. (2)
innermost B, H, then outermost N . Block order has significant performance implications.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In experiments, we validate that T HUNDER K ITTENS speeds up a broad range of ML primitives.
We compare to well-optimized kernels from prior work, written in alternate frameworks such as
CUTLASS, CuBLAS, general CUDA, and Triton. We compare our kernels for the “workhorse”
operations in AI, GEMM and attention, as well as kernels for emerging AI architectures, such as
linear attention and state space models (Section 4.1). We profile the kernels to understand TK’s role
in achieving high performance in Section 4.2. Kernel listings, in the TK template, are in Appendix C.

4.1    TK ENABLES SIMPLE AND PERFORMANT AI KERNELS

We evaluate a suite of TK kernels. We bench-
mark on an NVIDIA H100 80GB SXM GPUs
using CUDA 12.6 and report average TFLOPS.
We provide experiments on an NVIDIA RTX
4090 and an Apple M2 Pro in Appendix B.

Workhorse kernels for AI Industry teams
and researchers have made significant invest-
ments into optimizing GEMMs and attention
over the past several years (NVIDIA, 2023;
Dao et al., 2022b; Bikshandi & Shah, 2023a;
Shah et al., 2024, inter alia.), two workhorse Figure 7: GEMM kernel from CuBLAS and TK.
operations that power the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). While the baselines are
strong, TK kernels match or outperform:
• GEMM: We compare to the strongest baselines: CuBLAS(NVIDIA, 2023), CUTLASS NVIDIA
  (2017). A single TK matrix multiply kernel, with just 40 lines of device code, is competitive.
• Attention: We support multiple variants of attention: causal, non-causal, and grouped query at-
  tention (Ainslie et al., 2023) at head dimensions 64 and 128. We compare to the strongest baseline,
  which is concurrent to our work: FlashAttention-3 (FA3) (Shah et al., 2024). TK competes with
  FA3 across sequence lengths on the non-causal forwards pass, and outperforms FA3 on the causal
  and non-causal backwards pass by over 40% at shorter and 10% at longer sequences.
We find that TK makes it easy to use the GPU effectively by simplifying the choice of memory
layouts, exploration of grid patterns for L2 reuse, and selection of occupancy and pipeline depth.
The baseline kernels successfully use specialized H100 instructions and manage memory. However,
the existing kernels are relatively complex: FlashAttention-3 proposes a “ping-pong scheduler” for
workers, and the CuBLAS library is >600MB in CUDA 12.6 (Table 5), containing many tuned
GEMM variants and logic to select the best option at runtime (Schuetze, 2024). With TK, we
remove the ping-pong and maintain FA3-level efficiency, and we compete with CuBLAS on the
demonstrated matrix sizes, using a single GEMM kernel (entirely in Appendix C.1).
Kernels for emerging AI architectures In addition to supporting peak performance on popular
operations like GEMMs and attention, TK is also designed to be extensible to emerging AI work-
loads. We release kernels across recent ML primitives, including linear attention (Katharopoulos
et al., 2020), FFT convolutions (Cooley & Tukey, 1965), and state space models (Gu et al., 2021).


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Figure 8: Attention causal and non causal inference and backwards pass efficiency.

• Linear attention We optimize two different classes of linear attention architectures, polynomial-
  based feature maps as in (Arora et al., 2024; Aksenov et al., 2024; Keles et al., 2023; Kacham
  et al., 2024) and learned feature maps as in (Zhang et al., 2024b;a). In Figure 9, we compare to
  the strongest available baselines: the popular Flash Linear Attention (FLA) CUDA kernels (Yang
  & Zhang, 2024), which are written in Triton. We show TK outperforms FLA’s polynomial-based
  linear attention by 14×. TK outperforms FLA’s learned map linear attention by 6.5×.
• State space models The long convolution, implemented with Fourier transforms using the convo-
  lution theorem, is the key primitive in popular state space modeling architectures such as S4, H3,
  and Hyena (Gu et al., 2021; Poli et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023b; Hasani et al., 2022; Agarwal et al.,
  2024, inter alia.). In Figure 9, we compare to the strongest available baseline: the FlashFFTConv
  CUDA kernels in Fu et al. (2023c) and show TK outperforms the prior work by 4.7× at sequence
  length 4096 and 7.9× at 1024. TK outperforms PyTorch’s FFT operations by up to 8.7×.
  We also optimize the recent Mamba-2 state space model (Dao & Gu, 2024). We provide a TK
  kernel that outperforms the Triton kernels in prior work Dao & Gu (2024) by > 3× (Figure 9).
  This gap is primarily due to the ease of fusing complex operations in TK.
We also develop kernels for common memory-intensive AI operations – fused dropout-residual-
layernorm (Ba et al., 2016), and rotary (Su et al., 2023) – and show TK is effective. We compare to
popular Triton kernels for these operations. 2

TK’s programming model is extensible. In Appendix B, we demonstrate that TK extends across
(1) hardware platforms by providing competitive NVIDIA 4090 and Apple M2 kernels, (2) preci-
sions by providing a competitive FP8 GEMM kernel, and (3) tile shapes by providing an attention
kernel for arbitrary shapes.

4.2     C OMPARING KERNEL IMPLEMENTATIONS

To understand TK’s improvements, we profile the kernels using NVIDIA’s NSight Compute (NCU)
tool. In Table 4, we give NCU profiles for both the emerging long convolution primitive and the
well-optimized attention backwards pass, comparing to the strongest respective baselines.
• Long convolution: We profile FlashFFTConv (FC) and TK convolution kernels at B, D, N =
  16, 1024, 4096 in NCU. We find TK helps both with overlapping the workers (indicated by higher
  issue slots and fewer memory stalls) and in tensor core utilization (4.1× increase). This is enabled
  by our TK template, and use of TK warpgroup operations (which saves registers and establishes
  a SMEM to register memory pipeline through warpgroup matrix-multiply-add operations).
   2
       Reference Triton kernels are from: https://github.com/Dao-AILab/flash-attention.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Figure 9: ThunderKittens kernels are performant across a wide range of kernels.

                   Occupancy utilizations (%)                  HBM                      Shared
    Impl.          Tensor core     Issue slots    TPS (GB/s)     Stalls (Cycles)    Stalls (Cycles)
    FA3 Bkwd           61.2           25.1             328            1.83               0.92
    TK Bkwd            58.2           34.8             490            1.63               0.14
    FlashFFT           13.4           25.5             14.8            2.5                1.6
    TK                 54.8           40.0             31.4            0.6                0.3
Table 4: NCU profiles for 1) attention backwards pass kernels from FlashAttention-3 (Shah et al.,
2024) vs. TK and 2) long convolution kernels from FlashFFTConv (Fu et al., 2023c) vs. TK.

• Attention backwards: We consider FA3 and TK at B, H, N, D = 16, 16, 3072, 128. The meth-
  ods match in tensor core utilization, but TK gives higher issue slot utilization, suggesting the oc-
  cupancy may be better-tuned. TK gives higher HBM memory throughput and incurs 10% fewer
  stalled cycles on HBM waits. For shared memory, TK incurs 85% fewer stalled cycles – we find
  TK has no bank conflicts, but NVIDA’s NCU profiler reports up to 9.6-way bank conflicts in FA-3.

5   C ONCLUSION

Given the challenge of mapping AI architectures to GPU hardware, our work asks how far we can get
with a few, easy to use programming abstractions. In T HUNDER K ITTENS, we give abstractions for
each level of the GPU hierarchy: tiles with managed layouts at the worker level, and an asynchronous
LCSF template at the thread block level. We highlight tradeoffs for persistent block launches and
L2 reuse at the grid level. The natural question is whether we sacrifice anything in performance
when we write kernels with so few abstractions. We implement a breadth of AI kernels in TK and
excitingly find that our abstractions are both general and consistently meet or exceed state-of-the-art.
We are optimistic about the potential for accessible ways for programming AI hardware.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are grateful to Together.ai for making this work possible. We than Arjun Parthasarthy
for assistance in developing the complex tile support and FlashFFT kernels. We thank Mayee
Chen, Tri Dao, Kawin Ethyarajh, Sabri Eyuboglu, Neel Guha, David Hou, Jordan Juravsky, Her-
mann Kumbong, Jerry Liu, Avner May, Quinn McIntyre, Jon Saad-Falcon, Vijay Thakkar, Al-
bert Tseng, Michael Zhang for helpful feedback and discussions during this work. We grate-
fully acknowledge the support of NIH under No. U54EB020405 (Mobilize), NSF under Nos.
CCF2247015 (Hardware-Aware), CCF1763315 (Beyond Sparsity), CCF1563078 (Volume to Veloc-
ity), and 1937301 (RTML); US DEVCOM ARL under Nos. W911NF-23-2-0184 (Long-context)
and W911NF-21-2-0251 (Interactive Human-AI Teaming); ONR under Nos. N000142312633
(Deep Signal Processing); Stanford HAI under No. 247183; NXP, Xilinx, LETI-CEA, Intel, IBM,
Microsoft, NEC, Toshiba, TSMC, ARM, Hitachi, BASF, Accenture, Ericsson, Qualcomm, Analog
Devices, Google Cloud, Salesforce, Total, the HAI-GCP Cloud Credits for Research program, the
Stanford Data Science Initiative (SDSI), BFS is supported by a Hertz Fellowship, SA is supported
by a SGF Fellowship, and members of the Stanford DAWN project: Meta, Google, and VMWare.
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes
notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or rec-
ommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views, policies, or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of NIH, ONR, or the U.S. Govern-
ment.

R EFERENCES
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S
 Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, et al. Tensorflow: Large-scale machine
 learning on heterogeneous distributed systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467, 2016.

Naman Agarwal, Daniel Suo, Xinyi Chen, and Elad Hazan. Spectral state space models, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06837.

Joshua Ainslie, James Lee-Thorp, Michiel de Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy, Federico Lebrón, and Sumit
  Sanghai. Gqa: Training generalized multi-query transformer models from multi-head check-
  points. The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
  2023.

Yaroslav Aksenov, Nikita Balagansky, Sofia Maria Lo Cicero Vaina, Boris Shaposhnikov, Alexey
  Gorbatovski, and Daniil Gavrilov. Linear transformers with learnable kernel functions are better
  in-context models. 2024.

Simran Arora, Sabri Eyuboglu, Michael Zhang, Aman Timalsina, Silas Alberti, Dylan Zinsley,
  James Zou, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Simple linear attention language models balance
  the recall-throughput tradeoff. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.

Michael Bauer, Henry Cook, and Brucek Khailany. Cudadma: Optimizing gpu memory bandwidth
 via warp specialization. SC ’11: Proceedings of 2011 International Conference for High Perfor-
 mance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, 2011.

Ganesh Bikshandi and Jay Shah.          A case study in cuda kernel fusion:         Imple-
  menting flashattention-2 on nvidia hopper architecture using the cutlass library, 2023a.
  URL https://research.colfax-intl.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/
  colfax-flashattention.pdf.

Ganesh Bikshandi and Jay Shah.     Developing cuda kernels for accelerated matrix mul-
  tiplication on nvidia hopper architecture using the cutlass library, 2023b.     URL
  https://research.colfax-intl.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/
  colfax-gemm-kernels-hopper.pdf.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Li-Wen Chang, Wenlei Bao, Qi Hou, Chengquan Jiang, Ningxin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Xuanrun
  Zhang, Zuquan Song, Chengji Yao, Ziheng Jiang, Haibin Lin, Xin Jin, and Xin Liu. Flux: Fast
  software-based communication overlap on gpus through kernel fusion, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.06858.
Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Haichen Shen, Meghan
  Cowan, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, et al. {TVM}: An automated {End-to-End} op-
  timizing compiler for deep learning. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
  and Implementation (OSDI 18), pp. 578–594, 2018.
James W Cooley and John W Tukey. An algorithm for the machine calculation of complex fourier
  series. Mathematics of computation, 19(90):297–301, 1965.
Tri Dao. FlashAttention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Tri Dao and Albert Gu. Transformers are ssms: Generalized models and efficient algorithms through
  structured state space duality. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Tri Dao, Beidi Chen, Nimit Sohoni, Arjun Desai, Michael Poli, Jessica Grogan, Alexander Liu,
  Aniruddh Rao, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Monarch: Expressive structured matrices for
  efficient and accurate training, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.00595.
Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. FlashAttention: Fast and
  memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 2022b.
E. W. Dijkstra. Co-operating sequential processes. In F. Genuys (ed.), Programming Languages.
  NATO Advanced Study Institute, 1968. Lectures given at a three weeks Summer School held in
  Villard-le-Lans, 1966.
Venmugil Elango, Norm Rubin, Mahesh Ravishankar, Hariharan Sandanagobalane, and Vinod
  Grover. Diesel: Dsl for linear algebra and neural net computations on gpus. In Proceed-
  ings of the 2nd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Program-
  ming Languages, MAPL 2018, pp. 42–51, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Com-
  puting Machinery. ISBN 9781450358347. doi: 10.1145/3211346.3211354. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/3211346.3211354.
Daniel Y. Fu, Simran Arora, Jessica Grogan, Isys Johnson, Sabri Eyuboglu, Armin W. Thomas,
  Benjamin Spector, Michael Poli, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Monarch mixer: A simple sub-
  quadratic gemm-based architecture. 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS 2023), 2023a.
Daniel Y. Fu, Tri Dao, Khaled K. Saab, Armin W. Thomas, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hungry
  Hungry Hippos: Towards language modeling with state space models. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Daniel Y Fu, Hermann Kumbong, Eric Nguyen, and Christopher Ré. Flashfftconv: Efficient convo-
  lutions for long sequences with tensor cores. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05908, 2023c.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Tsun-Huang Wang, Makram Chahine, Alexander Amini, and
  Daniela Rus. Liquid structural state-space models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12951, 2022.
Horace He, Driss Guessous, Yanbo Liang, and Joy Dong. Flexattention: The flexibility of py-
  torch with the performance of flashattention, 2024. URL https://github.com/NVIDIA/
  cutlass.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Praneeth Kacham, Vahab Mirrokni, and Peilin Zhong. Polysketchformer: Fast transformers via
  sketching polynomial kernels, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01655.

A. Katharopoulos, A. Vyas, N. Pappas, and F. Fleuret. Transformers are rnns: Fast autoregressive
  transformers with linear attention. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.16236.

Feyza Duman Keles, Pruthuvi Mahesakya Wijewardena, and Chinmay Hegde. On the computational
  complexity of self-attention. In 34th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory,
  volume 201, pp. 1–23, 2023.

NVIDIA. Cuda templates for linear algebra subroutines, 2017. URL https://github.com/
 NVIDIA/cutlass.

NVIDIA. cuBLAS, 2023. URL https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cublas/.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-
  ward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01703.

Bo Peng, Eric Alcaide, Quentin Anthony, Alon Albalak, Samuel Arcadinho, Huanqi Cao, Xin
  Cheng, Michael Chung, Matteo Grella, Kranthi Kiran GV, Xuzheng He, Haowen Hou, Przemys-
  law Kazienko, Jan Kocon, and Jiaming et al. Kong. Rwkv: Reinventing rnns for the transformer
  era. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, 2023.

Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Eric Nguyen, Daniel Y Fu, Tri Dao, Stephen Baccus, Yoshua
 Bengio, Stefano Ermon, and Christopher Ré. Hyena hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional lan-
 guage models. Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 2023.

Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Connelly Barnes, Andrew Adams, Sylvain Paris, Frédo Durand, and Saman
  Amarasinghe. Halide: a language and compiler for optimizing parallelism, locality, and recom-
  putation in image processing pipelines. Acm Sigplan Notices, 48(6):519–530, 2013.

Nadav Rotem, Jordan Fix, Saleem Abdulrasool, Garret Catron, Summer Deng, Roman Dzhabarov,
  Nick Gibson, James Hegeman, Meghan Lele, Roman Levenstein, et al. Glow: Graph lowering
  compiler techniques for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00907, 2018.

Fabian Schuetze. Reverse-engineering cublas, 2024. URL https://accu.org/journals/
  overload/32/181/schuetze/#:˜:text=The%20kernels%20provided%
  20with%20cuBLAS,Ubuntu%2C%20libblas%2C%20ships%20600KB.

Jay Shah, Ganesh Bikshandi, Ying Zhang, Vijay Thakkar, Pradeep Ramani, and Tri Dao.
  Flashattention-3: Fast and accurate attention with asynchrony and low-precision, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08608.

Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Ahmed Murtadha, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
   hanced transformer with rotary position embedding, 2023.

Philippe Tillet, H. T. Kung, and David Cox. Triton: an intermediate language and compiler for
  tiled neural network computations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International
  Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages, MAPL 2019, pp. 10–19, New
  York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450367196. doi:
  10.1145/3315508.3329973. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3315508.3329973.

Nicolas Vasilache, Oleksandr Zinenko, Theodoros Theodoridis, Priya Goyal, Zachary DeVito,
  William S Moses, Sven Verdoolaege, Andrew Adams, and Albert Cohen. Tensor comprehen-
  sions: Framework-agnostic high-performance machine learning abstractions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.04730, 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. 31st Conference on Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), 2017.
A. Vyas, A. Katharopoulos, and F. Fleuret. Fast transformers with clustered attention. In Pro-
  ceedings of the International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2020.
Richard Wei, Lane Schwartz, and Vikram Adve. Dlvm: A modern compiler infrastructure for deep
  learning systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.03016, 2017.
Samuel Williams, Andrew Waterman, and David Patterson. Roofline: An insightful visual perfor-
  mance model for floating-point programs and multicore architectures. Communications of the
  ACM, 2008.
Songlin Yang and Yu Zhang. Fla: A triton-based library for hardware-efficient implementations of
  linear attention mechanism, January 2024. URL https://github.com/sustcsonglin/
  flash-linear-attention.
Michael Zhang, Simran Arora, Rahul Chalamala, Alan Wu, Benjamin Spector, Aaryan Singhal,
 Krithik Ramesh, and Christopher Ré. Lolcats: On low-rank linearizing of large language models.
 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10254.
Michael Zhang, Kush Bhatia, Hermann Kumbong, and Christopher Ré. The hedgehog & the porcu-
 pine: Expressive linear attentions with softmax mimicry. International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2024b.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our appendix is organized as follows:
1. Appendix A provides an extended discussion of related work.
2. Appendix B provides a set of kernel that demonstrate the extensibility and simplicity of TK
   kernels.
3. Appendix C provides a set of kernel listings written in the TK abstractions.
4. Appendix D provides extended discussion of the TK library implementation details, including
   approaches to constructing shared memory layouts and the set of layouts used in TK.

A    E XTENDED DISCUSSION OF PRIOR WORK
We provide an initial discussion of related work in Section 2 and extended discussion here. We
discuss various programming frameworks that support AI kernel development and discuss prior
work to develop hardware-aware AI algorithms.

CPP embedded libraries Towards raising the level of abstraction and supporting simpler pro-
grams, NVIDIA maintains the CuTe and CUTLASS libraries, which are CUDA primitives library
for graphics, scientific computing, and ML. As discussed in Section 2, both CUTLASS and TK can
support the same kernels, since both are C++ embedded libraries. Developers can use the power
of the full C++ library, including raw CUDA, when using these frameworks. Distinct from CUT-
LASS’s objectives, we specifically explore how broad and fast we can go, just using a small number
of opinionated abstractions.

Compiler-based libraries Many machine learning frameworks employ high-level computational
graph representations for optimizations, such as TVM Chen et al. (2018), TensorFlow XLA Abadi
et al. (2016), Glow Rotem et al. (2018), and DLVM Wei et al. (2017). TVM, for instance, incor-
porates a flexible tensor expression language and automated schedule optimization. Building upon
Halide’s Ragan-Kelley et al. (2013) separation of algorithm and schedule, TVM introduces new
primitives such as tensorization. The approaches of these frameworks differ from T HUNDER K IT-
TENS in that they provide a full end-to-end stack that optimizes both graph-level and operator-level
transformations, while T HUNDER K ITTENS concentrates specifically on kernel-level optimizations.
Triton Tillet et al. (2019) builds on existing approaches to deep learning compilation while intro-
ducing novel techniques for efficient tiled computations on GPUs. Recently, tools such as Flex
Attention also provide easy to use interfaces to write kernels for attention variants, and compile
down to Triton He et al. (2024). Unlike XLA and Glow, which use tensor-level IRs and predefined
templates, or Tensor Comprehensions Vasilache et al. (2018) and Diesel Elango et al. (2018), which
rely on polyhedral models, Triton introduces a C-like language (Triton-C) and an LLVM-based IR
(Triton-IR) centered around parametric tile variables. This approach supports non-affine tensor in-
dices that polyhedral models struggle with. Triton’s JIT compiler (Triton-JIT) implements tile-level
optimizations and an auto-tuner, often enabling high performance on par with hand-tuned libraries.
A key difference between TK and Triton is that TK is embedded within CUDA, and as a result its
abstractions fail gracefully. In contrast, Triton supports inline PTX only for element-wise operations
on tensors.

Hardware-aware AI architectures We are inspired by the success of several prior works that
introduce systems-level innovations to improve ML efficiency such as FlashAttention (Dao et al.,
2022b; Dao, 2024; Shah et al., 2024) and other optimized attentions (Bikshandi & Shah, 2023a),
FlashFFTConv (Fu et al., 2023c), linear attention kernels Vyas et al. (2020); Yang & Zhang (2024);
Peng et al. (2023); Dao & Gu (2024). Given the effort required to independently optimize each new
architecture, we ask whether a small set of opinionated GPU programming abstractions can help
researchers obtain kernels for a broad range of AI operations.

B    E XTENDED RESULTS
In Section 4, we show that T HUNDER K ITTENS results in state of the art kernels across a broad
range of AI workloads on NVIDIA H100 GPUs. This section provides extended details of our


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


experimental protocol, additional results to analyze the extensibility and simplicity of TK kernels,
and additional results to further highlight the breadth of features.

B.1   E XTENDED DETAILS OF EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL
• Benchmarking kernels In order to ensure fair performance comparisons between TK kernels and
  others, we run 10 warm-up iterations then use cudaEvents to measure total kernel execution time
  over 10 benchmarking iterations. Reported performance is the average of the 10 benchmarking
  iterations.
• Benchmarking PyTorch We measure baseline PyTorch algorithm-implementations with and
  without torch.compile - a new compile is run any time the input configurations (sequence length,
  batch size, etc.) change. We report the maximum TFLOPS with torch.compile across settings.
• Tuning kernels Baseline GEMM kernels are tuned via a grid-search over the default execution
  parameters exposed (if any) and through auto-tuning methods (exposed via CuBLASLt) - for
  baselines, the maximum performance achieved is reported. Furthermore, for Triton kernels, we
  run triton.autotune over the default parameter configurations provided in baselines we compare
  TK kernels to. In order to avoid impacting performance measurements, kernel tuning is done in
  separate iterations prior to warmup and benchmarking.
We use the following software versions for benchmarking: CUDA 12.6, Triton version 3.00, and
PyTorch version 2.4.

B.2   A NALYZING THE EXTENSIBILITY OF TK ACROSS WORKLOADS

We include additional kernels to demonstrate two additional TK features:
      1. FP8 precision: We provide an FP8 GEMM kernel in TK and compare this to CuBLAS in
         Figure 10. The inputs and outputs are both in FP8 precision, and the accumulate is in FP32.
      2. Padded tiles While TK uses 16 × 16 tiles by default, to encourage users to utilize tensor
         cores and coalesced loads, it is important to support un-aligned workloads. TK handles
         this by padding the tiles (discussed in Appendix D). We implement attention with non-
         aligned dimensions on the NVIDIA 4090 and H100 GPUs and find that the performance
         characteristics remain the same as our aligned kernels.


           Figure 10: GEMM kernel using FP8 precision on the NVIDIA Hopper GPU.

B.3   A NALYZING THE EXTENSIBILITY OF TK ACROSS HARDWARE PLATFORMS

We find that TK is extensible across hardware platforms. While we focused on the top-of-line
data center hardware, NVIDIA H100, in Section 4, here we additionally consider the top-of-line
consumer hardware, NVIDIA 4090, and personal hardware, Apple M2 chips.

Consumer hardware: NVIDIA 4090 GPU We implement non causal attention at head dimen-
sions 64 and 128 using TK. We compare to FlashAttention-2 Dao (2024), a popular reference kernel,
and find that the TK kernel is competitive across settings.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Attention non causal inference at head dimensions 64 and 128 and Based kernels, on
NVIDIA 4090 chips using TK and the reference baselines.


Personal hardware: Apple M2 chip We implement non causal attention at head dimensions 64
and 128, and GEMMs on the M2 chip. We compare to the Apple MLX framework example kernels
and find that the TK kernel is competitive across settings.


Figure 12: Attention non causal inference at head dimensions 64 and 128 and GEMM kernels, on
Apple M2 chips using TK and the Apple MLX reference baselines.

We next include code listings for the attention kernel on NVIDIA 4090 fig. 13 and Apple M2 Fig-
ure 14, highlighting the close resemblance between the implementations.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     NVIDIA 4090 attention:
 1   template<int D> constexpr size_t ROWS = 16*(128/D); // height of each worker tile (rows)
 2   template<int D, typename T=bf16, typename L=row_l> using qkvo_tile = rt<T, ROWS<D>, D, L>;
 3   template<int D, typename T=float> using attn_tile = rt<T, ROWS<D>, ROWS<D>>;
 4   template<int D> using shared_tile = st_bf<ROWS<D>, D>;
 5   template<int D> using global_layout = gl<bf16, -1, -1, -1, D>; // B, N, H, at runtime, D at compile time
 6   template<int D> struct globals { global_layout<D> Qg, Kg, Vg, Og; };
 7
 8   template<int D> __launch_bounds__(NUM_WORKERS*WARP_THREADS, 1)
 9   __global__ void attend_ker(const __grid_constant__ globals<D> g) {
10
11       using load_group = kittens::group<2>; // pairs of workers collaboratively load k, v tiles
12       int loadid = load_group::groupid(), workerid = kittens::warpid(); // which worker am I?
13       constexpr int LOAD_BLOCKS = NUM_WORKERS / load_group::GROUP_WARPS;
14       const int batch = blockIdx.z, head = blockIdx.y, q_seq = blockIdx.x * NUM_WORKERS + workerid;
15
16       extern __shared__ alignment_dummy __shm[];
17       shared_allocator al((int*)&__shm[0]);
18       shared_tile<D>(&k_smem)[LOAD_BLOCKS][PIPE_STAGES] = al.allocate<shared_tile<D>,LOAD_BLOCKS,PIPE_STAGES>();
19       shared_tile<D>(&v_smem)[LOAD_BLOCKS][PIPE_STAGES] = al.allocate<shared_tile<D>,LOAD_BLOCKS,PIPE_STAGES>();
20       shared_tile<D> (&qo_smem)[NUM_WORKERS] = reinterpret_cast<shared_tile<D>(&)[NUM_WORKERS]>(k_smem);
21       // Initialize all of the register tiles.
22       qkvo_tile<D, bf16> q_reg, k_reg; // Q and K are both row layout, as we use mma_ABt.
23       qkvo_tile<D, bf16, col_l> v_reg; // V is column layout, as we use mma_AB.
24       qkvo_tile<D, float> o_reg; // Output tile.
25       attn_tile<D, float> att_block; // attention tile, in float.
26       attn_tile<D, bf16> att_block_mma; // bf16 attention tile for second mma_AB. We cast right before.
27       typename attn_tile<D, float>::col_vec max_vec_last, max_vec, norm_vec; // these are column vectors.
28       // each warp loads its own Q tile of 16x64
29       if (q_seq*ROWS<D> < g.Qg.depth) {
30           load<1, false>(qo_smem[workerid], g.Qg, {batch, q_seq, head, 0}); // going through shared memory
31           __syncwarp();
32           load(q_reg, qo_smem[workerid]);
33       }
34       __syncthreads();
35
36       if constexpr(D == 64) mul(q_reg, q_reg, __float2bfloat16(0.125f * 1.44269504089));
37       else if constexpr(D == 128) mul(q_reg, q_reg, __float2bfloat16(0.08838834764f * 1.44269504089));
38       neg_infty(max_vec);
39       zero(norm_vec);
40       zero(o_reg);
41       // launch the load of the first k, v tiles
42       int kv_blocks = (g.Kg.depth + LOAD_BLOCKS*ROWS<D>-1) / (LOAD_BLOCKS*ROWS<D>), tic = 0;
43       load_group::load_async<1, false>(k_smem[loadid][0], g.Kg, {batch, loadid, head, 0});
44       load_group::load_async<1, false>(v_smem[loadid][0], g.Vg, {batch, loadid, head, 0});
45       // iterate over k, v for these q’s that have been loaded
46       for(auto kv_idx = 0; kv_idx < kv_blocks; kv_idx++, tic=(tic+1)%3) {
47           int next_load_idx = (kv_idx+1)*LOAD_BLOCKS + loadid;
48           if(next_load_idx*ROWS<D> < g.Kg.depth) {
49               int next_tic = (tic+1)%3;
50               load_group::load_async<1, false>(k_smem[loadid][next_tic], g.Kg, {batch, next_load_idx, head, 0});
51               load_group::load_async<1, false>(v_smem[loadid][next_tic], g.Vg, {batch, next_load_idx, head, 0});
52               load_async_wait<1>(); // next k, v can stay in flight.
53           }
54           else load_async_wait();
55           __syncthreads();
56           #pragma unroll LOAD_BLOCKS
57           for(int subtile = 0; subtile < LOAD_BLOCKS && (kv_idx*LOAD_BLOCKS + subtile)*ROWS<D> < g.Kg.depth;
                   ,→ subtile++) {
58               load(k_reg, k_smem[subtile][tic]); // load k from shared into registers
59               zero(att_block); // zero 16x16 attention tile
60               mma_ABt(att_block, q_reg, k_reg, att_block); // Q@K.T
61               int first_index = (kv_idx*LOAD_BLOCKS + subtile)*ROWS<D>; // one past last KV index of tile
62               int start_fill = g.Kg.depth-first_index < ROWS<D> ? g.Kg.depth-first_index : ROWS<D>;
63               right_fill(att_block, att_block, start_fill, base_types::constants<float>::neg_infty());
64               copy(max_vec_last, max_vec);
65               row_max(max_vec, att_block, max_vec);
66               sub_row(att_block, att_block, max_vec);
67               exp2(att_block, att_block);
68               sub(max_vec_last, max_vec_last, max_vec);
69               exp2(max_vec_last, max_vec_last);
70               mul(norm_vec, norm_vec, max_vec_last);
71               row_sum(norm_vec, att_block, norm_vec);
72               copy(att_block_mma, att_block);
73               load(v_reg, v_smem[subtile][tic]);
74               mul_row(o_reg, o_reg, max_vec_last);
75               mma_AB(o_reg, att_block_mma, v_reg, o_reg);
76           }
77       }
78       div_row(o_reg, o_reg, norm_vec);
79       __syncthreads();
80       if (q_seq*ROWS<D> < g.Og.depth) { // write out o.
81           store(qo_smem[workerid], o_reg); // going through shared memory improves coalescing of dram writes.
82           __syncwarp();
83           store<1, false>(g.Og, qo_smem[workerid], {batch, q_seq, head, 0});
84       }
85   }


                  Figure 13: Attention implemented in TK on NVIDIA 4090 chips.

                                                     18
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Apple M2 attention:
 1   namespace custom_ops {
 2   struct subexp2 {;
 3       template<typename T> static METAL_FUNC T op(thread const T &a, thread     const T &b) { return metal::exp2(a-
               ,→ b); }
 4   };
 5   }
 6
 7   template<typename RT, typename RV>
 8   static METAL_FUNC typename metal::enable_if<ducks::is_register_tile<RT>() && ducks::is_register_vector<RV>(), void
           ,→ >::type
 9   subexp2(thread RT &dst, thread const RT &src, thread const RV &row_values) {
10       row_map<custom_ops::subexp2, RT, RV>(dst, src, row_values);
11   }
12   template<typename RV, typename U>
13   static METAL_FUNC typename metal::enable_if<ducks::is_register_vector<RV>(), void>::type
14   subexp2(thread RV &dst, thread const RV &lhs, thread const U &rhs) {
15       bin_op<custom_ops::subexp2, RV>(dst, lhs, rhs);
16   }
17   //constant constexpr const int D = 128;
18   #define NUM_WORKERS 1
19   template<int D>
20   kernel void attend_ker(ATTEND_KER_PARAMS) {
21       static_assert(D == 64 || D == 128, "D must be 64 or 128");
22       using global_layout = kittens::ore::gl<bfloat, 1, -1, -1, D>;
23       global_layout gl_q(__q__, nullptr, H, N, nullptr);
24       global_layout gl_k(__k__, nullptr, H, N, nullptr);
25       global_layout gl_v(__v__, nullptr, H, N, nullptr);
26       global_layout gl_o(__o__, nullptr, H, N, nullptr);
27       using st_qkv     = st_bf<8, D>;
28
29       using rt_qv    = rt_bf<8, D>;
30       using rt_k_t    = rt_bf<8, D, ducks::rt_layout::col>;
31       using rt_att    = rt_fl<8, 8>;
32       using rt_o      = rt_fl<8, D>;
33       using rv_att    = rt_fl<8, 8>::col_vec;
34
35       const int block = blockIdx.z;
36       const int head = blockIdx.y;
37       const int q_seq = (blockIdx.x * NUM_WORKERS) + warpId;
38       const int kv_blocks = N / st_qkv::rows;
39       rt_qv q_reg;
40       rt_k_t k_reg;
41       rt_qv v_reg;
42       rt_att att_block;
43       rt_o o_reg;
44       rv_att max_vec_last;
45       rv_att max_vec;
46       rv_att norm_vec;
47       load(q_reg, gl_q, {block, head, q_seq, 0}, laneId);
48       neg_infty(max_vec);
49       zero(norm_vec);
50       zero(o_reg);
51       constexpr const bf16 q_mul = ((D == 128) ? 0.08838834764bf : 0.125bf) * 1.44269504089bf;
52       mul(q_reg, q_reg, q_mul);
53       #pragma clang loop unroll(full)
54       for(auto kv_idx = 0; kv_idx < kv_blocks; kv_idx++) {
55               load(k_reg, gl_k, {block, head, kv_idx, 0}, laneId);
56               zero(att_block);
57               mma_ABt(att_block, q_reg, k_reg, att_block);
58               copy(max_vec_last, max_vec, laneId);
59               row_max(max_vec, att_block, max_vec, laneId);
60               subexp2(max_vec_last, max_vec_last, max_vec);
61               subexp2(att_block, att_block, max_vec);
62               mul(norm_vec, norm_vec, max_vec_last);
63               row_sum(norm_vec, att_block, norm_vec, laneId);
64               mul_row(o_reg, o_reg, max_vec_last);
65               load(v_reg, gl_v, {block, head, kv_idx, 0}, laneId);
66               mma_AB(o_reg, att_block, v_reg, o_reg);
67       }
68       div_row(o_reg, o_reg, norm_vec);
69       store(gl_o, o_reg, {block, head, q_seq, 0}, laneId);
70   }



                          Figure 14: Attention implemented in TK on Apple M2 chips.


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4   A NALYZING THE SIMPLICITY OF TK

As a proxies for understanding the simplicity of the TK library, we measure (1) the size of various
popular frameworks in bytes and (2) the lines of code across our kernels.
The library sizes are shown in Table 5. For CUTLASS and TK we report the size of the “include/”
directory, and for Triton we report the combined size of the “include/” directories in Triton plus the
“include/” in the core MLIR compiler dependency.
                             Library         Size (Bytes)   Date / Version
                             CUTLASS           22 MB         10/22/2024
                             Triton           12.6 MB        10/22/2024
                             TK               <1.0 MB        10/22/2024

                              Table 5: Sizes of various CUDA libraries.

We find that the TK kernels in Table 6 average at < 200 lines of code. We compare to the lines
of code in the corresponding state of the art baseline kernels, and the TK speed ups over these
baselines. While measuring lines of code may be difficult, we provide links in the table indicate our
approach. For TK, we include many comments, all the global data descriptor, and custom functions.
We exclude the python bindings and other wrapper functions for all baselines. We generally observe
that TK kernels use fewer lines of code and provide speed ups.
 Workload                      TK kernel (LoC)          Reference kernel (LoC)      Speed up (min-max)
 Attention forwards                    217             2325 (CUTLASS FA3)               0.87-1.14×
 GEMM                                   84                463 (CUTLASS)                 0.98-2.05×
 Convolution (N = 4096)                131           624 (CUDA FlashFFTConv)                4.7×
 Based linear attention                282                   89 (Triton)                 3.7-14.5×
 Hedgehog linear attention             316                  104 (Triton)                  4.0-6.5×
 Mamba-2                               192                  532 (Triton)                  3.0-3.7×
 Rotary                                101                  119 (Triton)                  1.1-2.3×
 Fused layernorm                       146                  124 (Triton)                  1.0-2.2×

Table 6: Lines of code (LoC) across TK H100 kernels, state of the art non TK kernels, and the TK
speed up over the reference across the evaluated input dimensions in Section 4.


                                                   20
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     C     T HUNDER K ITTENS KERNEL LISTINGS
     This section first recaps our benchmarking methodology for the results and provides a set of kernels
     written in the TK LCSF template and tile abstractions:
     1. Appendix C.1 GEMM kernel
     2. Appendix C.2 Long convolution kernel
     3. Appendix C.3 Attention kernel
     4. Appendix C.4 Rotary kernel
     To introduce the template components, we describe the GEMM kernel in detail in Appendix C.1.

     Benchmarking approach Our kernels in Section 4 are benchmarked on an NVIDIA H100 80GB
     SXM GPU with 10 warmup and 10 timed iterations using timings measured in C++. We also provide
     Python-bound kernels and benchmarking infrastructure in our repository for reference.

     C.1   M ATRIX MULTIPLY

     First we show and describe a TK GEMM kernel in the LCSF template.
     Each compute warpgroup is responsible for computing 64M -row, 64N -column chunk of the result-
     ing output matrix. Each compute worker identifies the coordinates for its chunk, zeros its accumula-
     tor registers, repeatedly runs large asynchronous matrix multiplies (compute), and finally stores out
     its tile in the end (finish). The load workers also compute their coordinates, and then repeatedly load
     chunks of the input matrices (load). Store workers perform asynchronous stores when the compute
     workers are finished with the chunks (stores).

     Tuning the number of workers and pipeline stages The computation is divided into stages, with
     each stage processing 64 elements along the reduction dimensions of the input matrices. The input
     pipeline is automatically sized by T HUNDER K ITTENS if the user does not specify a value. For
     common configurations of either a (2 compute warpgroup) 128 × 256 or (3 compute warpgroups)
     192 × 192 output tile per block, it generates a 4-stage pipeline.

     Tuning the grid order The greatest complexity of this kernel is in setting the grid parameters. This
     kernel adopts a 3D stride over the input matrices, which has a significant effect for large matrices
     which do not fit in L2 cache. The order in which blocks execute strongly influences cache locality
     and thus available memory bandwidth. To illustrate the magnitude of the effect, comparing the
     presented scheme versus a naive grid (in which blocks are executed in row-major order) a 4096 ×
     4096 × 4096 matrix multiply only drops from 767 TFLOPs to 735 TFLOPs, but a 16384 × 16384 ×
     16384 matrix multiply drops from 797 TFLOPs to 387 TFLOPs, a > 50% performance degradation.



 1   using namespace kittens;
 2   using namespace kittens::prototype;
 3   using namespace kittens::prototype::lcf;
 4   template<int M_BLOCK, int N_BLOCK>
 5   struct matmul_layout {
 6      using base_tile       = st_bf<64, 64>;
 7      using global_layout = gl<bf16, 1, 1, -1, -1, base_tile>;
 8      struct globals        { global_layout A, B, C; };
 9      struct input_block    { base_tile a[M_BLOCK], b[N_BLOCK]; };
10      struct finish_block   { base_tile c[M_BLOCK][N_BLOCK]; };
11      struct common_state   { int2 coord; };
12      struct consumer_state { rt_fl<16, N_BLOCK*base_tile::cols> accum; };
13   };
14   template<int _M_BLOCK=2, int _N_BLOCK=4, int _SUPER_M=12>
15   struct matmul_template {
16      static constexpr int M_BLOCK = _M_BLOCK, N_BLOCK = _N_BLOCK, SUPER_M = _SUPER_M;
17      using layout    = matmul_layout<M_BLOCK, N_BLOCK>;
18      using wide_tile = st_bf<64, 64*N_BLOCK>;
19      static constexpr int NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS=M_BLOCK*4, INPUT_PIPE_STAGES=4,
             ,→ PRODUCER_BARRIER_ARRIVALS=1;


                                                       21
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 1        // Helper functions
 2        template<bool PERISISTENT_GRID=true> __host__ static inline dim3 grid(int M, int N, int K) {
 3          return dim3(PERISISTENT_GRID ? 132 : M*N/(M_BLOCK*N_BLOCK*layout::base_tile::num_elements)
                  ,→ );
 4        }
 5          // ThunderKittens template functions
 6        __device__ static inline void common_setup(common_setup_args<layout> args) {
 7          int Rblocks = args.globals.C.rows / (M_BLOCK*64), Cblocks = args.globals.C.cols / (N_BLOCK
                  ,→ *64);
 8          int super_rows = (Rblocks/SUPER_M)*SUPER_M,
 9            final_rows = Rblocks - super_rows,
10            super_repeat = SUPER_M*Cblocks;
11          int task_id = args.task_iter*gridDim.x + blockIdx.x;
12          if (task_id < super_rows * Cblocks)
13            args.common.coord = { SUPER_M*(task_id/super_repeat) + task_id%SUPER_M,
14                                     (task_id%super_repeat)/SUPER_M };
15          else if (task_id < Rblocks*Cblocks) {
16            int remainder_id = task_id - super_rows*Cblocks;
17            args.common.coord = { super_rows + (remainder_id%final_rows), remainder_id/final_rows };
18          }
19          else { // Id is too high, no more work to do
20            args.num_iters = -1;
21            return;
22          }
23          args.num_iters = args.globals.A.cols/64;
24          int id = warpgroup::groupid() == NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS/4 ? 0 : warpgroup::groupid(); //
                  ,→ producer sets as 0
25          args.common.coord = { args.common.coord.x*M_BLOCK + id, args.common.coord.y*N_BLOCK };
26        }
27        struct producer {
28          __device__ static void setup(producer_setup_args<layout> args) {
29            warpgroup::decrease_registers<40>(); // decrease registers for producers
30          }
31          __device__ static void load(producer_load_args<layout> args) {
32            if(warpgroup::warpid() == 0) {
33               tma::expect(args.inputs_arrived, args.input);
34               for(int i = 0; i < M_BLOCK; i++)
35                  tma::load_async(args.input.a[i], args.globals.A,
36                                  {args.common.coord.x+i, args.iter}, args.inputs_arrived);
37               for(int i = 0; i < N_BLOCK; i++)
38                  tma::load_async(args.input.b[i], args.globals.B,
39                                  {args.iter, args.common.coord.y+i}, args.inputs_arrived);
40            }
41          }
42        };
43        struct consumer {
44          __device__ static void setup(consumer_setup_args<layout> args) {
45            warpgroup::increase_registers<232>(); // increase registers for consumers
46            zero(args.state.accum);
47          }
48          __device__ static void compute(consumer_compute_args<layout> args) {
49            warpgroup::mma_AB(
50               args.state.accum, // dest registers
51               args.input.a[warpgroup::groupid()], // A matrix
52               reinterpret_cast<wide_tile&>(args.input.b) // B matrix
53            );
54            warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
55            if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.inputs_finished);
56          }
57          __device__ static void finish(consumer_finish_args<layout> args) {
58            warpgroup::store(reinterpret_cast<wide_tile&>(args.finish.c[warpgroup::groupid()]), args
                     ,→ .state.accum);
59            warpgroup::sync();
60            if(warpgroup::warpid() == 0) for(int i = 0; i < N_BLOCK; i++) {
61               tma::store_async(args.globals.C, args.finish.c[warpgroup::groupid()][i],
62                                            {args.common.coord.x, args.common.coord.y+i});
63               tma::store_async_read_wait(); // wait that store is finished before reusing finish
                       ,→ memory
64            }
65            zero(args.state.accum);
66            if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.finish_finished);
67          }
68        };
69   };



          Figure 15: Templated matrix multiply kernel which is reasonably competitive with CuBLAS.



                                                      22
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     C.2      L ONG CONVOLUTION

     This section shows the long convolution kernel for sequence length 4096, written in the TK ab-
     stractions. We use the FFT convolution algorithm, computed via Monarch Matrices, for our long
     convolution kernel (Cooley & Tukey, 1965; Fu et al., 2023a; Dao et al., 2022a).

 1        struct consumer {
 2          __device__ static void setup(consumer_setup_args<layout> args) {
 3            warpgroup::consumer_registers<NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS/4>();
 4            int iters_per_head = (args.globals.x.batch + NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS-1) /
                   ,→ NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS;
 5            args.state.current_head = (0 / iters_per_head)*132 + blockIdx.x; // start for iter 0
 6            using consumers = group<NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS>;
 7            consumers::load(args.scratch.f,       args.globals.f,       {0, 0, 0, 0});
 8            consumers::load(args.scratch.finv,    args.globals.finv,    {0, 0, 0, 0});
 9            consumers::load(args.scratch.tw,      args.globals.tw,      {0, 0, 0, 0});
10            consumers::load(args.scratch.twinv_t, args.globals.twinv_t, {0, 0, 0, 0});
11            load_head_data(args.scratch, args.globals, args.state.current_head);
12          }
13          __device__ static void compute(consumer_compute_args<layout> args) {
14
15           int warpgroupid = warpgroup::warpid()/kittens::WARPGROUP_WARPS;
16           int default_barrer_id = warpgroupid + 4;
17           // X = FˆT X
18           crt_fl<16, 64> mma_reg; // 64 registers
19           crt_bf<16, 64> accum, tmp; // 32 registers each
20           warpgroup::mm_AB(mma_reg.real, args.scratch.f.real, args.input.x[warpgroup::groupid()]);
21           warpgroup::mm_AB(mma_reg.imag, args.scratch.f.imag, args.input.x[warpgroup::groupid()]);
22           warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
23           copy(accum, mma_reg);
24           warpgroup::load(tmp, args.scratch.tw); // for twiddle first
25           mul(accum, accum, tmp);
26           group<NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS>::sync(2);
27           warpgroup::mm_AB(mma_reg, accum, args.scratch.f);
28           warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
29           copy(accum, mma_reg);
30           warpgroup::load(tmp, args.scratch.kf); // for filter second
31           mul(accum, accum, tmp);
32           warpgroup::mm_AB(mma_reg, accum, args.scratch.finv);
33           warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
34           copy(accum, mma_reg);
35           warpgroup::load(tmp, args.scratch.twinv_t); // twiddle inverse is pre-transposed
36           mul(accum, accum, tmp);
37           warpgroup::store(args.scratch.tmp[warpgroup::groupid()], accum); // must store for AtB
38           warpgroup::sync(default_barrer_id);
39           warpgroup::mm_AB(mma_reg, args.scratch.finv, args.scratch.tmp[warpgroup::groupid()]);
40           warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
41           warpgroup::store(args.output.o[warpgroup::groupid()], mma_reg.real);
42           warpgroup::sync(default_barrer_id);
43
44           if(laneid() == 0) {
45             arrive(args.inputs_finished);
46             arrive(args.outputs_arrived);
47           }
48           __syncwarp();
49           int iters_per_head = (args.globals.x.batch + NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS-1) /
                  ,→ NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS;
50           int next_head = ((args.iter+1) / iters_per_head)*132 + blockIdx.x;
51           if(next_head != args.state.current_head) {
52             load_head_data(args.scratch, args.globals, next_head);
53             args.state.current_head = next_head;
54           }
55          }
56          __device__ static void finish(consumer_finish_args<layout> args) { if(laneid() == 0)
                 ,→ arrive(args.finish_finished); }
57        };
58   };



     Figure 16: A convolution kernel for context length 4096, written in the TK LCSF template, which
     outperforms FlashFFTConv (Fu et al., 2023c).


                                                      23
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 1   using namespace kittens;
 2   using namespace kittens::prototype;
 3   using namespace kittens::prototype::lcsf;
 4   template<int _wg> struct fftconv_4096_layout { // 4096
 5      static constexpr int wg = _wg;
 6      using seq_tile        = st_bf<64, 64>;
 7      using seq_layout      =     gl<bf16, -1, -1, 64, 64, seq_tile>;
 8      using filter_layout = cgl<gl<bf16, 1, -1, 64, 64, seq_tile>>;
 9      using fft_layout      = cgl<gl<bf16, 1, 1, 64, 64>>;
10      struct globals {
11        seq_layout o, x;
12        filter_layout kf;
13        fft_layout f, finv, tw, twinv_t;
14      };
15      struct input_block      { seq_tile x[wg]; };
16      struct output_block     { seq_tile o[wg]; };
17      struct scratch_block {
18        cst_bf<64, 64> kf, f, finv, tw, twinv_t, tmp[2];
19      };
20      struct consumer_state { int current_head; };
21   };
22   struct fft_4096_template {
23      static constexpr int NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS=8, NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS=NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS/4,
             ,→ NUM_BLOCKS=1, OUTPUT_PIPE_STAGES=2, INPUT_PIPE_STAGES=4;
24      using layout = fftconv_4096_layout<NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS>;
25      // mine
26      __device__ static inline void load_head_data(typename layout::scratch_block &scratch, const
             ,→ layout::globals &g, int head) {
27        using consumers = group<NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS>;
28        consumers::sync(3);
29        consumers::load(scratch.kf, g.kf, {0, head, 0, 0}); // next chunk
30        consumers::sync(3);
31      }
32      // tk
33      __device__ static void common_setup(common_setup_args<layout> args) {
34        int heads_handled = (args.globals.x.depth+131-blockIdx.x) / 132; // I am guaranteeing
                ,→ batch is handled by just one block.
35        int iters_per_head = (args.globals.x.batch + NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS-1) /
                ,→ NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS;
36        args.num_iters = args.task_iter == 0 ? heads_handled * iters_per_head : -1;
37      }
38      struct producer {
39        __device__ static void setup(producer_setup_args<layout> args) {
40          warpgroup::producer_registers();
41        }
42        __device__ static void load(producer_load_args<layout> args) {
43          int iters_per_head = (args.globals.x.batch + NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS-1) /
                   ,→ NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS;
44          int head = (args.iter / iters_per_head)*132 + blockIdx.x;
45          int batch = (args.iter % iters_per_head) * NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS;
46          if(warpgroup::warpid() == args.iter%4) {
47             tma::expect_bytes(args.inputs_arrived, sizeof(args.input.x[0]) * min((int)
                     ,→ NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS, (int)(args.globals.x.batch - batch)));
48             for(int b = batch; b < batch+NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS && b < args.globals.x.batch; b++)
                     ,→ {
49                tma::load_async(args.input.x[b-batch], args.globals.x, { b, head, 0, 0 }, args.
                       ,→ inputs_arrived);
50             }
51             if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.inputs_arrived, 3); // extra arrivals needed
52             __syncwarp();
53          }
54        }
55        __device__ static void store(producer_store_args<layout> args) {
56          int iters_per_head = (args.globals.x.batch + NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS-1) /
                   ,→ NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS;
57          int head = (args.iter / iters_per_head)*132 + blockIdx.x;
58          int batch = (args.iter % iters_per_head) * NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS;
59          if(warpgroup::warpid() == args.iter%4) {
60             for(int b = batch; b < batch+NUM_CONSUMER_WARPGROUPS && b < args.globals.x.batch; b++)
                     ,→ {
61                tma::store_async(args.globals.o, args.output.o[b-batch], { b, head, 0, 0 });
62             }
63             tma::store_async_read_wait();
64             if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.outputs_finished, 4);
65             __syncwarp();
66          }
67        }
68      };


                                                    24
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     C.3   ATTENTION

     This section shows non-causal attention at head dimensions 64, 128, in the TK abstractions.

 1         exp2(args.state.max_vec_last_scaled, args.state.max_vec_last_scaled);
 2         mul(args.state.norm_vec, args.state.norm_vec, args.state.max_vec_last_scaled);
 3         row_sum(args.state.norm_vec, args.state.att_block, args.state.norm_vec); // accumulate
                ,→ onto the norm_vec
 4         mul_row(args.state.o_reg, args.state.o_reg, args.state.max_vec_last_scaled); //
                ,→ normalize o_reg before mma
 5         copy(args.state.att_block_mma, args.state.att_block); // convert to bf16 for mma
 6         // O += A @ V
 7         warpgroup::mma_AB(args.state.o_reg, args.state.att_block_mma, args.input.v);
 8         warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
 9         if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.inputs_finished); // done!
10       }
11       __device__ static inline void finish(consumer_finish_args<layout> args) {
12         if((args.common.seq*NUM_WORKERS+warpgroup::groupid())*64 >= args.globals.Q.rows) return;
                ,→ // out of bounds?
13         div_row(args.state.o_reg, args.state.o_reg, args.state.norm_vec);
14         auto &o_smem = reinterpret_cast<typename layout::qo_tile&>(args.scratch.q[warpgroup::
                ,→ groupid()]);
15         warpgroup::store(o_smem, args.state.o_reg);
16         warpgroup::sync(warpgroup::groupid());
17         if(warpgroup::warpid() == 0)
18           tma::store_async(args.globals.O, o_smem, {args.common.batch, args.common.head, args.
                  ,→ common.seq*NUM_WORKERS+warpgroup::groupid(), 0});
19       }
20     };
21   };
22   // kernel is kittens::prototype::lcf::kernel<attn_fwd_template<HEAD_DIM>>;



     Figure 17: A templated non-causal attention kernel for head dims. 64 and 128 that competes with
     FlashAttention-3.


                                                    25
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 1   using namespace kittens;
 2   using namespace kittens::prototype;
 3   using namespace kittens::prototype::lcf;
 4   template<int D, int NUM_WORKERS> struct attn_fwd_layout {
 5      using qo_tile    = st_bf<64, D>;
 6      using kv_tile    = st_bf<D==64?192:128, D>;
 7      using qo_global = kittens::gl<bf16, -1, -1, -1, D, qo_tile>;
 8      using kv_global = kittens::gl<bf16, -1, -1, -1, D, kv_tile>;
 9      struct globals { qo_global O, Q; kv_global K, V; };
10      struct input_block     { kv_tile k, v; };
11      struct scratch_block { qo_tile q[NUM_WORKERS]; };
12      struct common_state    { int batch, head, seq; };
13      struct consumer_state {
14        rt_fl<16, qo_tile::cols> o_reg;
15        col_vec<rt_fl<16, kv_tile::rows>> max_vec, norm_vec;
16        col_vec<rt_fl<16, kv_tile::rows>> max_vec_last_scaled, max_vec_scaled;
17        rt_fl<16, kv_tile::rows> att_block;
18        rt_bf<16, kv_tile::rows> att_block_mma;
19      };
20   };
21   template<int D> struct attn_fwd_template {
22      static constexpr int NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS = 12, NUM_WORKERS = NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS/4,
             ,→ INPUT_PIPE_STAGES = 2;
23      using layout = attn_fwd_layout<D, NUM_WORKERS>;
24      __device__ static inline void common_setup(common_setup_args<layout> args) {
25        args.common.batch = blockIdx.z; args.common.head = blockIdx.y; args.common.seq = blockIdx.
                ,→ x;
26        args.num_iters = args.task_iter == 0 ? args.globals.K.rows/layout::kv_tile::rows : -1;
27      }
28      struct producer {
29        __device__ static inline void setup(producer_setup_args<layout> args) {
30          warpgroup::producer_registers();
31        }
32        __device__ static inline void load(producer_load_args<layout> args) {
33          if(warpgroup::warpid() == 0) {
34             tma::expect(args.inputs_arrived, args.input);
35             tma::load_async(args.input.k, args.globals.K, {args.common.batch, args.common.head,
                    ,→ args.iter, 0}, args.inputs_arrived);
36             tma::load_async(args.input.v, args.globals.V, {args.common.batch, args.common.head,
                    ,→ args.iter, 0}, args.inputs_arrived);
37          }
38          else if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.inputs_arrived);
39        }
40      };
41      struct consumer {
42        __device__ static inline void setup(consumer_setup_args<layout> args) {
43          warpgroup::consumer_registers<NUM_WORKERS>();
44          if((args.common.seq*NUM_WORKERS + warpgroup::groupid())*layout::qo_tile::rows < args.
                  ,→ globals.Q.rows) // out of bounds?
45             warpgroup::load(args.scratch.q[warpgroup::groupid()], args.globals.Q,
46                            {args.common.batch, args.common.head, args.common.seq*NUM_WORKERS+
                                   ,→ warpgroup::groupid(), 0});
47          zero(args.state.o_reg);
48          zero(args.state.norm_vec);
49          neg_infty(args.state.max_vec);
50          warpgroup::sync(warpgroup::groupid());
51        }
52        __device__ static inline void compute(consumer_compute_args<layout> args) {
53          constexpr float TEMPERATURE_SCALE = (D == 128) ? 0.08838834764f*1.44269504089f : 0.125f
                  ,→ *1.44269504089f;
54          warpgroup::mm_ABt(args.state.att_block,args.scratch.q[warpgroup::groupid()],args.input.k
                  ,→ );
55          mul(args.state.max_vec_last_scaled,args.state.max_vec,TEMPERATURE_SCALE);
56          warpgroup::mma_async_wait();
57          // softmax
58
59         row_max(args.state.max_vec, args.state.att_block, args.state.max_vec); // accumulate
                ,→ onto the max_vec
60         mul(args.state.max_vec_scaled, args.state.max_vec, TEMPERATURE_SCALE);
61         mul(args.state.att_block, args.state.att_block, TEMPERATURE_SCALE);
62         sub_row(args.state.att_block, args.state.att_block, args.state.max_vec_scaled);
63         exp2(args.state.att_block, args.state.att_block);
64         sub(args.state.max_vec_last_scaled, args.state.max_vec_last_scaled, args.state.
                ,→ max_vec_scaled);


                                                    26
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     C.4      ROTARY POSITIONAL ENCODINGS

     This section shows the rotary kernel for head dimension 128, written in the TK abstractions.

 1            load(args.state.cos, args.globals.cos, idx);
 2          }
 3          __device__ static void compute(consumer_compute_args<layout> args) {
 4            rt_fl<16, headdim> x;
 5            rt_fl<16, headdim/2> x1, x2, temp1, temp2;
 6            load(x, args.input.x[warpid()]);
 7            if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.inputs_finished);
 8            __syncwarp();
 9            for(int i = 0; i < headdim/32; i++) {
10                #pragma unroll
11                for(int j = 0; j < 4; j++) {
12                    x1.tiles[0][i].data[j] = x.tiles[0][i].data[j];
13                    x2.tiles[0][i].data[j] = x.tiles[0][i+headdim/32].data[j];
14                }
15            }
16            mul(temp1, x1, args.state.cos);
17            mul(temp2, x2, args.state.cos);
18            mul(x2, x2, -1.f);
19            mul(x1, x1, args.state.sin);
20            mul(x2, x2, args.state.sin);
21            add(temp1, temp1, x2);
22            add(temp2, temp2, x1);
23            for(int i = 0; i < headdim/32; i++) {
24                #pragma unroll
25                for(int j = 0; j < 4; j++) {
26                    x.tiles[0][i].data[j]            = temp1.tiles[0][i].data[j];
27                    x.tiles[0][i+headdim/32].data[j] = temp2.tiles[0][i].data[j];
28                }
29            }
30            store(args.output.o[warpid()], x);
31            __syncwarp();
32            if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.outputs_arrived);
33          }
34          __device__ static void finish(consumer_finish_args<layout> args) {
35            if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.finish_finished); // nothing to do here
36          }
37        };
38   };



     Figure 18: A templated rotary kernel for head dim. 128 that outperforms popular Triton baselines.


                                                      27
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 1   using namespace kittens;
 2   using namespace kittens::prototype;
 3   using namespace kittens::prototype::lcsf;
 4   template<int _headdim, int _warps> struct rotary_layout {
 5      static constexpr int headdim = _headdim, warps = _warps;
 6      using seq_tile     = st_bf<16, headdim>;
 7      using seq_global = gl<bf16, -1, -1, -1, headdim, seq_tile>;
 8      using rope_global = gl<bf16, 1, 1, -1, headdim/2>;
 9      struct globals {
10        seq_global o, x;
11        rope_global sin, cos;
12        int batches; // how many batches per block, for sizing grid
13      };
14      struct input_block     { seq_tile x[warps]; };
15      struct output_block    { seq_tile o[warps]; };
16      struct producer_state { int active_warps; };
17      struct consumer_state { rt_fl<16, headdim/2> sin, cos; }; // long-resident tiles
18   };
19   template<int _headdim> struct rotary_template {
20      static constexpr int headdim=_headdim, NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS=8, NUM_BLOCKS=1,
             ,→ OUTPUT_PIPE_STAGES=3, INPUT_PIPE_STAGES=3;
21      using layout = rotary_layout<headdim, NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS>;
22      __device__ static inline void common_setup(common_setup_args<layout> args) {
23        if(args.task_iter == 0) {
24          args.num_iters = min(args.globals.batches, (int)(args.globals.x.batch-blockIdx.y*args.
                 ,→ globals.batches)) * args.globals.x.depth; // batches*heads handled by block
25        }
26        else args.num_iters = -1;
27      }
28      struct producer {
29        __device__ static void setup(producer_setup_args<layout> args) {
30          warpgroup::producer_registers();
31          args.state.active_warps = min((int)NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS,
32                                         (int)(args.globals.x.rows/16 - blockIdx.x*
                                                ,→ NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS));
33        }
34        __device__ static void load(producer_load_args<layout> args) {
35          if(warpgroup::warpid() == args.iter%4) {
36              kittens::coord idx = { blockIdx.y*args.globals.batches+args.iter/args.globals.x.
                     ,→ depth,
37                                      args.iter%args.globals.x.depth,
38                                      blockIdx.x*NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS,
39                                      0 };
40              tma::expect_bytes(args.inputs_arrived, sizeof(layout::seq_tile)*args.state.
                     ,→ active_warps);
41              for(int i = 0; i < args.state.active_warps; i++) {
42                  tma::load_async(args.input.x[i], args.globals.x, {idx.b,idx.d,idx.r+i,idx.c},
                         ,→ args.inputs_arrived);
43              }
44              if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.inputs_arrived, 3);
45              __syncwarp();
46          }
47        }
48        __device__ static void store(producer_store_args<layout> args) {
49          if(warpgroup::warpid() == args.iter%4) {
50              kittens::coord idx = { blockIdx.y*args.globals.batches+args.iter/args.globals.x.
                     ,→ depth,
51                                      args.iter%args.globals.x.depth,
52                                      blockIdx.x*NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS,
53                                      0 };
54              for(int i = 0; i < args.state.active_warps; i++) {
55                  tma::store_async(args.globals.o, args.output.o[i], {idx.b,idx.d,idx.r+i,idx.c});
56              }
57              tma::store_async_read_wait();
58              if(laneid() == 0) arrive(args.outputs_finished, 4);
59              __syncwarp();
60          }
61        }
62      };
63      struct consumer {
64        __device__ static void setup(consumer_setup_args<layout> args) {
65          warpgroup::consumer_registers<NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS/4>();
66          kittens::coord idx = { blockIdx.x*NUM_CONSUMER_WARPS + warpid(), 0 };
67          load(args.state.sin, args.globals.sin, idx); // could be better coalesced but doing just
                 ,→ once


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     L IBRARY IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
This section provides additional implementation details for T HUNDER K ITTENS.

D.1    T ILE DATA STRUCTURES

The core primitive in T HUNDER K ITTENS is the tile data structure as introduced in section 3.1. Tiles
exist at the shared memory and register memory levels of the GPU hierarchy, and are created with
multiples of 16 × 16 in dimension.

Precision T HUNDER K ITTENS is extensible across data types: FP32, FP16, BF16, and FP8. De-
signing a unified tile data structure that seamlessly supports different data types is challenging for
two reasons:
1. Each data type requires using different memory layouts both at the shared and register memory
   levels, in order to use specialized hardware instructions like tensor cores. 3
2. Each data type uses a different amount of space, meaning that the 16 × 16 tile that the user sees
   could contain a fixed number of bits, fixed number of elements, or some other option. Ideally, we
   can store elements in fully packed formats (e.g., bf16 2 for bf16, e4m3 8x4 for e4m3 FP8).
We let the users think in terms of the number of elements per tile. When the user defines a 16 × 32
tile for instance, we store this as 16 × 8 packed elements of e4m3 8x4 or 16 × 16 packed elements
of bf16 2 in registers. In the library, we define and operate an underlying tile width for the tiles to
hide this complexity from the user. Taking care of differences across data types at tile data structure
level, we can then use the exact same library functions (e.g., mma, exp, cumsum) across tiles of
different data types, preserving the simplicity of the library.

Padding Some AI workloads require shapes that are not multiples of 16. T HUNDER K ITTENS
provides mechanisms to support these workloads, too, without compromising performance on
hardware-friendly workloads.
1. Loads & Stores. T HUNDER K ITTENS loads and stores take an optional template arguments for
   whether to assume tensors are multiples of 16. If not, each load or store is preceded by a check to
   ensure that it is in-bounds. Out-of-bound loads are filled with zeros; out-of-bound stores are not
   performed. For safety, these checks are enabled by default; however, they are not free, and they
   can also be disabled by setting the appropriate template flag. This abides by TK’s philosophy
   of “extensible, but with good defaults.” For TMA loads and stores, we use the built-in hardware
   padding features (that is, out-of-bounds accesses are automatically filled in with zeros).
2. Fills & Masks. In addition to preventing illegal memory accesses, one often needs to alter data
   within a tile to prevent accidental computations. T HUNDER K ITTENS provides functionality for
   this, too, in the form of six functions: top fill, bottom fill, left fill, right fill, triu, and tril, which
   respectively fill the top, bottom, left, right, upper triangle, or lower triangle of tiles. In our
   experience, these functions have proven sufficient for all kernels considered.

D.2 S HARED MEMORY LAYOUTS
To illustrate some of the choices available in shared memory layouts, this appendix outlines six
different shared memory layouts for GPU tiles: a naive row-major layout, a padded layout, a simple
swizzled layout, and three more specialized swizzled layouts. We are particularly interested in which
memory banks (numbered from 00 to 31) store each element of the tile; for each layout, we color
and label the element of the tile accordingly. We illustrate all layouts using a 32 × 64 16-bit tile.
D.3    NAIVE LAYOUT

A row-major layout, illustrated in figure 19, is among the simplest layouts. It has the benefit of
accurately reflecting tensor layouts in HBM. Furthermore, for access patterns that access row-wise,
it has no bank conflicts. But when loading or storing tensor core register layouts, it suffers 8-way
bank conflicts, and is thus extremely slow.
  3
    https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/
#asynchronous-warpgroup-level-matrix-instructions


                                                      29
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Figure 19: Row-major shared memory layout.


1   bf16* naive_layout(bf16 *data, int r, int c) {
2       return &data[r * columns + c];
3   }


    D.3.1    PADDED LAYOUT


                                   Figure 20: Padded shared memory layout.


    A common solution to these bank conflicts is to “pad” each row by one memory bank, thereby in-
    troducing an offset to shift consecutive elements of a column into different memory banks. This
    eliminates bank conflicts, but creates misaligned addresses which interferes with fast instructions
    that require aligned addresses. For example, it wouldn’t be possible to use TMA to store the sec-
    ond row of this layout due to it only having a 16-byte alignment, whereas TMA requires 128-byte
    alignments.


                                                     30
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   bf16* padded_layout(bf16 *data, int r, int c) {
2       return &data[r * (columns+1) + c];
3   }


    D.3.2    NAIVE S WIZZLED L AYOUT


                               Figure 21: Naive swizzled shared memory layout.


    A third option is to “swizzle” the memory, in which progressive rows are reshuffled to alter their
    banking. This layout accomplishes this by xor’ing the index with the row, which reduces bank
    conflicts. However, this layout lacks hardware support for HGMMA and UTMA instructions, which are
    particularly important on H100 GPUs for achieving high performance. Additionally, the granularity
    of the swizzling must be large enough to totally prevent bank conflicts when loading into registers.
    We illustrate a simple, naive swizzling pattern here, which used to be recommended for preventing
    bank conflicts before the advent of tensor cores:



1   bf16* row_swizzled_layout(bf16 *data, int r, int c) {
2       uint64_t addr = (uint64_t)&data[r * columns + c];
3       return (bf16*)(addr ˆ (r << 2));
4   }


                                                            31
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    D.3.3    32 BYTE SWIZZLING


                              Figure 22: 32 byte swizzled shared memory layout.


    32 byte swizzling is the first of a family of layouts (of which we will examine three), where instead
    of swizzling the index with the row, the memory address is instead swizzled directly with itself. This
    layout is defined by the following C code:


1   bf16* swizzled_layout_32B(bf16 *data, int r, int c) {
2       uint64_t addr = (uint64_t)&data[r * columns + c];
3       return (bf16*)(addr ˆ (((addr % (32*8)) >> 7) << 4));
4   }


    This layout here suffers from 4-way bank conflicts, but is valid for all tiles whose width is a multiple
    of 16. However, importantly, it has (as do its siblings below) hardware support from both HGMMA
    and UTMA instructions.


                                                         32
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    D.3.4    64 BYTE SWIZZLING


                              Figure 23: 64 byte swizzled shared memory layout.

    64 byte swizzling is a layout similar to 32 byte swizzling with a more aggressive pattern:
1   bf16* swizzled_layout_64B(bf16 *data, int r, int c) {
2       uint64_t addr = (uint64_t)&data[r * columns + c];
3       return (bf16*)(addr ˆ (((addr % (64*8)) >> 7) << 4));
4   }


    64 byte swizzling suffers from just 2-way bank conflicts, but is only valid for tiles whose width is a
    multiple of 32 (for half-precision types, or 16 for full-precision).

    D.3.5    128 BYTE SWIZZLING .


                             Figure 24: 128 byte swizzled shared memory layout.

    128 byte swizzling is a further extension of its kin:


                                                         33
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   bf16* swizzled_layout_128B(bf16 *data, int r, int c) {
2       uint64_t addr = (uint64_t)&data[r * columns + c];
3       return (bf16*)(addr ˆ (((addr % (128*8)) >> 7) << 4));
4   }



    Finally, 128 byte swizzling has no bank conflicts, but is only valid for half-precision tiles whose
    width is a multiple of 64.

    D.3.6    T HUNDER K ITTENS APPROACH
    After substantial evaluation of these layouts, we concluded that the three final layouts were the three
    most important, because HGMMA and UTMA instructions are critical to high performance, and further-
    more that they are good enough to yield high performance across many kernels. Correspondingly,
    depending on the width of the tile at compile time we select the highest level of swizzling possible
    to minimize bank conflicts.


                                                         34
