Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R ETHINKING A RTISTIC C OPYRIGHT I NFRINGEMENTS
IN THE E RA OF T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATIVE M ODELS

 Mazda Moayeri1 , Sriram Balasubramanian1 , Samyadeep Basu1 ,

 Priyatham Kattakinda1 , Atoosa Chegini1 , Robert Brauneis2 , Soheil Feizi1
 1
   University of Maryland, 2 George Washington University



                                                  A BSTRACT
             The advent of text-to-image generative models has led artists to worry that their
             individual styles may be copied, creating a pressing need to reconsider the lack
             of protection for artistic styles under copyright law. This requires answering chal-
             lenging questions, like what defines style and what constitutes style infringment.
             In this work, we build on prior legal scholarship to develop an automatic and
             interpretable framework to quantitatively assess style infringement. Our methods
             hinge on a simple logical argument: if an artist’s works can consistently be
             recognized as their own, then they have a unique style. Based on this argument, we
             introduce ArtSavant, a practical (i.e., efficient and easy to understand) tool to
             (i) determine the unique style of an artist by comparing it to a reference corpus of
             works from hundreds of artists, and (ii) recognize if the identified style reappears in
             generated images. We then apply ArtSavant in an empirical study to quantify
             the prevalence of artistic style copying across 3 popular text-to-image generative
             models, finding that under simple prompting, 20% of 372 prolific artists studied
             appear to have their styles be at risk of copying by today’s generative models. Our
             findings show that prior legal arguments can be operationalized in quantitative ways,
             towards more nuanced examination of the issue of artistic style infringements.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Currently, US copyright law offers no protection for artistic styles, likely due to challenges in
defining style infringement and a prior lack of necessity. However, with highly capable text-to-image
generative models transforming the art landscape, there have been increasingly more calls to
reconsider this lack of protection. Namely, many fear that models like Stable Diffusion, Imagen,
Mid-Journey, and DeepFloyd (Rombach et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; DeepFloyd, 2023; Podell
et al., 2024) may make replication of an artist’s unique style as simple as providing an adequate
prompt, potentially inundating the market with imitations that devalue the original artist’s work
and threaten their livelihood. This matter has gained widespread attention, as it is fundamentally
interdisciplinary (engaging legal, artistic, and technical communities), and has serious material and
human consequences. In fact, multiple legal cases regarding artistic copyright are ongoing (Brittain,
2024; Poritz, 2024), and Adobe (2023) has already called for new provisions in copyright law to
protect artistic style. Thus, with generative AI creating a pressing need to answer previously unsettled
questions, it is now critical for us to rethink artistic copyright.
We begin by surveying existing copyright law around art, finding that it has historically relied heavily
on qualitative judgments, such as the ‘substantial similarity test’ (Goldstein, 2014). The subjective
nature of existing law has led to judgments that vary from case-to-case (e.g. on if characters are
protected (DCC, 2015; MGM, 1995; Kli, 2014) or not (Sony, 1998)), which will prove problematic
when dealing with AI-powered mimicry at unprecedented scale. An automatic quantitative approach
could help make judgments quicker and more consistent. However, any technical solution must
also be easy to understand and based in legal literature, as the audience whose decisions we intend
to assist1 is largely non-technical (e.g. judges, juries, and artists). Thus, we set out to develop an
intuitive, automatic, and legally-grounded manner to quantitatively argue artistic style infringement.
    1
        We absolutely do not wish to replace humans in this nuanced decision making, but instead to help them.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  ArtSavant Report for Canaletto
               You have a unique and recognizable style!
               We can identify your style (over the style of 372 other artists) in 88.37% of your works. This
               puts you in the top 83.6% percentile of artists in recognizability.

               Your style is detected in works generated by Stable Diffusion.
               When prompting a gen AI model to copy you, the resultant images exhibit your style more
               than 372 other artists 70.34% of the time.

               We ﬁnd stylistic elements unique to you that reappear in generated images.
               We identify some tag signatures (set of stylistic elements that frequently co-occur only in your
               work) that also appear in generated images. Here’s an example; click to see more.


Figure 1: Our primary contribution is an interpretable and quantitative framework, rooted in legal
scholarship, for arguing style infringement from the perspective of classification. Given artworks by
Canaletto, our tool, ArtSavant, automatically identifies a unique style and recognizes said style
in generated art, summarizing its findings in an easy to understand yet quantitative report.


Our work is structured around key questions we identify that, when answered, can form the basis of
an argument for artistic style infringement. Namely, given an artist, i. do they have a unique style?
If so, ii. to what degree does it appear in generated art? And lastly, iii. in what precise way (with
respect to specific artistic elements present in both the original and generated art) is the style copied?
Inspired by legal arguments presented by Sobel (2024) and O’Connor (2022), we first frame artistic
style as characterized by a set of elements that co-occur frequently across an artist’s body of work,
where each element may not be protectable on its own, but together, they could represent an unique
stylistic signature.
To prove the uniqueness of an artistic style, we propose a simple logical argument, which serves as our
core ideological contribution. Namely, if an artist’s works are consistently recognized as their own,
that artist must have some unique style, with which their work can consistently be classified back to
them (instead of hundreds of other potential creators). Therefore, the task of showing the existence and
uniqueness of artistic styles can be studied from the lens of classification – something deep networks
are particularly adept at doing. To perform this classification, we curate a reference dataset of artworks
from 372 artists, and implement two classification methods, taking holistic and analytic approaches.
Current copyright law dictates that similarity between artworks must be evaluated in analytic and holis-
tic terms (Tuf, 2003; Goldstein, 2014) (see § 2). For example, we could analyze Vincent Van Gogh’s
style as comprised of expressive wavy lines, bright unblended coloring, post-impressionism, choppy
textured brushwork, etc, or we could make an intuitive, holistic judgement: e.g. in Figure 3, we can
tell the look and feel of the generated images capture Van Gogh’s style, even without articulating the
shared stylistic elements. In order to make these notions more concrete and quantitative, we develop
two complementary methods corresponding to holistic and analytic ways of evaluating style similarity.
The first method – DeepMatch – is simply a neural network classifier, with which we show that for
89.2% of artists, their held-out works can consistently (i.e. over half the time) be mapped back to
them (over 371 other artists). This represent a significant empirical finding, as it quantitatively shows
that unique artistic styles exist for an overwhelming majority of artists we study – a necessary
precondition for adding legal protections for artistic style. DeepMatch can be thought of as capturing
neural signatures for each artist. Namely, the classification head vector consists of a combination
of neural features that encode that artist’s style. As these are not interpretable, we complement the
holistic DeepMatch with TagMatch, a novel, inherently interpretable, attributable, analytic approach.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: We define artistic style as a set of elements (or signature) that appear frequently over a body
of work, and reduce the problem of style copy detection to classification of sets of images to artists.
(left) We offer proof-of-concept via two ways to recognize artistic styles over image set, including a
novel inherently interpretable and attributable tag-based method. (right) In an empirical study of 372
prolific artists, we find generative models potentially copy artistic styles for 20.2% of these artists.


TagMatch maps a collection of works to an artist by first assigning diverse stylistic tags in a zero-shot
manner to each work, and then efficiently searching over the space of tag compositions to surface
unique tag signatures. We show empirically that searching over tag compositions is critical, as no tag
on its own is unique to an artist – recall this idea was described by legal scholars Sobel (2024) and
O’Connor (2022); in our work, we make this quantitative. Further, importantly, TagMatch allows
for articulating the specific combination of elements that uniquely appear in artist’s works and
in (infringing) generated work. Such interpretable output can be particularly useful for the legal
settings where arguments around artistic copying ultimately are to be made.
We package these methods in ArtSavant, a tool that for any artist can produce a report like Figure
1 in minutes. ArtSavant shows our logical framework to argue style infringement is practically
feasible, automatically generating a quantitative assessment of style copying in a way that can
be understood by the broad set of relevant stakeholders. Finally, we use ArtSavant to provide
a quantitative snapshot of the prevalence of style copying with today’s generative models under
simple prompting. After generating images in the style of artists from our dataset with 3 popular
text-to-image models and using ArtSavant to assess copying, we find 20% of the artists we study
to be at risk, suggesting style copying may indeed by possible with today’s generative AI.
In summary, we make the following contributions:

       • We develop an automatic, interpretable, and legally-grounded manner to quantitatively
         argue artistic style infringement, leveraging a simple classification argument.
       • We introduce ArtSavant, a practical tool to quantify and communicate style copying
         for any artist, consisting of a reference dataset of artworks from 372 prolific artists, and
         two complementary methods, including a novel, highly interpretable and attributable one.
         Notably, our two methods directly relate to the principles of “analytic” and “holistic” style
         similarity used in the substantial similarity test in existing copyright law.
       • With ArtSavant, we perform a large-scale empirical study to measure style copying
         across 3 popular text-to-image generative models, finding that generated images (using
         simple prompting) from 20% of the artists examined appear to be at risk of style copying.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Overview of copyright legal literature: Currently, there is an ongoing debate within legal scholar-
ship2 regarding whether artistic style can and should be protected under copyright law. Some (Bracha,
2023) conclude, from a traditional interpretation of copyright law, that style is wholly outside the
purview of copyright law as copyright is only concerned with protection against copying individual
artworks. However, many courts have recognized protection for characters that are developed over
    2
      We encourage readers to review Appendix B for a detailed but brief history of copyright law, so to understand
the broader context for our work and the legal challenges / ambiguities surrounding it.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


multiple works, from Sherlock Holmes (Kli, 2014) to James Bond (MGM, 1995) and the Batmobile
(DCC, 2015). Other scholars (O’Connor, 2022; Sobel, 2024) have argued that artistic style, separate
from any particular artwork, constitutes a distinct intellectual contribution which has commercial and
aesthetic value. In particular, Sobel (2024) suggests that style can be defined as “a holistic attribute of
a work, or a group of works, that comprises a constellation of expressive choices. These expressive
choices might be unprotectable individually, but in combination, they may constitute protectable
expression.” Additionally, Sobel emphasizes the challenge courts face when applying the substantial
similarity test to art – they “must simultaneously dissect images into their constituent elements — a
task judges claim they are unable to do— while also assessing works’ aesthetic appeal holistically
and intuitively”. If indeed style may come under copyright protection in the future, a substantial
similarity test for art style would be even more challenging to implement and apply than one for
individual artworks. In our work, we aim to develop a tool which can help courts determine the extent
of style similarity from the lens of the substantial similarity test applied to artistic style. Critically,
we do not seek to replace human decision makers with an automated analog, but instead to leverage
our tool to provide quantitative evidence to assist humans in making nuanced qualitative judgments.
Current technical solutions: The rapid advance of image generative models has made the possibility
of mimicking artists’ personal styles a topic of discussion in the literature (Ren et al., 2024). Some
works describe ways to either detect direct image copying in generated images, or to foil any future
copying attempts by imperceptibly altering the artists’ works to prevent effective training by the
generative models. These include techniques like adding imperceptible watermarks to copyrighted
artworks (Wang et al., 2024; Cui et al., 2023; 2024), and crafting “un-learnable” examples on which
models struggle to learn the style-relevant information (Shan et al., 2023; Xue et al., 2024; Zhao et al.,
2023). Others have suggested methods to mitigate this issue from the model owner’s perspective -
to either de-duplicate the dataset before training (Carlini et al., 2023; Somepalli et al., 2022; 2023),
or to remove concepts from the model after training (“unlearning”) (Kumari et al., 2023; Gandikota
et al., 2023; Basu et al., 2023). Methods like (Carlini et al., 2023; Somepalli et al., 2022; 2023) are
also more focused on analyzing direct image copying from the training data, and thus may not be
applicable to preventing style copying.
Shortcomings of current methods from a legal perspective: None of these works tackle the
problem of detecting potentially copied art styles in generated art, especially in a manner which may
be relevant to legal standards of copyright infringement. According to current US legal standards
(CRS, 2023), an artwork has to meet the “substantial similarity” test for it to be infringing on copyright.
This similarity has to be established on analytic and holistic terms (Tuf, 2003; Goldstein, 2014).
Analytic here refers to explaining an artwork by breaking it down into its constituents using a concrete
and objective technical vocabulary, while holistic refers to the overall “look and feel” of the artwork.
So to be relevant to the legal community (who ultimately decides on alleged cases of style copying),
we design our tool to reflect this dichotomy in its working, while also emphasizing ease of use and
interpretability, to make our tool practically useful for a concerned artist hoping to protect themselves.
These priorities manifest in our reformulation of detecting style copying as classification in §4. But
first, we discuss limitations in applying the typical copy detection approach to artistic styles.

3    M OTIVATION : I MAGE - WISE SIMILARITY MAY BE LIMITED FOR S TYLE
     C OPYING

A prevailing approach to investigating copying involves representing images in a deep embedding
space via models like SSCD (Pizzi et al., 2022) or DINO (Caron et al., 2021a), and computing
image-to-image similarities across generated and real images. Such an approach has been employed
by Somepalli et al. (2022; 2023); Carlini et al. (2023) to show that generative models can (though
rarely do) create exact replicas of training images. Inspired by these results and the consequent
concerns from artists, we first explore if generative models can recreate famous artworks, e.g., by
Vincent Van Gogh. Specifically, we generate images by prompting “{artwork title} by Vincent
Van Gogh” for 1500 Van Gogh works, and compute the DINO similarity between pairs of a real
and corresponding generated image. Figure 3 visualizes the distribution of similarities, as well
as examples at each similarity level. We find that the vast majority of similarities are lower than
0.75, which amounts to pairs that are far from duplicates. However, even when the generated image
differs significantly from the source real image, certain stylistic elements associated with Van Gogh
seem to appear consistently in the generated works. Thus, while instance-wise copying of artwork


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Example generations from Stable Diffusion 2 when prompted to produce specific paintings
by Vincent Van Gogh, along with the histogram of similarities between the generated image and
corresponding real image. Even for a famous artist like Van Gogh, generative models rarely produce
near-exact duplicates. However, Van Gogh’s style appears consistently, even when similarity is low.


appears rare for even the ultra famous Van Gogh, style copying may require going beyond
image-to-image comparisons, as artists may still have their personal styles, developed over a long
career/many artworks and at significant personal cost, infringed upon in ways that searching for exact
replicas would miss. A recent work finetunes embeddings so that cosine similarity better proxies
style similarity (Somepalli et al., 2024), though even in this case, the utility of such a tool in court is
limited by its lack of interpretability. We provide a deeper comparison to this work in Appendix D.1.

4       R EFORMULATING A RTISTIC S TYLE C OPYING AS C LASSIFICATION OVER
        I MAGE S ETS
Having established that style is comprised over a body of work (instead of a single image) and that
copy detection must be interpretable to hold weight in court, we now present an alternate framework
for arguing style infringement, with the following intuition: if an artist’s work can consistently
be distinguished from that of other artists, then there must exist something unique that is present
across that artist’s portfolio. Thus, we can use classification over image sets (i.e. bodies of work) to
demonstrate a unique style exists given an artist. Then, style infringement can be argued by showing
the copied artist can again be predicted (over many others) given a set of generated works. We now
detail DeepMatch and TagMatch, two complementary methods (w.r.t. accuracy and interpretability)
that classify artistic styles over image sets, in holistic and analytic manners respectively.
A necessary preliminary: WikiArt Dataset. To distinguish one artist’s style from that of others, we
need a corpus of artistic styles (i.e. portfolios from many artists) to compare against. To this end, we
curate a dataset D consisting of artworks from WikiArt 3 (like others (Tan et al., 2017; Karayev et al.,
2014)) to serve as (i) a reference set of artistic styles, (ii) a validation set of real art to show (most)
artists have unique styles and our methods can recognize them on held-out sets of their works, and (iii)
a test-bed to explore if text-to-image models replicate the styles of the artists in our dataset in their gen-
erated images. We include ∼91k artworks from 372 artists A spanning diverse eras and art movements,
including any artist with at least 100 works on WikiArt. Each work is labeled with its genre (e.g., land-
scape) and style (e.g., Impressionism), though we primarily use the artist and title labels. We provide
an easy-to-execute script to enable others to scrape newer versions of this dataset if desired. We now
detail DeepMatch and TagMatch, which each compare a test set of images to our reference corpus.
    3
        https://www.wikiart.org/; note that we only include Public domain or fair use images.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   D EEP M ATCH : B LACK -B OX D ETECTOR

DeepMatch consists of a light-weight artist classifier4 (on images) and a majority voting aggregation
scheme to obatin one prediction for a set of images. Majority voting requires that at least half the
images in a test set D̂ are predicted to an artist a for DeepMatch to predict a, allowing for abstention in
case no specific style is recognized with sufficient confidence. For our classifier, we train a two layer
                                                          MLP on top of embeddings from a frozen CLIP
                                                          ViT-B\16 vision encoder (Radford et al., 2021),
                                                          using a train split containing 80% of our dataset.
                                                          We employ weighted sampling to account for
                                                          class imbalance. Since we utilize frozen embed-
                                                          dings, training takes only a few minutes on one
                                                          RTX2080 GPU. Thus, a new artist could easily
                                                          retrain a detector to include their works (and
                                                          thus encode their artistic style).
                                                        Validation of the Detector. We apply Deep-
                                                        Match on the held-out test split of our dataset
                                                        and observe that the image-wise classifier at-
                                                        tains 72.8% accuracy per image over 372 artists.
                                                        When aggregating image-wise predictions via
                                                        majority vote, 89.3% of artists are matched, val-
                                                        idating our method, and offering strong evi-
                                                        dence towards the existence of unique artistic
                                                        styles. Specifically, neural classifiers capture
                                                        unique and frequently co-occurring character-
                                                        istics of the artists in their embedding space,
Figure 4: DeepMatch on held-out real art: 89.3% which can be thought of as ‘holistic’ neural sig-
of artists can be recognized. The remaining 10.7% natures. Figure 4 shows the distributions of
of artists have very similar styles to other artists: image-wise accuracies per artist, shading cor-
e.g., Palma Il Giovane’s work differs marginally rectly matched artists (green). We also present
from other Italian renaissance painters.                an image from one of the few artists who’s style
                                                        is not matched by DeepMatch, along with an
                                                        image from a similar artist. Notice that the style
of two artists can be extremely similar (see Appendix C.1), making the existence of unique artistic
styles for the vast majority of artists considered (by way of neural signatures) a non-trivial observation.
This empirical finding also has legal significance, as it is necessary for an artist to demonstrate
that they have a unique style before they could allege that their style is being infringed upon.

4.2   I NTERPRETABLE A RTISTIC S IGNATURES

Now we provide an analytic complement to DeepMatch’s holistic approach. Namely, we seek to
articulate the elements that comprise an artist’s unique style. We do so by tagging images with
descriptors (called atomic tags) drawn from a vocabulary of stylistic elements. Then, we compose
tags efficiently to go from atomic tags that are common across artists to longer tag compositions
that are unique to each artist (i.e. tag signatures). We detail these steps now, before explaining how
tag signatures can be used to classify an image set to an artist in the following section.
Zero-shot Art Tagging. We utilize the zero-shot open-vocabulary recognition abilities of CLIP to
tag images with descriptors of stylistic elements. First, we construct a concept vocabulary V with
help from LLMs. Namely, we prompt Vicuna-13b and ChatGPT to generate a dictionary of concepts
along various aspects of art. We manually consolidate and amend the concept dictionary, resulting in
a vocabulary of 260 concepts over 16 aspects (see Appendix F.1).
To assign concepts to images, we a design a novel zero-shot scheme that consists of selective
multilabel classification per-aspect. Namely, for an image, we compute CLIP similarities to all
concepts, and normalize similarities within each aspect. Then, we only assign a concept its normalized
   4
     Others have trained art classifiers (Karayev et al., 2014; Johnson et al., 2008; van Noord et al., 2015), but
they do not operationalize them for style infringement.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Example atomic tags assigned via our proposed CLIP-based zero-shot method. We perform
selective multilabel classification along various aspects of art (e.g. medium, colors, shapes, etc), so
that atomic tags span diverse categories. Details in section 4.2.


similarity (i.e. z-score) exceeds a threshold of 1.75. This means that a concept is only assigned for
an aspect if the image is substantially more similar to this concept than other concepts describing
the same aspect. Classifying per-aspect allows for a diversity of descriptors to emerge, while global
thresholding results in a biased tag description, as concepts for certain aspects (e.g. subject matter)
consistently have higher CLIP similarity than those for more nuanced aspects (e.g. brushwork). We
call the assigned concepts atomic tags; figure 5 shows atomic tags assigned for a few examples.
Validation of Quality of Tags Using Human-Study. We validate the effectiveness of our tagging via
a human-study involving MTurk workers. In particular, given an image of an artwork and an assigned
atomic tag vpredict from the vocabulary V – MTurk workers are asked “Does the term vpredict match
(i.e. the concept vpredict present) the artwork below? ”. The workers are then asked to select between
{Yes, No, Unsure}. We collect responses for 1000 images with 3 annotators each. We find that in
only 17% cases, a majority of workers disagree with the provided tag, suggesting our tagging results
in a low false positive rate. We also observe all three annotators agree in only 51% of cases, reflecting
that describing artistic style can be subjective. While our tagging is not perfect, it is a deterministic
and automatic method of articulating artistic style elements, and it will improve as underlying VLMs
improve too. See Appendix F.6 for more details and discussion on the human study.
Tag Composition for Artists. Using the atomic tags in the artwork specific vocabulary V, we now
present an iterative algorithm to obtain a set of tag signatures Sa for each artist a ∈ A, which consist
of multiple atomic tags that frequently co-occur in an artist’s works. In particular, our algorithm
efficiently searches the space of tag compositions to go from atomic tags to composition of tags which
become more unique as the length of the tag composition grows. For e.g., while 40% of the artists may
use simple colors, only 15% may use both simple colors and impressionism style in the same works.

To efficiently search the space of tag compositions
per artist a ∈ A, we first assign a set of tags to
each of their images x ∈ Da via the zero-shot se-
lective multi-label classification method described
above. For each image x, let tag(x) denote the set
of predicted atomic tags. To get atomic tags for an
artist, we aggregate all atomic tags over images,
and keep only the tags occurring in at least 3 works.
We denote this aggregate set of atomic tags as the
“Common Atomic Tags Per Artist” and denote it
as Ca . Then, we iterate through all the images
x ∈ Da for a given artist a, to find the intersection
I(x) = tag(x) ∩ Ca . We then compute a powerset Figure 6: Composing atomic tags results in more
P(I(x)) of the tags occurring in the intersection unique tags, towards artistic tag signatures.
I(x) and increment the count of each occurrence
of the tag composition from the powerset in Sa .
Note that the size of I(x) is much smaller than that of Ca , and thus, iterating through P(I(x)) for
each image x is much, much faster than iterating through P(Ca ). Finally, we again filter the tag


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


compositions in Sa , only including those that occur in at least 3 works. We provide the details of this
tag composition algorithm in 1 and Appendix F.3.
Can Unique Artistic Signatures be Articulated? Applying tag composition on the WikiArt dataset,
we observe that when the length of a tag (i.e. number of atomic tags that all frequently co-occur) grows,
the number of artists that the tag (composition) is common for decreases (fig. 6). Eventually, our tag
composition algorithm identifies unique tag signatures such that only one artist frequently produces
art containing all atomic tags in the composition. This echoes the previous finding that unique styles
exist, with these styles now articulated, towards an interpretable argument of style copying.


4.3    TAG M ATCH : I NTERPRETABLE AND ATTRIBUTABLE S TYLE D ETECTION

In 4.1, we outlined a holistic approach to accurately detect artistic styles. While DeepMatch obtains
high accuracy (recognizing styles for 89.3% of artists), the neural signatures it relies upon lack
interpretability. For a copyright detection tool to be useful in practice (e.g., to be used as assistive
technologies), providing explanations of the classification decisions can tremendously benefit the
end-user. To this end, we leverage our efficient tag composition algorithm as defined in 4.2 to develop
TagMatch - an interpretable classification and attribution method which can effectively classify a set of
artworks to an artist, as well provide reasoning behind the classification and example images from both
sets that present the matched tag signature. TagMatch follows the intuition of matching a test portfolio
to a reference artist who’s portfolio shares the most unique tag signatures. Given a set of N test images
T = {xi }N  i=1 , we first obtain a number of tag compositions for them using our iterative algorithm
in 4.2. These tag compositions are then compared with the tag compositions of the artists in the
reference corpus in order of uniqueness (i.e. we first consider tag signatures present in the test portfolio
that occur for the fewest number of reference artists). We can then rank reference artists by how
unique the shared tags are with the test portfolio. Detailed steps of the algorithm is in Appendix F.3.
Notably, TagMatch is fast, taking only about a minute, after caching embeddings of all images.
Validation of TagMatch. We again utilize the test split of our WikiArt Dataset to validate the
proposed style detection method. TagMatch predicts the correct artist with top-1 accuracy of 61.6%,
with top-5 and top-10 accuracies rising to 82.5% and 88.4% respectively. While less accurate than
DeepMatch, the tag signatures provided by TagMatch allow for analytic arguments to be made
regarding style copying, as the exact tag signatures used in matching can be inspected. Moreover,
the subset of images in both the test portfolio and matched reference portfolio can be easily retrieved,
offering direct attribution of the method; examples can be seen in the next section, where we match
generated images to our reference artists. Overall, we hope TagMatch and DeepMatch can serve
as automatic and objective tools to navigate the subtle problem of identifying artistic styles, towards
detecting style copying and helping artists argue their case (i.e. in a court of law) in such instances.


5     A R T S A V A N T : A P RACTICAL T OOL FOR C ONCERNED A RTISTS

We package DeepMatch and TagMatch into ArtSavant, a practical tool designed with a concerned
artist in mind. Given a set of works by the concerned artist, ArtSavant would create an easy-to-
understand report characterizing the degree to which generative models copy the styles of the artist.
As shown in Figure 7, the artist can present a set of generated images, or we can generate them by
prompting text-to-image models with prompts of the form “{title of work} by {name of artist}”. The
provided works are then combined with our existing art repository and split into train/test sets. Using
the train split, we (a) train a classifier over the 372 + 1 artists, and (b) tag all images, compose tags
within artists, and store extracted tag compositions per artist, resulting in neural and tag signatures.
With these, we can apply DeepMatch and TagMatch respectively. Applying DeepMatch to the held-out
art provides a measure of recognizability, establishing that the artist has an identifiable style to begin
with. Then, running DeepMatch on generated images provides a quantitative manner to understand
if (and to what degree) the artist’s style appears consistently in generated works. Finally, running
TagMatch on the generated images helps articulate the particular style signatures that are copied,
enabling an analytic way to argue infringement, while also surfacing stylistically similar examples.
Figure 1 shows an example report outputted by ArtSavant when presented with art from an artist
named Canaletto, who we observed was at risk of style infringement. We design the report to be easy


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: ArtSavant flow. We design our tool with a concerned artist in mind, who wishes to
quickly investigate the degree to which they may be at risk of style copying by generative models.


to understand, quantitative, and legally-grounded. Moreover, the report can be generated very quickly:
as all steps operate on embeddings from a frozen CLIP encoder, the process takes about 1-2 minutes.

5.1   A NALYSIS WITH A R T S A V A N T : Q UANTIFYING S TYLE C OPYING OF 372 P ROLIFIC
      A RTISTS

While enough anecdotal instances of style
mimicry have been observed to raise concern
(Shan et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2024), the preva-
lence and nature of such instances remains nebu-
lous. To shed quantitative insight on style copy-
ing, we now leverage ArtSavanton the 372
artists from our WikiArt dataset, generating im-
ages with three popular text-to-image models:
(i) Stable-Diffusion-v1.4; (ii) Stable-Diffusion-
v2.0; and (iii) OpenJourney from PromptHero.
Following figure 7, we employ a simple prompt-
ing strategy of augmenting painting titles with
the name of the artist; we explore alternate
prompts in E.
We first apply DeepMatch to see what fraction
of artists’ styles can be recognized consistently
                                                    Figure 8: DeepMatch on generated art. In red: the
over generated images. Namely, each generated
                                                    fraction of artists with their styles recognized in at
image is classified to one of 372 artists, and per
                                                    least half of their respective generated images.
artist, predictions are aggregated via majority
voting. Figure 8 shows the ‘accuracy’ on
generated images per artist, where accuracy is now interpreted as the rate which images generated
to copy an artist are classified as that artist. In red, the fraction of artists who see accuracies of
at least 50% (i.e. so that the generated image set is classified to the original artist) are denoted per
model, which we call the match rate. We observe an average match rate of 20.2%, indicating that for
the vast majority of artists in our study, simple prompting of generative models does not reproduce
their styles in a way recognizable to DeepMatch, which has an 89% match rate on real art. For all
three models, over half the artists see accuracies below 20%, with 26% of artists seeing an average
accuracy below 5% for generated images. On the other hand, a handful of artists’ styles are matched
with high confidence: 16 artists see average accuracies over 75%. These include ultra famous artists
like Van Gogh, Claude Monet, Renoir, which we’d expect generative models to do well in emulating.
However, a few relatively lesser known artists are also present, like Jacek Yerka, who are still alive,
and thus could be negatively affected by generative models reproducing their styles.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Examples of applying TagMatch to generated images. TagMatch is inherently interpretable
with respect to tags, as each inference comes with the exact set of tags that are (i) shared between the
sets of test art and art from the predicted artist, and (ii) used to predict the artist.


In Appendix H, we design a small scale human evaluation to validate the outputs of our automated
approach. We observe that generated art can fail to meet the threshold of style copying in two ways:
either the generated art does not match the artist’s style, or the style of the generated art is no more
similar to the artist than to that of a highly similar artist. This underscores that style similarity alone
does not constitute infringement, which instead requires replication of unique style signatures.
With TagMatch, in addition to predicting an artistic style, we can also articulate the specific tag
signature shared between the test set of images and the reference set of images for the predicted
style. Thus, we can inspect the shared signature, as well as instances from both sets where the
signature is present, providing direct evidence of the potential style infringement a broader audience
to independently verify. Inspecting some examples in figure 9 (more in fig. 16), we observe that while
pixel level differences are common across retrieved image subsets, stylistic elements are consistent in
both sets with the labeled tags, echoing our motivating claim that style copying goes beyond image
or pixel-wise similarity. Lastly, TagMatch also allows for understanding image distributions from the
perspective of interpretable tags. We explore this direction in appendix F.2, finding differences in the
uniqueness of the tags present in generated art vs real art.

6    C ONCLUSION
In our paper, we rethink the problem of copyright infringement in the context of artistic styles, which
currently have no legal protection. So that our analysis is valuable to the relevant stakeholders, we
base our method in legal precedent and take steps to ensure the interpretability of our approach. Then,
we study the scientific basis for three questions: i. Do unique artistic styles exist? ii. Can unique
styles be articulated interpretably in a quantitatively-grounded manner? iii. Do these unique styles
re-appear in generated art? We answer these questions empirically, using a simple logical argument
at the heart of our methods: if an artist’s works are consistently recognized as their own, the artist
has a unique style. Having reformulating the task to a classification problem over image sets, we
develop ArtSavant – a novel tool to extract and detect artistic style signatures in a manner that
is quantitative, intepretable, and rooted in legal principles. Crucially, we develop ArtSavant not
to replace human decision makers, but instead to aide them in navigating the nuance associated
with style copying. We find evidence of the existence of artistic styles, and in an empirical study,
quantify the degree to which styles are potentially infringed, validating our framework. We hope our
contributions help bridge the gap between legal and technical communities, towards quantitatively
examining the nuanced issue of artistic style infringements.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This project was supported in part by a grant from an NSF CAREER AWARD 1942230, ONR
YIP award N00014-22-1-2271, ARO’s Early Career Program Award 310902-00001, Army Grant
No. W911NF2120076, the NSF award CCF2212458, NSF Award No. 2229885 (NSF Institute
for Trustworthy AI in Law and Society, TRAILS), a MURI grant 14262683, an award from meta
314593-00001 and an award from Capital One.

R EFERENCES
The statute of anne, 8 anne, c. 19, 1710. URL https://www.copyrighthistory.org/
  cam/tools/request/showRecord.php?id=record_uk_1710. April 10, 1710.

Copyright act of 1790, 1st congress, 2nd session, chapter xv, 1790. URL https:
  //www.copyrighthistory.org/cam/tools/request/showRecord.php?
  id=record_us_1790. Stat. 124-126, May 31, 1790.

Copyright act of 1870, act of july 8, 1870, chapter 230, 1870. URL https:
  //www.copyrighthistory.org/cam/tools/request/showRecord.php?
  id=record_us_1870. 16 Stat. 198, July 8, 1870.

Metro-goldwyn-mayer v. american honda motor co., 1995. URL https://law.justia.com/
 cases/federal/district-courts/FSupp/900/1287/2262232/.

Tufenkian import / export ventures inc. v. einstein moomjy inc., 2003. URL https://caselaw.
  findlaw.com/us-2nd-circuit/1455682.html.

Klinger v. conan doyle estate, ltd., 2014. URL https://caselaw.findlaw.com/court/
  us-7th-circuit/1674598.html.

Dc comics v. towle, 2015. URL https://casetext.com/case/comics-v-towle-2.

Generative artificial intelligence and copyright law, Sep 2023. URL https://crsreports.
  congress.gov/product/pdf/LSB/LSB10922.

Adobe.       Fair act to protect artists in age of ai,     September 12
  2023.          URL      https://blog.adobe.com/en/publish/2023/09/12/
  fair-act-to-protect-artists-in-age-of-ai#:~:text=The%20right%
  20requires%20intent%20to,independent%20creation%20is%20a%
  20defense. Accessed: 2024-05-22.

Samyadeep Basu, Nanxuan Zhao, Vlad Morariu, Soheil Feizi, and Varun Manjunatha. Localizing
  and editing knowledge in text-to-image generative models, 2023.

Arne Birkenstock. Beltracchi - die kunst der fälschung, 2014. Motion Picture.

Oren Bracha. The work of copyright in the age of machine production. U of Texas Law, Le-
  gal Studies Research Paper, 2023. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4581738 or
  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4581738.

Robert Brauneis. Understanding copyright’s first encounter with the fine arts: A look at the legislative
  history of the copyright act of 1870. Case Western Reserve Law Review, 71(1), 2020.

Blake Brittain.        Music labels’ ai lawsuits create new copyright puzzle for
  us courts.        Reuters, 2024.      URL https://www.reuters.com/legal/
  music-labels-ai-lawsuits-create-new-copyright-puzzle-us-courts-2024-08-03/.
  Accessed: 2024-9-26.

Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramèr,
  Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models,
  2023.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. CoRR, abs/2104.14294,
 2021a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14294.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021b.
Stephen Casper, Zifan Guo, Shreya Mogulothu, Zachary Marinov, Chinmay Deshpande, Rui-Jie Yew,
  Zheng Dai, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Measuring the success of diffusion models at imitating
  human artists, 2023.
Joe Coscarelli. An a.i. hit of fake ‘drake’ and ‘the weeknd’ rattles the music world. New York
  Times, April 2023. URL https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/19/arts/music/
  ai-drake-the-weeknd-fake.html.
Yingqian Cui, Jie Ren, Han Xu, Pengfei He, Hui Liu, Lichao Sun, Yue Xing, and Jiliang Tang.
  Diffusionshield: A watermark for copyright protection against generative diffusion models, 2023.
Yingqian Cui, Jie Ren, Yuping Lin, Han Xu, Pengfei He, Yue Xing, Wenqi Fan, Hui Liu, and Jiliang
  Tang. FT-SHIELD: A watermark against unauthorized fine-tuning in text-to-image diffusion
  models, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OQccFglTb5.
DeepFloyd. Deepfloyd, Apr 2023. URL https://github.com/deep-floyd/IF.
Rohit Gandikota, Hadas Orgad, Yonatan Belinkov, Joanna Materzyńska, and David Bau. Unified
  concept editing in diffusion models, 2023.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional
  neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 2414–2423, 2016.
Giacomo.      Generative ai,  art authentication and forgery,   September
  2023.          URL     https://www.hephaestusanalytical.com/blog/
  generative-ai-art-authentication-and-forgery. Hephaestus Analytical.
Paul Goldstein. Goldstein on Copyright, 3rd edition. Wolters Kluwer Legal & Regulatory U.S., 2014.
US Government. 7 u.s.c. § 114(b). United States Code, Title 7, Section 114(b).
US Government. Act of august 24, 1912, chapter 356, 1912. URL https://www.loc.gov/
 law/help/statutes-at-large/62nd-congress/session-2/c62s2ch356.
 pdf. 37 Stat. 488, Public Law 303.
US Government.  The sound recording act of 1971, public law 92-140, section
 3, 1971.  URL https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-85/pdf/
 STATUTE-85-Pg391.pdf. 85 Stat. 391.
Shaun Greenhalgh. A Forger’s Tale: Confessions of the Bolton Forger. The History Press, 2015.
Xinyu Huang, Yi-Jie Huang, Youcai Zhang, Weiwei Tian, Rui Feng, Yuejie Zhang, Yanchun Xie,
  Yaqian Li, and Lei Zhang. Open-set image tagging with multi-grained text supervision. arXiv
  e-prints, pp. arXiv–2310, 2023.
C. Richard Johnson, Ella Hendriks, Igor J. Berezhnoy, Eugene Brevdo, Shannon M. Hughes, Ingrid
  Daubechies, Jia Li, Eric Postma, and James Z. Wang. Image processing for artist identification.
  IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 25(4):37–48, 2008. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2008.923513.
Sergey Karayev, Aaron Hertzmann, Matthew Trentacoste, Helen Han, Holger Winnemoeller, Aseem
  Agarwala, and Trevor Darrell. Recognizing image style. In Proceedings of the British Machine
  Vision Conference 2014, BMVC 2014. British Machine Vision Association, 2014. doi: 10.5244/c.
  28.122. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.5244/C.28.122.
Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Sheng-Yu Wang, Eli Shechtman, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Ablating concepts in text-to-image diffusion models, 2023.
Joseph Loewenstein. The Author’s Due: Printing and the Prehistory of Copyright. University of
  Chicago Press, 2010.
Jonathan Lopez. The Man Who Made Vermeers: Unvarnishing the Legend of Master Forger Han van
  Meegeren. St. Martin’s Press, 2008.
Mazda Moayeri, Keivan Rezaei, Maziar Sanjabi, and Soheil Feizi. Text-to-concept (and back) via
 cross-model alignment, 2023.
Seán M. O’Connor. Ai replication of musical styles points the way to an exclusive rights
  regime. In Ryan Abbott (ed.), Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and Artificial
  Intelligence. Edward Elgar, 2022. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4066915 or
  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4066915.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mahmoud Assran, Nicolas
 Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael
 Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Hervé Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut,
 Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision,
 2024.
Ed Pizzi, Sreya Dutta Roy, Sugosh Nagavara Ravindra, Priya Goyal, and Matthijs Douze. A self-
  supervised descriptor for image copy detection, 2022.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=di52zR8xgf.
Isaiah Poritz.       Artist advances ’compressed copies’ theory in stability ai suit.
   Bloomberg Law, 2024.      URL https://news.bloomberglaw.com/litigation/
   artist-advance-compressed-copies-theory-in-stability-ai-suit.
   Accessed: 2024-9-26.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
Jie Ren, Han Xu, Pengfei He, Yingqian Cui, Shenglai Zeng, Jiankun Zhang, Hongzhi Wen, Jiayuan
   Ding, Hui Liu, Yi Chang, and Jiliang Tang. Copyright protection in generative ai: A technical
   perspective, 2024.
Keivan Rezaei, Mehrdad Saberi, Mazda Moayeri, and Soheil Feizi. Prime: Prioritizing interpretability
  in failure mode extraction, 2023.
A. J. K. Robinson. The evolution of copyright, 1476-1776. Cambrian Law Review, 22:55, 1991.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim
  Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image
  diffusion models with deep language understanding, 2022.
Shawn Shan, Jenna Cryan, Emily Wenger, Haitao Zheng, Rana Hanocka, and Ben Y. Zhao. Glaze:
  Protecting artists from style mimicry by text-to-image models, 2023.
Benjamin Sobel. Elements of style: Copyright, similarity, and generative ai. Harvard Journal of Law
  & Technology, Forthcoming Vol. 38, Cornell Legal Studies Research Paper Forthcoming, 2024.
  Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4832872 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4832872.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models, 2022.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein.
  Understanding and mitigating copying in diffusion models. In A. Oh, T. Neumann,
 A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 47783–47803. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/9521b6e7f33e039e7d92e23f5e37bbf4-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Gowthami Somepalli, Anubhav Gupta, Kamal Gupta, Shramay Palta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, Abhinav Shrivastava, and Tom Goldstein. Measuring style similarity in diffusion models.
  In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Milan, Italy, 2024.
  Springer.
Sony. Danjaq llc v. sony corp., 1998. Relating to the rights to James Bond films based on *Thunder-
  ball*.
Wei Ren Tan, Chee Seng Chan, Hernán E. Aguirre, and Kiyoshi Tanaka. Artgan: Artwork synthesis
 with conditional categorial gans. CoRR, abs/1702.03410, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
 abs/1702.03410.
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer v. American Honda Motor Co. 900 f. supp. 1287, 1995. U.S. District Court
 for the Central District of California.
DC Comics v. Towle. 802 f.3d 1012, 2015. U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Nanne van Noord, Ella Hendriks, and Eric O. Postma. Toward discovery of the artist’s style: Learning
  to recognize artists by their artworks. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 32:46–54, 2015. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15774940.
Zhenting Wang, Chen Chen, Lingjuan Lyu, Dimitris N. Metaxas, and Shiqing Ma. DIAGNOSIS:
  Detecting unauthorized data usages in text-to-image diffusion models. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=f8S3aLm0Vp.
Haotian Xue, Chumeng Liang, Xiaoyu Wu, and Yongxin Chen. Toward effective protection against
  diffusion based mimicry through score distillation, 2024.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Maggie Wang, and James Zou. Post-hoc concept bottleneck models, 2023.
Zhengyue Zhao, Jinhao Duan, Kaidi Xu, Chenan Wang, Rui Zhangp Zidong Dup Qi Guo, and Xing
  Hu. Can protective perturbation safeguard personal data from being exploited by stable diffusion?,
  2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    L IMITATIONS

Our work tackles a novel problem of artistic style infringements. Style, however, is qualitative. We
merely put forward one definition for artistic style, along with two implementations for demonstrating
the existence of a style given example works from an artist and recognizing the identified style in other
works. Importantly, we argue that an artist’s style is unique if we can consistently distinguish their
work from that of other artists. However, we can only proxy the entire space of artists. We construct a
dataset consisting of works from 372 artists spanning diverse schools of art and time periods in attempt
to represent the space of existing artists, though of course we will always fall short in capturing all
kinds of art. We provide tools to allow for this dataset to grow with time, and we caution that if only
one artist for some broader artistic style is not present in our reference set, the uniqueness of that
artist’s style may be overestimated, and as such, generated images may be matched to this artist with
an overestimated confidence. However, if only one out of 372 artists exhibits some style, than one
could argue that that alone reflects a notable uniqueness of that artist. To employ a stricter criterion
for alleging style copying, we’d recommend augmenting the reference set to include more artists with
very similar styles to the artist in question. Nonetheless, we believe our reference dataset representing
a large swath of existing art, to where analysis based on this reference set is still informative.
We also note that our atomic tagging leverages an existing foundation model (CLIP) with no additional
training. While we verify the precision of our tags, CLIP is known to have issues with complex
concepts. Further, we do not claim our tags achieve perfect recall (most image taggers do not). We
advise users to interpret the assignment of a tag to indicate a strong presence of that concept, relative
to similar concepts (i.e. from the same aspect of artistic style). While our tagger is not perfect, it is
objective and automatic, enabling interpretable style articulation and detection. Also, we note that
the field of image tagging in general has seen rapid improvement in the past year Huang et al. (2023),
and an improved tagger could easily be swapped into our pipeline.
Lastly, we only analyze generated images using off-the-shelf text-to-image models. It is possible that
particularly determined and AI-adept style thiefs fine-tune a model to more closely replicate specific
artistic styles. This is a much more threatening scenario, though requires greater effort and ability by
the style thief. We elect to demonstrate the feasability of our approach in the more broadly accessible
setting of using models off-the-shelf, and note that our method can flexibly accept generated images
produced in a different way (or perhaps discovered on the internet); notice generated images are an
optional input in figure 7. We look forward to explorations of more threatening scenarios in future
work, and hope both our formulation and methods for measuring style copying prove to be of use.


B    A B RIEF H ISTORY OF C OPYRIGHT L AW: S ITUATING OUR WORK

Throughout its history, copyright law has been centrally concerned with and affected by the replace-
ment of slow, expensive, inexact human copying with comparatively fast, cheap, and exact machine
copying. The very origin of copyright law is tied to the replacement of hand copying of manuscripts
by scribes to machine duplication with printing presses. As the use of presses grew, publishers
and authors became aware that printing enabled wider distribution of books. At the same time,
however, they became aware that inexpensive unauthorized copying of those books would threaten
the compensation available to an author for their initial investment in writing a book (Robinson, 1991;
Loewenstein, 2010). The first copyright laws – the Statute of Anne in England in 1710 (sta, 1710),
and the Copyright Act of 1790 (cop, 1790) in the United States – grew directly out of those concerns.
As machine copying has spread to other types of creative works, copyright law has adapted by
including those works as copyrightable subject matter. In the mid-nineteenth century, chromolithog-
raphy enabled dramatically better and less expensive copying of paintings. Congress responded in
1870 by extending copyright protection to paintings (cop, 1870; Brauneis, 2020). In the twentieth
century, the development of audio and visual recording technologies presented new opportunities but
also new threats to performers – musicians, actors, dancers, and other performing artists. Because
recorded performances could in many cases be an adequate substitute for live performances, new
markets opened, but both new and old markets would be threatened if recordings could be made and
distributed without authorization. Congress responded by extending federal copyright protection to
motion pictures in 1912 (Government, 1912), and to sound recordings in 1971 (Government, 1971).
In the case of sound recordings, Congress also distinguished between human and machine copying.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Federal copyright law permits human copying of the sounds in a sound recording, through human
imitation of those sounds that are independently recorded, while it prohibits direct electronic or
mechanical machine copying of a sound recording (Government). That is another layer of recognition
of the particular threat to authors posed by inexpensive, exact machine copying.
Generative AI is the newest technology for making creative works. Current generative AI tools are
not designed to enable copying of specified preexisting works. However, for the first time, they may
replace expensive human imitation of individual artistic styles with inexpensive machine mimicking
of those styles. There have always been talented human artists who, with enough time for study and
painstaking manual imitation, can produce believable forgeries – works that are not copies of any
previously known works of well-known artists, but that convincingly apply the style of those artists to
a different subject matter. In the twentieth century, artists such as Han van Meegeren (Lopez, 2008),
Wolfgang and Helene Beltracchi (Birkenstock, 2014), and Shaun Greenhalgh (Greenhalgh, 2015)
became infamous for their ability to create convincing forgeries of works of other artists. However,
those forgers took weeks or months to create their forgeries, and they were motivated to make that
considerable investment of time only because they believed they could sell the results for tens or
hundreds of thousands of dollars.
By contrast, generative AI tools can create images, and texts and music in minutes or hours, at total
machine and labor costs of only tens or hundreds of dollars, rather than tens or hundreds of thousands
of dollars. Generative AI training algorithms are capable of modeling extraordinarily complicated
patterns in a set of training works, and thus there is some reason to think that they could model the
style of an author as manifested in a set of that author’s works. There is also anecdotal evidence that
generative AI tools can in fact produce new works that audiences mistakenly believe were created by
particular human artists, authors, or performers (Giacomo, 2023; Coscarelli, 2023). Those capabilities
raise the issue of whether copyright law should step in and protect copying of individual artistic styles,
as it has stepped in many times in the past to protect copying of different types of individual works.
That could be accomplished through legislation, but also possibly judicially. Because copyright
infringement standards have never been codified, courts have created and modified those standards
themselves. In the case of protection of fictional characters, courts have already gone beyond the
individual work of authorship, and protected structures or entities that are only fully developed in
multiple works (Kli, 2014; v. American Honda Motor Co., 1995; v. Towle, 2015).
Our purpose in this paper is not to take a position on the issue of whether copyright law should be
extended to protect individual artistic styles, or on whether such an extension could be accomplished
through legislation or through judicial decision. Neither is our purpose to automate the analysis of
copyright infringement. Rather, we are interested in investigating whether there is any scientific
support for the idea that there are identifiable individual artistic styles, and that those styles could be
correlated with a group of human-understandable stylistic terms. Anecdotes about a generative AI
tool producing an image or text that some people come to believe was created by a particular human
artist or author are not proof that all or even some artists or authors have stable individual styles that
can be modelled and applied in a wide variety of images, text, or music. However, when we try to
train a model that can correctly identify authors of previously unseen works, we may get closer to
understanding whether and when individual artistic styles exist. If we can link that classification
to a selection of terms describing characteristics of those works, then we can explain to human
beings what the components of such individual artistic styles might be. If some kind of protection
of individual style ever became part of copyright law, judges or juries would still have to decide
whether a particular output of a generative AI tool too closely mimicked the individual style of an
artist. The degree to which an AI model could or could not correctly identify the author of a work,
and the stylistic terms that that model could or could not correlate with that classification, would
simply provide additional information to those human decision-makers.


C    A NUANCE IN ARTISTIC STYLE INFRINGEMENTS : E XISTING A RTISTS CAN
     HAVE VERY SIMILAR STYLES

A crucial step in arguing that an artist’s style has been infringed is to first demonstrate the existence
of the given artist’s unique style. We note that doing so objectively is non-trivial, as a style may not
have a clear definition, and thus, it can be challenging to systematically compare to all other artistic
styles, so to show uniqueness. In our work, we utilized classification, claiming that if an artist’s works


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Examples of artists who’s styles were not recognized by DeepMatch (i.e. less than half of
their held-out works were predicted to the artist). Each panel shows an example work from (left) the
unrecognized artist and (right) the artist that is incorrectly predicted most frequently over works from
the unrecognized artist. We see that artists can use very similar, at times arguably indistinguishable,
styles.


can consistently be mapped (i.e. at least half the time) to that artist (over a large set of other artists),
than that artist must have some underlying unique style (parameterized by a neural signature).
In doing so, we found that 89.3% of artists could be recognized based of a set of (at least 20 of) their
works (held-out in training the classifier). What about the remaining 10.7% of artists? We now take
a closer look at these artists, and also introduce a second, stricter style copying criterion. Namely,
we consider the notion that it may be unfair to claim a generative model is copying the style of an
artist, if another existing artist seems to also be copying that artist. That is, we propose a way to
verify that the generative model not only shows a substantial similarity to the copied artist, but also
an unprecedented similarity.

C.1    A RTISTS WHO ’ S STYLES WERE NOT RECOGNIZED

First, we inspect more examples from artists who were not recognized using our majority voting
threshold in DeepMatch. That is, less than half of their held-out works were predicted to them. Figure
10 shows a number of examples, from which we can make some qualitative observations. First,
the styles of artists who operate in the same broader genre (e.g. portraiture, landscapes, narrative
scenes in renaissance styles, etc) can be extremely similar. We even see an instance where an artist’s
son’s style is indistinguishable from his father’s (Jamie and Andrew Wyeth). Lastly, we note that in
most cases, the artists only marginally fall short of our recognition threshold (i.e. accuracy for their
held-out works is only a bit below 50%). We utilize majority voting because (i) it is intuitive, (ii) it
requires consistent appearance of the neural signature across works, and (iii) it allows for abstention
when no particular style is strongly present. However, the exact threshold of 50% can be altered as
desired. In summary, as in Figure 4, we see artistic styles can be very similar, making the existence
of unique artistic styles for the vast majority of artists a non-trivial observation.
If an artist’s style cannot be recognized over their own held-out works, arguing that a generative model
copies that style is strenuous, as the style itself is ill-defined. Notably, in these cases, the classifier
had an option to predict the correct artist. However, in applying DeepMatch to generated images,
there is no direct option for the classifier to abstain from predicting anyone, under that generated


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: We verify the stricter criterion of unprecedented similarity by holding out the real artist
with highest similarity to a given artist, and checking if the held-out real artist’s works are flagged as
potential style copying by DeepMatch. (left) We observe only three artists where the most similar
held-out artist has their work flagged as a style match, and in all cases, when generated images are
flagged, the match confidence of the generated images exceeds that of the held-out real artist’s works
(i.e., the generated images flagged by our method reflect unprecedented similarity to the given
artist’s style). (right) Inspecting the flagged held-out artists further show that style copying is very
nuanced, as artists take inspiration from one another, and as such, they may already have very similar
styles. While we always observe unprecedented similarity, a potential solution to style copying may
be for generative models to ensure that they do not copy any more than what already exists; that is,
they may exhibit some copying, but no more than for which precedent already exists.


art comes from a “new artist”, which takes inspiration from existing artists. Note that abstention is
still possible (due to the majority voting in DeepMatch), and occurs when a match confidence falls
below 50%. To make comparisons fairer to generative models, we now discuss a stricter criterion of
unprecedented similarity.

C.2   Unprecedented Similarity: D O GENERATIVE MODELS COPY STYLES MORE THAN EXISTING
      ARTISTS ALREADY DO ?

A nuance that requires consideration when studying artistic style copying is that it is possible for
two artists to have very similar styles. Thus, it may be unfair to allege that a generative model is
copying an artist a if there exists another artist b who’s style is just as or in fact even more similar to
artist a. Towards this end, we introduce unprecedented similarity, which requires that the similarity
between works of a generative model A′ and works of the artist inteded to be copied A is higher than
the similarity of any existing artist with A. That is, sim(A, A′ ) ≥ sim(A, B) for works B from all
other existing artists b.
Note that this is a stricter criterion than our previous threshold. In DeepMatch, we required that at
least half of the works in a given set of test images were predicted to a single artist in order for us
to flag the test images as a potential style infringmenet. In other words, that threshold required that
sim(A, A′ ) ≥ 0.5, which in turn implies that sim(A, A′ ) ≥ sim(A′ , B) for all B (with room to
spare; here we use match confidence to denote similarity).
Now, however, instead of just comparing A′ to all B, we must also compare all B to A. Instead of
comparing all other artists, we inspect the most similar artist b∗ to a, identified by taking the artist
b with the highest rate of false positive predictions to artist a. Then, we hold out b, and train a new


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Alternate implementations of DeepMatch, using DINOv2 and CLIP backbones, and
varying the number of hidden layers. We also present performance of zero-shot CLIP. Numbers are
averaged over five trials, except for zero-shot CLIP, which is deterministic.


classifier on the remaining 371 artists. Finally, we check for style matches of for the set of generated
images A′ and the works B ∗ from the most similar artist b∗ .
Figure 11 summarizes our result for OpenJourney (all three models studied show consistent results).
We find that only in three cases do we see a held-out artist’s work flagged as potential style copying.
Notably, in all instances where generated work is flagged as potential style copying, the corresponding
held-out artist’s work is either not flagged or is flagged with lower confidence, indicating that the
instances of style copying of generative models that we observe always also satisfy the criterion of
unprecedented similarity.
Taking a closer look at instances where held-out art is flagged for style copying (or perhaps style
emulation?), we again see just how similar the works of different artists can be. Namely, we see
that some artists works seem to fall into a broader genre of art that many artists utilize (e.g. ukiyo-e
or impressionism). In summary, while generative models can very closely resemble the style of a
given artist, contextualizing copying by generative models with respect to copying (or perhaps, ‘style
emulation’) already done by existing artists is crucial in order to afford the same artistic liberties to
generative models as have been provided to other artists in the past.


D     BASELINES

We now present some alternate implementations to the methods we present, so to serve as base-
lines. We note that a key contribution of our work is reformulating the problem of detecting style
infringements from computing image-wise similarity to performing classification over image sets,
and building a tool around this idea. Thus, it is rather challenging to perform apples-to-apples
comparisons to prior copy detection works, as our methods implement a different task. We include
substantial qualitative discussion comparing our approach to image-similarity techniques (and thus
motivating our framework) in section 3, and we add to that discussion here.
We further stress that there is not a singular numerical objective that we can use as a way to compare
methods. For example, we report the accuracy of matching artists (i.e. aggregating classification
predictions with majority voting), but since it is not necessarily true that all artists are distinguishable,
it would be imprudent to strictly prefer a higher accuracy, as there is no strict groundtruth; that
is, there is no completely definitive way to say if an artist has a unique style or not, due to the
subjective/qualitative nature of style. Nonetheless, for lack of other quantitative metrics, we inspect
accuracy on real and generated images for a few lightweight approaches to artist classifications, and
compare them below.

D.1    D EEP M ATCH

Figure 12 shows the performance of different classifiers, where we vary the frozen backbone and
the number of hidden layers. We find that classifiers trained on CLIP yield higher match-rates
for both real and generated art than classifiers train on DINOv2 Oquab et al. (2024) embeddings.
Interestingly, zero-shot CLIP does poorly on real art, but well on generated art, perhaps because many


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Per-artist accuracy for classifiers using CLIP and DINO backbones (top) or CLIP and
CSD Somepalli et al. (2022) (bottom) are highly correlated. While each classifier may yield different
overall accuracy, the relative notions of (i) how recognizable the artist’s real art is, and (ii) how much
so the artist’s style appears in generated works, appear to be classifier agnostic.


generative models optimize using CLIP-score, which applies the same mechanism as zero-shot CLIP
classification, perhaps explaining the assertion that generative models are highly capable of imitating
humans found in this brief work Casper et al. (2023). The number of hidden layers does not have a
very strong affect on recognizing real art, but it does appear inversely related to the ability of the model
to recognize generated art. It is possible that having two many hidden layers can overfit the model
to the distribution of real images, creating a distribution shift when applied on the generated images.
While exact numbers seem to vary, we note that relative trends (i.e. between artists) appear agostic
to the underlying classifier. Figure 13 shows accuracy per artist for classifiers trained on CLIP vs
DINOv2 embeddings, as well as classifiers trained on CLIP vs. CSD (a style fine-tuned version of
CLIP) embeddings (Somepalli et al., 2022). For both real and generated art, the per-artist accuracies
are strongly correlated, which could motivate using relative metrics in addition to absolute values
dependent on exact accuracy values; note that we include relative numbers in our ArtSavantreport
(see Figure 1; e.g., ‘percentile of recognizability’).
We ultimately choose something in the middle of the road: a 1-hidden layer MLP on CLIP embeddings,
which has the strongest performance recognizing real art, and appears to have some ability to recognize
generated art. We note the majority aggregation that we apply is just one way to summarize the
classification output across an image set. We opt for it because it is intuitive and it provides a natural
avenue for abstention, though this threshold can be modified as desired, and inspecting relative
accuracies could be most informative. We again stress that our current implementation serves as a
proof of concept of our framework, which is our primary contribution.

D.2    TAG M ATCH

We now present baselines for TagMatch. Like above, and indeed more so, accuracy is not exactly an
objective to maximize. In fact, what is most important with TagMatch is interpretability, and ease with
which the output of TagMatch can be used in arguments to a broader, non-technical audience. Thus,
we consider a popular framework from the interpretable classification literature: concept bottleneck
models (CBM) Koh et al. (2020). Namely, we train a linear layer atop concept predictions extracted
from CLIP, so to create a CBM without direct concept supervision, as in Moayeri et al. (2023);
Yuksekgonul et al. (2023).


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               CBM       CBM + sparsity       Ours
                      Accuracy on real art     62.8%          58.7%          61.5%

                                   Table 1: Baselines for TagMatch



As shown in table 1, accuracies are roughly similar. But, the interpretability provided by the methods
are markedly different. CBM involves examining the final linear layer to discern which concepts are
important to which class, which requires users to inspect a coefficient for every concept. Adding
sparsity by way of an ℓ1 penalty can help, but the problem persists. Our version of TagMatch, on
the other hand, affords concise articulations of tag signatures, as well as a number of how many
other artists share a given signature. Perhaps most crucially, our implementation also yields faithful
attribution, which can be critical in gathering evidence to present to a judge or jury.


D.3    E VALUATION ON I MAGE R ETRIEVAL

We now present a comparison between our method, DeepMatch, and baseline methods such as CLIP
zero-shot and CSD (a version of CLIP fine-tuned to better measure style similarity (Somepalli et al.,
2024)). We evaluate all methods on how well they can retrieve images from a fixed reference set of
artworks based on their similarity with a query artwork. We draw the query artworks from the test
split of our dataset, and the fixed reference set is the training split. We count each retrieved artwork
created by the same artist as the query artwork as a true positive, and if created by a different artist as
a false positive. This setup mirrors one potential usage of these tools in the real world, wherein if the
AI-generated artwork contains some distinctive artistic signature belonging to a real artist, we would
expect the tool to retrieve artworks which also contain the same artistic signature. As DeepMatch
is not originally intended for retrieval, we repurpose it’s classifier for retrieval purposes by using
the softmax probabilities it outputs given an image as an encoding of that image (i.e. each image is
represented by a 372-dimensional vector, where the ith element corresponds to the likelihood that the
image is authored by artist i).
In Figure 14, we plot the distribution of AUROCs over the artists in our dataset for the baseline
methods and DeepMatch. We find that CSD (mean AUROC of 0.891) outperforms CLIP (mean
AUROC of 0.861) in this task, which is expected as CSD outputs a more style-centric similarity
measure compared to CLIP. However, CSD is not specifically aware of what makes an artist’s style
distinctive and thus struggles to retrieve the most relevant artworks compared to DeepMatch (mean
AUROC 0.979), which performs the best among the three.
Intuitively, the improved performance of our method can be linked to the original objective of the
three methods considered. Image similarity methods (such as using cosine similarity between CLIP
embeddings as similarity score) are not equipped or intended to measure stylistic similarity, but
rather only a general sense of image similarity. Even methods such as CSD which are specifically
trained using a contrastive loss to be invariant to style preserving transformations are not aware of the
components that constitute a unique artistic style. That is, while CSD is trained to contrast general art
styles (e.g. “impressionism” from “cubism”), it is not trained to contrast between two (potentially
very similar) artists (e.g. “Manet’s impressionism” vs. “Monet’s impressionism”). From a copyright
perspective, we are precisely interested in only those stylistic components that set an artist’s work
apart from their peers - that is, a unique artistic signature. This naturally suggests a framework
which analyzes style from the lens of image classification. Our method, DeepMatch, is trained to
classify artworks and thus upweights stylistic features which are most unique and thus useful for
classification.
We note another factor that may also contribute to our improved performance is that our method is
specifically trained for distinguishing the 372 artists in our datasets, while our baselines are more
general. However, we engineer our method to be very efficient, allowing for new artists to be
introduced as needed, at minimal cost. Again, this was precisely be design, as in practice, we envision
only one or a few new artists would need to be incorporated given a copyright case to be studied.
Overall though, the key distinction between our method and image-similarity based techniques is that
(1) we emphasize capturing features that distinguish between individual styles (as opposed to broader


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Histogram of AUROCs for all artists


                              160
                                                                               CLIP zeroshot
                                                                               DeepMatch
                              140
                                                                               CSD

                              120


                              100

                  Frequency
                              80


                              60


                              40


                              20


                               0
                                    0.6        0.7          0.8   0.9   1

                                                       AUROC


Figure 14: Distribution (over artists) of AUROCs for the task of retrieving art from the same artist as
a query image, using DeepMatch, CSD, and CLIP zero-shot to encode images.


ones), and (2) we account for the fact that style is comprised over a body of work, going beyond
comparing just a pair of images together.

D.4    S TABILITY

We also explore the stability of our method to using different data splits. We perform five different
random train / test splits, and inspect the accuracy of our implementations of DeepMatch and
TagMatch. DeepMatch per-image accuracies are very stable, with a standard deviation of 0.1%.
TagMatch is also stable, though less so, with a standard deviation 1.1%.


E     O N ALTERNATE PROMPTS

We briefly explore using alternate prompts to generate images. Namely, we create 120 prompts of
the form “{an object} in {location} in the style of {artist}” (e.g. “A bottle in forest in the style of
Jeff Koons”, which are by nature no longer artist-specific (like the titles we originally use). Using
DeepMatch, average match rate drops considerably in this less specific case, from 20% to 8%. This
is in line with existing wisdom that prompting can significantly affect the behavior of a model, and
also echoes our overall empirical observation that current style copying does not appear to be very
prevalent. We hope that our framework can be useful in examining which prompts induce greatest
copying going forward, especially as prompt and model sophistication grows.


F     D ETAILS ON TAG M ATCH

We now provide greater details regarding the implementation of TagMatch, a central technical
contribution of our work. TagMatch is a method to classify a set of images to a class; specifically,
we map a set of artworks to one artist, selected over 372 choices. TagMatch is not as accurate as
DeepMatch, as it maps held-out works of each artist in our WikiArt dataset to the correct artist about
61% of the time (compared to 89% top-1 accuracy for DeepMatch). However, top-5 accuracy is
more reasonabe, achieving above 80%. Most notably, TagMatch is inherently interpretable and
attributable. It consists of three steps: (i) assigning atomic tags to images, (ii) efficiently composing
tags to obtain more unique tag signatures, and (iii) matching a test set of images to a reference
artist based on the uniqueness of the tags shared between the test set and works from the predicted
reference artist.


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our method is fast and flexible: after caching image embeddings, the whole thing only takes minutes,
and it is easy to modify the concept vocabulary as desired, as the tagging is done in a zero-shot
manner. Through MTurk studies, we verify that the atomic tags we assign our mostly precise, though
we recognize that these descriptors can be subjective. Thus, while we do not claim perfect tagging,
we stress that our method is easy to understand, and crucially, is deterministic per image. Therefore,
ideally our tagging may be more reliable biased than human judgements, particularly when the
humans involved may be biased (e.g. an artist alleging copying and a lawyer defending a generative
model would have strong and opposing stakes).
Below, we provide details for image tagging (§F.1), artist tagging (§F.2), artistic style inference via
tag matching (§F.3), effect of hyperparameters (§F.4), details on efficiency (§F.5), and a review of
validation (§F.6).

F.1   I MAGE TAGGING

As explained in §4.2, we utilize CLIP to attain a diverse set of atomic tags per image in a zero-shot
manner. Specifically, we first define a vocabulary of descriptors along various aspects of artistic
style. Then, given an image, we do selective multi-label zero-shot classification for each aspect.
Performing zero-shot classification per aspect proves to be critical in order to achieve a diversity of
tags and a similar number of tags per image. We find that some descriptors always lead to higher
CLIP similarities than others. Specifically, descriptors for simple aspects, like colors and shapes,
yield higher similarities than more complex aspects like brushwork and style. Thus, using a global
threshold across descriptors would lead to a less diverse descriptor set. Moreover, we observe
some images have higher similarities across the board than others, which again would lead global
thresholding to result in a disparate number of tags per image. Our per-aspect scheme requires that
the descriptors within each aspect are mostly mutually exclusive; we prioritize this in the construction
of the concept vocabulary, via the prompt we present the LLM assistants and our manual verification.
Namely, we prompt both Vicuna-33b and ChatGPT with “I want to build a vocabulary of tags to be
able to describe art. First, consider different aspects of art, and then for each aspect, list about 20
distinct descriptors that could describe that aspect of art. Please return your answer in the form of a
python dictionary. ”. We then perform a filtering step with a human in the loop, where we manually
remove tags that are difficult to recognize or redundant. After this filtering step, we add in a few new
aspects. First, we incorporate the 20 styles (e.g., “impressionism”) and genres (e.g., “portrait”) that
are most common amongst works in our WikiArt dataset; note that all WikiArt images also contain
metadata for these categories. Finally, we add some easy to understand tags such as color and shape
which can be important characteristics describing a given painting. The concept vocabulary we use is
contains shown below:

       • Style, caption template: {} style. Descriptors:
            – realism, impressionism, romanticism, expressionism, post impressionism, art nouveau
              modern, baroque, symbolism, surrealism, neoclassicism, naïve art primitivism, north-
              ern renaissance, rococo, cubism, ukiyo e, abstract expressionism, mannerism late
              renaissance, high renaissance, magic realism, neo impressionism
       • Genre, caption template: the genre of {}. Descriptors:
            – portrait, landscape, genre painting, religious painting, cityscape, sketch and study,
              illustration, abstract art, figurative, nude painting, design, still life, symbolic painting,
              marina, mythological painting, flower painting, self portrait, animal painting, photo,
              history painting, digital art
       • Colors, caption template: {} colors. Descriptors:
            – pale red, pale blue, pale green, pale brown, pale yellow, pale purple, pale gray, black
              and white, dark red, dark blue, dark green, dark brown, dark yellow, dark purple, dark
              gray
       • Shapes, caption template: {}. Descriptors:
            – circles, squares, straight lines, rectangles, triangles, curves, sharp angles, curved an-
              gles, cubes, spheres, cylinders, diagonal lines, spirals, swirling lines, radial symmetry,
              grid patterns


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • Common Objects, caption template: {}. Descriptors:
           – male figures, female figures, children, farm animals, pet animals, wild animals, geo-
             metric shapes, fruit, vegetables, intsruments, flowers, boats, waves, roads, household
             items, the moon, the sun, saints, angels, demons
       • Backgrounds, caption template: {} in the background. Descriptors:
           – fields, blue sky, night sky, sunset or sunrise, forest, rolling hills, simple colors, beach,
             port, river, starry night, clouds, shadows, living room, bedroom, trees, buildings,
             chapels, heaven, hell, houses, streets
       • Color Palette, caption template: {} color palette. Descriptors:
           – vibrant, muted, monochromatic, complementary, pastel, bright, dull, earthy, bold,
             subdued, rich, simple, complex, varying, minimal, contrasting
       • Medium, caption template: the medium of {}. Descriptors:
           – oil painting, watercolor, acrylic, ink, pencil, charcoal, etching, screen printing, relief,
             intaglio, collage, montage, photography, sculpture, ceramics, glass
       • Cultural Influence, caption template: {} influences. Descriptors:
           – Indigenous, European, American, East Asian, Indian, Middle Eastern, Hispanic, Aztec,
             Contemporary, Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Russian, African, Egyptian, Tahitian, Polyne-
             sian, Dutch
       • Texture, caption template: {} texture. Descriptors:
           – rough, smooth, bumpy, glossy, matte, roughened, polished, textured, smoothed, brush-
             stroked, layered, scraped, glazed, streaked, blended, uneven, smudged
       • Other Elements, caption template: {}. Descriptors:
           – stippled brushwork, chiaroscuro lighting, pointillist brushwork, multimedia compo-
             sition, impasto technique, repetitive, pop culture references, written words, chinese
             characters, japanese characters

Now, we detail the implementation of our modified zero-shot classification. Recall that in zero-shot
classification, one computes a text embedding per class, which amounts to the classification head,
and computes an image embedding for the test input, so that the prediction is the class who’s text
embedding has the highest cosine similarity to the test image embedding. In computing the text
embeddings, we take each descriptor (e.g. Dutch) and place it an aspect-specific caption template (e.g.
Dutch → Dutch influences), and then average embedddings over multiple prompts (e.g. “artwork
containing Dutch influences”, “a piece of art with Dutch influences”, etc), as done in Radford et al.
(2021). We modify standard zero-shot classification to allow for the fact that more than one descriptor
(or perhaps none) from a given aspect may be present. Namely, instead of assigning the most similar
descriptor per-aspect, we assign an atomic tag for any descriptor who’s similarity is significantly
higher than other descriptors for that aspect. We achieve this via z-score thresholding: per-aspect, we
convert similarities to z-scores by subtracting away the mean and dividing by the standard deviation,
and then admit atomic tags who’s z-score is at least 1.5.
The template prompts we utilize for embedding each concept caption are as follows:

       • art with
       • a painting with
       • an image of art with
       • artwork containing
       • a piece of art with
       • artwork that has
       • a work of art with
       • famous art that has
       • a cropped image of art with


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Iterative Algorithm to Obtain Tag Composition Per Artist a ∈ A
Require: Da (Images for artist a), Ca (Common tags for artist a)
  Sa = {}                                            \triangleright  Stores the tag compositions with their associated counts
  for x ∈ Da do
      I(x) = tag(x) ∩ Ca                                               \triangleright  Compute the intersection with common atomic tags
      P(I(x)) = ComputePowerSet(I(x))                                                                                 \triangleright  Compute power-set of the tags
      UpdateCount(Sa , P(I(x)))                                                              \triangleright  Update the count of each tag composition
  end for
  Filter(Sa )                  \triangleright  Keep tag compositions which occur above a count threshold of 3



F.2      F ROM I MAGE TAGS TO unique A RTIST TAGS

Recall that we define styles not per-image, but over a set of images. Namely, we seek to surface
tags that occur frequently. The best way to do so is to simply count the occurrences of each tag, and
discard the ones that rarely appear. However, each atomic tag is not particularly unique with respect
to artists. We utilized efficient composition of atomic tags to arrive at more unique tag signatures, as
shown in figure 6 and detailed in algorithm 1. Importantly, we utilize a threshold here to differentiate
what a common tag is; we require a tag to appear in at least three works for an artist in order for the
tag to count as a frequently used tag by the artist. We note that tag composition can be done efficiently
because we have a relatively low number of tags per image: on average, there are 6.2 atomic tags
per image. Moreover, because the number of occurrences for a composed tag is bound belo by the
number of occurrences of each atomic tag in the composition, we can ignore all non-frequent atomic
tags. Thus, we can iterate over the powerset of common atomic tags per image without it taking
exorbitantly long. We include one fail safe, which is that in the rare instance where an image has a
very high number of common atomic tags, we truncate the tag list to include only 25 tags. Over the
91k images that we encounter, this happens only once. We highlight that our tag composition takes
inspiration from Rezaei et al. (2023).


F.3      P REDICTING A RTISTIC S TYLES BASED ON M ATCHED TAGS

Once we have converted tags per image to tags per artist, we can then utilize these artist tags to perform
inference over a set of images. Namely, given a test set of images, we extract common tags (including
tag compositions) for the test set and compare them to tags extracted for each artist in our reference
corpus. Then, we predict the reference artist who shares the most unique tags with the test set.
Figure 15 best explains our method, as it shows the documented code. We note that all code
will be released upon acceptance. We’ll now explain it step by step. First, for each artist and
for the test set of images, we find common tags via (i) assigning atomic tags to each image, (ii)
finding the commonly occurring atomic tags, (iii) counting compositions of the commonly occur-
ring atomic tags, and (iv) discarding tags (including compositions) that do not occur frequently
enough. The code shows this done for the test set of images; we perform this per reference artist
when the TagMatcher object (for which tag_match is function) is initialized; notice fields
like self.ref_tags_w_counts_by_artist, which contain useful information about the
reference artists, computed once and re-used for each inference.
Then, we loop through the set of ‘matched’ tags (i.e. those that occur for both the test set of images
and at least one reference artist), starting with the most unique ones. Here, uniqueness refers to the
number of reference artists that frequently use a tag. For each tag, we loop through all artists that
also use that tag. For the first k (denoted by self.matches_per_artist_to_consider in
the code) matched tags per artist, we add a score to a list of scores for the artist, which ultimately
are averaged. The score contains an integer and a decimal component. The integer component is the
number of reference artists that share the matched tag. The decimal component is the absolute value
of the difference in frequency with which the tag appears, over the reference artist’s works and the
test set of images; note that this is always less than one. This way, when comparing two matched
tags, a lower score is assigned to a more unique one, and one there is a tie in uniqueness, we break
the tie based on how similar the frequency of the matched tag is for the test artist and reference artist.


                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Figure 15: Code for predicting artistic styles via matched tags.


Finally, we average the list of scores per artist to get a single score per reference
artist, analogous to a logit. We assign a score of inf for any artist with less than
self.matches_per_artist_to_consider (which we set to 10) matched tags. This hyper-
parameter makes our tag matching less sensitive to individual matched tags, and empirically results in
a substantial improvement in top-1 accuracy on held-out art from WikiArt artists (see next section).

F.4   C HOOSING H YPERPARAMETERS

Overall, there are three hyperparameters to our method: the z-score threshold, the tag count threshold,
and the number of matches to consider per artist. Here is quick refresher on what they each do:

       • The z-score threshold determines how much more similar a descriptor needs to be to an
         image compared to other descriptors for the same aspect in order for the descriptor to be
         assigned as an atomic tag of the image. The value we use is 1.75.
       • The tag count threshold is the minimum number of an artist’s works that a tag needs to be
         present in order for a the tag to be deemed common for the artist. The value we use is 3.
       • The number of matches to consider per artist pertains to how many matched tags are
         considered when computing the final score per artist in tag match. That is, the final score for
         an artist is the average of the top-k most unique tags that the artist shares with the test set of
         images, where k corresponds to this hyperparameter. The value we use is 10.

Now that the role of each hyperparameter is clear, let’s discuss how hyperparameters can be adjusted
towards particular ends, along with the potential consequence of each action:

       • To increase the number of atomic tags, lower the z-score threshold. Risk: atomic tags may be
         less precise, and the method will take longer to run, as there will atomic tags and composed
         tags.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Figure 16: Additional examples of applying TagMatch to generated images.



       • To get more tags per artist, lower the tag count threshold. Risk: some tags will become
         less unique. Other tags will be introduced, and may be very unique, which could skew tag
         matching. Also, the method may take longer to run, as there will be more tags.

       • To make inference less sensitive to a low number of matched tags, increase the number of
         matches to consider per artist. Risk: when you consider more matches, interpretation is a
         little more difficult, as you have more reasons for each inference, and it will take longer to
         view them all.

To choose hyperparameters, we selected a small range of reasonable values and swept each hyperpa-
rameter individually. While a combined search would likely yield better accuracy numbers, we opt
out of hyper-tuning TagMatch for accuracy, as its main objective is to provide and interpretable and
attributable complement to DeepMatch. We find the (relatively strong, considering the high number of
artists considered) accuracy numbers encouraging, but do not find it a priority, as DeepMatch arguably
provides a stronger and easier to understand signal of if style copying is happening. TagMatch, on
the other hand, tells us how and where it is happening (if observed with DeepMatch).


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: Sweep of hyperparameters asssociated with TagMatch. (left) We jointly sweep the z-score
threshold and the tag count threshold. (right) Having fixed the first two parameters, we sweep the
last one: the number of matches considered in inference. See detailed discussion in §F.4.


We also include a hyperparameter sweep, of the z-score threshold and tag count threshold jointly,
and of the number of matches to consider separatedly afterwards. Figure 17 visualizes the results.
Choosing a lower z-score threshold results in higher TagMatch accuracies. However, a lower z-score
threshold would admit a greater number of false positive tags, and also incurs a longer time of
computation, as there are more tags to compose (we empirically observe an increase of about 50%
in run time using our 372 artist reference corpus). Increasing the tag count threshold can reduce
the time of computation and also increase sensitivity to false positive tags (on individual images),
resulting in higher TagMatch accuracies. Interestingly, considering more matches improves accuracy
considerably, but eventually saturates and reduces accuracy. Essentially, by considering more matches
per artist, inference becomes less sensitive to the most unique matched tag between the artist and the
test set. The smoothed predictions are more accurate up to a point (i.e. 10 matches), but then hinder
accuracy. Also, choosing too high a number here can make faithful interpretation more cumbersome,
as there are more matches to inspect afterwards.
We reiterate that the main goal of TagMatch is not to be super accurate, but to complement DeepMatch
with interpretations (via matched tag signatures) and attributions (via works from the test set and
from the reference artist that present the matched tags). We ultimately first choose a high z-score
threshold of 1.75, as a preliminary check revealed this threshold to have considerably higher precision
in its atomic tags (which we validate with a human study), and since it speeds up the analysis. Then,
we choose the best tag count threshold (3) and number of matches to consider (10), in that order. We
hope our discussion of the impact of each hyperparameter can enable practitioners to modify these
choices as they please. Furthermore, as base VLMs and tagging methods improve, our framework
can modularly swap out our zero-shot tagging (and thus also the z-score threshold) for a stronger
method, while retaining the other structure of TagMatch.



F.5   E FFICIENCY OF TAG M ATCH : RUNS IN ROUGHLY 1 MINUTE

TagMatch is surprisingly fast. The longest step by far is computing CLIP embeddings for the reference
artworks. This takes us about 5 minutes using one rtx2080 GPU with four CPU cores to embed the
73k training split images using a CLIP ViT-B\16 model. Importantly, this step is done only once,
and in practice, is done offline. The other steps and approximate time needed for each are as follows:
embedding concepts (5 seconds), extracting common atomic tags and composing them (45 seconds),
reorganizing tags and removing non-common tags (3 seconds). Then, inference for a test set of
100 − 200 works takes about 10 to 15 seconds. Again, we will release all code upon acceptance,
as we truly hope our tool can be of use to artists who are concerned by generative models potential
infringing upon their unique styles.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Figure 18: Instructions showed to MTurk workers to validate atomic tags.


F.6   VALIDATION


Because tag match has multiple steps, we perform multiple validations. First, for image tagging,
we utilize an MTurk study. We collect 3000 separate human judgements on instances of assigned
atomic tags. Namely, we show 1000 randomly selected (tag, image) pairs to three annotators each.
Figure 18 shows an example of the form presented to MTurk workers. MTurkers provide consent
and are awarded $0.15 per task, resulting in an estimated hourly pay of $12 − $18. For each task,
they answer ‘yes’, ‘no’, or ‘unsure’ to the question ‘does the term {atomic tag} match the artwork
below?’ They are also shown example artworks for each term which were manually verified to be
correct. Response rates were as follows: 69.89% yes, 8.99% unsure, 21.12% no. In investigating
inter-annotator agreement, we find that at least 2 annotators agree 92.1% of the time, but all 3 agree
only 51.52% of the time. This reflects the subjectivity associated with assigning artistic tags, and
partially motivates the need for a deterministic automated alternative, in order to objectively tag
images at scale. All three annotators said no only 5.16% of the time, and at least two said no 17.11%
of the time, suggesting that our zero-shot tagging mechanism achieves reasonable precision.
To validate the value of tag composition, we refer to figure 6, which shows how tags become more
unique as they get longer (i.e. consist of more atomic tags). Moreover, our time analyses show that
the added benefit of composing tags to find unique tag signatures does not come at the cost of the
efficiency of our method. Finally, the non-trivial top-1 matching accuracy and strong top-5 matching
accuracy shows that the extracted tag signatures do indeed capture some unique properties of artistic
style. Figure 16 reflects a few more examples of successful inference, interpretation, and attribution
for the task of detecting style copying by generative models.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     Top 1    Top 5     Top 10
         Generated Art          CompVis Stable Diffusion v1.4        10.10    35.49      49.74
                                Stability AI Stable Diffusion v2     12.95    37.82      52.59
                                PromptHero Openjourney                6.99    31.87      45.08
                                Average                              10.02    35.06      49.14
         Real Art (held out)                                         61.56    82.53      88.44

 Table 2: Match rates using TagMatch for three generative models, as well as on real held out art.


      Figure 19: The tags for generated images are less common compared to tags in real art.


G    A S IM 2R EAL G AP IN TAG D ISTRIBUTIONS

An added advantage of ascribing tags to images is that we can better compare image distributions
from an interpretable basis (the tags). We briefly explore this direction now.
First, we provide complete results from applying TagMatch to generated images from each of the
three text-to-image models in our study, presented in table 2. Consistent with our DeepMatch results,
we observe substantially lower matching accuracy for generated images than for real held-out artwork.
While the primary takeaway is that for many artists, generative models struggle to replicate their
styles, we can also hypothesize that generative models may output images that follow a different
distribution than the distribution of real artworks.
Motivated by this hypothesis, we now compare the distribution of real to generated artworks from the
perspective of tags. Because we consider composed tags, the total space of tags is vast and hard to
reason over. However, we can look at properties of each tags. Namely, we can inspect the uniqueness
of tags. That is, for each tag present in generated images, we inspect the number of reference artists
that also present that tag; we do the same for real art as well (subtracting one so to not double count
the artist for which a given a tag is being considered). Figure 19 shows a kernel density estimation
plot of the distributions of tag commonality, where a tag commonality of 5 means that for each tag
assigned to a set of images (either from a real artist or from a generative model emulating an artist),
5 other artists also commonly use that tag. We see tags tend to be rather unique (due to our tag
composition), and notably, tags for generated images are more unique.


H    H UMAN VALIDATION OF S TYLE C OPYING

We design and conduct a human study to assess style copying, toward verifying the outputs of our
system. Given a ‘plaintiff’ artist A, we present a set of artworks generated by Stable Diffusion v1.4 in
the style of the plaintiff A, along with two sets of real artworks: one from the plaintiff A, and another
from a very similar artist B (selected as the artist – aside from A – that DeepMatch predicts to have
created the highest number of the artworks generated to be in the style of A).


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A human then denotes if the set of generated art more closely resembles the style of set from artist A
or artist B, with the choice to abstain if neither set is more similar to the generated art than the other.
Abstention may occur if the generated art is different from both sets or similar to both sets. Each set
contains 16 works. The 16 generated artworks are selected at random from the collection of images
generated in artist A’s style. The 16 images each from artist A and B are drawn to be those that are
most similar (via mean CLIP similarity) to the 16 selected generated images. The two sets of real art
are presented in random order so that the human does not know which belongs to the plaintiff artist.


     (a) Case 1: Generated art from Pierre Auguste Renoir was deemed more similar to art by Renoir than
     art from a similar artist. Here, the generated art seems to replicate aspects of Renoir’s style.


     (b) Case 2: Generated art from Sally Gabori was deemed dissimilar to both real art from Gabori and
     another artist. Here, the generated art does not seem to be aware of Gabori’s style.


     (c) Case 3: Generated art from Theodore Rousseau was deemed similar to both real art from Rousseau
     and from another artist, leading the human annotator to abstain from saying that the generated art
     copies Rousseau in particular. This highlights how style similarity may not constitute infringement.

Figure 20: Samples visualizations from our human evaluation. In the real evaluation, the order of
the Plaintiff and Similar Artist panels is randomized, and the titles of the panels are removed. The
first case demonstrates an instance where the human annotator viewed the generated art as more
stylistically similar to the plaintiff’s art than the most similar other artist, suggesting that Renoir’s
unique style is at risk of copying. The latter two cases show different ways in which the threshold
of style copying may not be met: when the generated art is not similar to the plaintiff, or when the
generated art is not sufficiently uniquely similar to the plaintiff.


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We run this experiment for 40 artists: 20 which are flagged by our method as being at risk of style
copying, and 20 which are not – we call the first group SAFE and the second group COPIED. We
find that the percent of artists where the generated art is marked as more similar to the plaintiff
is 90% for the COPIED group and just 5% for the SAFE group. Notably, the human abstained in
19 of the 20 artists in the SAFE group: for 15 artists, the generated art was dissimilar to both sets
of real art, while for 4 artists, the generated art was equally similar to both sets. The latter type of
abstentions underscores an important point: generated art can be similar to a plaintiff artist without
necessarily meeting a bar for infringement, since infringement would require that a unique style is
copied. This point relates to the discussion of CSD: while an improved style similarity metric can
help surface relevant art, on its own, it does not immediately lead to an understanding of if an artist’s
style is unique, and what elements comprise that style. These questions are critical when it comes to
copyright protection for artistic styles, and we center answering them in our work.
In summary, our human study corroborates the outputs of our method. Artists that are flagged to be at
risk of style copying have generated artwork that is more similar to their work than even art from the
most similar other artist. However, artists who are not flagged by our method have generated artwork
that is either dissimilar to their style, or no more similar to their style than to that of another artist.


I     PATCH M ATCH : G ENERATING A DDITIONAL V ISUAL E VIDENCE OF C OPYING

Detecting artistic style copying in a given art requires analyzing local stylistic elements that manifest
across an artist’s body of work. To address this, we employ a patch-based approach that compares
small image regions between a given art and original artworks, enabling a fine-grained analysis of
stylistic and semantic (e.g. objects) similarities at a local level. We consider three patch matching
methods: CLIP-based, DINO-based, and Gram matrix-based.

Gram Matrix-based Patch Matching Gatys et al. (2016): The Gram matrix is a measure of style
similarity introduced in the context of neural style transfer. It captures the correlations between the
activations of different feature maps in a convolutional neural network, representing the style of an
image. For patch matching, the Gram matrices of patches from the given art and original arts can be
computed and compared using a suitable distance metric (e.g., Frobenius norm). The Gram matrix is
specifically designed to capture stylistic elements, making it well-suited for detecting style copying.
CLIP-based Patch Matching Radford et al. (2021): CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-
training) is a powerful model that can effectively capture the semantic similarity between text and
images. In the context of patch matching, CLIP embeddings can be used to measure the similarity
between a patch from a given art and patches from original artworks. The patches can be encoded
using the CLIP image encoder, and the cosine similarity between their embeddings can be computed
to find the closest matches. CLIP may not be as sensitive to low-level stylistic elements, such as
brushstrokes, textures, and color palettes, however it focuses more on higher-level semantic concepts,
which can be useful to find if the given art pictured the same objects as the selected original patch.
DINO-based Patch Matching Caron et al. (2021b): DINO is a self-supervised vision transformer
that learns robust visual representations by solving a self-distillation task. DINO embeddings can
be used for patch matching by computing the cosine similarity between the embeddings of patches
from the given art and original artworks. We use DINO to capture higher semantical similarities,
and check whether the given art pictured similar subjects of interest and high-level visual features as
selected original artworks.


I.1    E XPERIMENTAL SETTING

For our experiments, we aim to identify the most similar artwork from a pool of 10, 000 original
artworks in the WikiArt dataset given a reference image. The reference image is first resized to a
resolution of 512 ∗ 512 pixels and normalized. From this normalized image, we select a patch size of
128 ∗ 128 pixels. This process is repeated for all original artworks in the dataset, resulting in a total
of 40, 000 patches from original artworks for comparison with the reference patch. We then use three
methods, namely Gram matrix, CLIP, and DINO, to find the most similar patches.


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Referenced patch     Gram matrix patch          CLIP patch         DINO patch


                         Referenced image     Gram matrix image          CLIP image        DINO image


Figure 21: The most similar patches to a referenced patch in an image using Gram-matrix, CLIP, and
DINO.



      Referenced patch       Original patch      Referenced patch        Original patch   Referenced patch   Original patch


      Referenced image       Original image      Referenced image        Original image   Referenced image   Original image


Figure 22: Comparison of patches using the Gram-matrix method, highlighting the closest matches to
three selected artworks by Van Gogh. The selected original arts, all from Van Gogh, closely resemble
the style of the referenced paintings.


Figure 21 showcases the patches that are deemed most similar to the image being referenced. These
matches are determined using Gram-matrix, CLIP, and DINO methods.
We then select an artist and find patches from our original image dataset that closely match this
artist’s style. In Figure 22, we utilize the Gram-matrix method to identify the most similar patches
to three chosen artworks by Van Gogh. Our dataset includes all paintings by Van Gogh as well as
works by nine other artists. Gram-matrix selects original artworks that closely resemble the style
of the reference image, all of which are from Van Gogh. Essentially, this means that Gram-matrix
predominantly selects Van Gogh’s artworks because they are the most stylistically similar to the
referenced paintings compared to the works of the other nine artists.

I.2     D ISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS

Patch matching methods like Gram-matrix, CLIP, and DINO are effective in detecting similarities
between artworks by examining their local stylistic and semantic elements. Gram-matrix focuses
on capturing stylistic correlations, CLIP evaluates semantic similarity, and DINO concentrates on
higher-level features. However, these methods have limitations. They primarily focus on local
aspects of artworks and may overlook broader artistic characteristics such as texture, composition,
and brushwork that are crucial to detect copyright infringements. Moreover, the process of finding
the most similar patches for each given art takes approximately fifteen minutes when considering


                                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


10, 000 original artworks, and if we opt to include more original artworks, the duration of the process
would inevitably increase. Therefore, patch-matching methods are computationally expensive,
which restricts their practical application. Despite these limitations, patch matching is valuable
for identifying instances of direct copying in artworks and they aid in the detection of plagiarized
content.

J   D ETAILS ON W IKI A RT S CRAPING
WikiArt is a free project intended to collect art from various institutions, like museums and universities,
to make them readily accessible to a broader audience. We design a scraper to collect a corpus of
reference artists, with which we can define a test artist’s style in contrast to the other artists, and
to provide a testbed to empirically study copying behavior of generative models. Some important
landing pages to perform scraping are (i) the works by artist page (https://www.wikiart.
org/en/Alphabet/j/text-list; url shows all artists starting with the letter ‘j’, and we
loop through all letters), (ii) the page containing information on allowed usage (https://www.
wikiart.org/en/terms-of-use), (iii) an example artist landing page (https://www.
wikiart.org/en/vincent-van-gogh), and (iv) an example painting landing page (https:
//www.wikiart.org/en/vincent-van-gogh/the-starry-night-1889). As you
can see, many pages have standard formats, making scraping particularly feasible. We will provide
our scraping code, along with all other code, to facilitate easy updating of our dataset as time goes by.
We obtain artworks only from artists with at least 100 works on WikiArt, so to focus on somewhat
famous artists who are arguably more likely to be copied. For every work, we also scrape the licensing
information, and annotation for styles, genres, and title. In total, our dataset has 90,960 artworks over
372 artists. There are 81 styles with at least 100 works, with the most popular styles being realism,
impressionism, romanticism, and expressionism. There were 37 genres with at least 100 works, with
the most popular being portrait, landscape, religious painting, sketch and study, and cityscape. We
note that we only include images who’s license is either public domain or fair use, with the vast
majority of works being public domain. Nonetheless, we strongly advise against using this dataset
for commercial purposes, and especially for the purpose of copying artists.


                                                   34
