Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A P ERCOLATION M ODEL OF E MERGENCE : A NALYZING
T RANSFORMERS T RAINED ON A F ORMAL L ANGUAGE
  Ekdeep Singh Lubana∗1,5 , Kyogo Kawaguchi∗2,3,4 , Robert P. Dick5 , Hidenori Tanaka1,6
 1
   CBS-NTT Program in Physics of Intelligence, Harvard University
 2
   Nonequilibrium Physics of Living Matter RIKEN Hakubi Research Team,
   RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research
 3
   RIKEN Cluster for Pioneering Research
 4
   Institute for Physics of Intelligence, Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo
 5
   EECS Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
 6
   Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA


                                                A BSTRACT

             Increase in data, size, or compute can lead to sudden learning of specific capa-
             bilities by a neural network—a phenomenon often called “emergence”. Beyond
             scientific understanding, establishing the causal factors underlying such emergent
             capabilities is crucial to enable risk regulation frameworks for AI. In this work,
             we seek inspiration from study of emergent properties in other fields and propose
             a phenomenological definition for the concept in the context of neural networks.
             Our definition implicates the acquisition of general regularities underlying the data-
             generating process as a cause of sudden performance growth for specific, narrower
             tasks. We empirically investigate this definition by proposing an experimental
             system grounded in a context-sensitive formal language, and find that Transform-
             ers trained to perform tasks on top of strings from this language indeed exhibit
             emergent capabilities. Specifically, we show that once the language’s underlying
             grammar and context-sensitivity inducing regularities are learned by the model,
             performance on narrower tasks suddenly begins to improve. We then analogize our
             network’s learning dynamics with the process of percolation on a bipartite graph,
             establishing a formal phase transition model that predicts the shift in the point of
             emergence observed in our experiments when intervening on the data regularities.
             Overall, our experimental and theoretical frameworks yield a step towards better
             defining, characterizing, and predicting emergence in neural networks.

1        I NTRODUCTION
Modern neural networks, e.g., large language models (LLMs) (Gemini Team, 2023; OpenAI, 2023;
Anthropic, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023), exhibit a broad spectrum of capabilities, allowing them to
serve as the “foundation” for downstream, application-specific systems (Bommasani et al., 2022;
Ahn et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2024). As these models scale, either via addition of
more data, parameters, or compute, an intriguing behavior is at times observed: until a certain critical
scale is reached, there are capabilities that the model does not exhibit; however, beyond this point,
such capabilities suddenly “emerge” (Wei et al., 2022; Srivastava et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020; Yu
et al., 2022; Steinhardt, 2023; Pan et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023; Kirsch et al., 2022; He et al., 2024;
Elhage et al., 2021; Tigges et al., 2024). More specifically, the performance of the model on a task
or benchmark meant to evaluate said capabilities witnesses substantial growth in performance, even
though the overall training loss undergoes minimal, if any, improvements (Arora & Goyal, 2023;
Du et al., 2024). Empirical evidence in fact suggests that, at times, several capabilities can emerge
simultaneously (Wei et al., 2022; Wei, 2022).
Beyond developing a better scientific understanding of neural networks, understanding emergent
capabilities is crucial to enable risk-centric regulation frameworks for AI, which assume a system’s
capabilities can be preemptively conjectured (NIST, 2023; EU Council, 2024; OSTP, 2023; Kaminski,
2023). To this end, recent work has made attempts at identifying factors that decide whether a
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Code at https://github.com/EkdeepSLubana/ConceptPercolation.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


capability will emerge. For example, Okawa et al. (2023) and Arora & Goyal (2023) implicate the
underlying compositional structure of a capability as the cause for its sudden learning. Hoffmann et al.
(2023) argue capabilities that involve interactions between specialized components within a model
are likely to yield sudden performance improvements once the correct interaction mechanism is
learned; e.g., the interaction between the previous token and copy attention heads to enable in-context
learning (Elhage et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2024; Reddy, 2023). Meanwhile, Schaeffer et al. (2023)
argue emergent abilities are an artifact of poorly defined, discontinuous evaluation metrics, claiming
that models undergo continuous, persistent improvements during training. Recent work has however
demonstrated that even continuous metrics can witness sudden improvements, with such changes
co-occurring with the model’s learning of a new capability (Chen et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024). This
undermines the claim that emergent capabilities are merely an artifact of evaluation protocols.
Taken together, the orthogonal explanations and disparate results above have resulted in emergence
becoming an unclear phenomenon in machine learning. At its core, however, we claim that the
concept has never been defined in prior work (see App. B for a detailed related work). This has
arguably led to distinct mechanisms causing sudden changes in model performance to all be labeled
as “emergence”. What is the phenomenology that this term is meant to capture in the context of neural
networks? Is it merely a sudden increase in performance with scale, or broader than that? Given
a reasonable definition, can we show, even if in a simplified system, that emergent capabilities are
commonplace? Can we use this simplicity to better understand what drives their sudden learning?
                                                             Phase: Solid phase            Liquid phase                   Gas phase
This work. To address the questions above, we pro-          (ρ, Ψ6) =    (1,1) Ψ = 1 6 e i6θ (1,0)                 N         (0,0)
                                                                                                              ρ=
pose a phenomenological definition for emergence                                      Nb ∑
                                                                                  6
                                                                                                 i

                                                                                         i=1
                                                                                                                   V

and try to understand what drives it in a toy task of                        θi


learning formal languages (Chomsky, 1956; Cagnetta
& Wyart, 2024; Liu et al., 2023a; Wen et al., 2023;                                   Ψ6: Bond-orientation              ρ: Density
Liu et al., 2022a; Friedman et al., 2023; Jain et al.,
                                                                                               Temperature
2023; Merrill et al., 2023). Specifically, we argue
three characteristics should be observed to claim a          Phase: Initialization Capability 1 learned Capability 2 learned
capability is emergent (see Def. 1): beyond (i) sud-        (c1, c2) =   (0,0)                       (1,0)                    (1,1)
den performance improvement for a specific task,
we claim emergence is more likely to represent a
meaningful concept if (ii) performance on several                                          c1: Capability 1            c2: Capability 2
tasks improves simultaneously and (iii) there are pre-
                                                                            Data, Model, Optimization Scale
cise regularities underlying the data-generating pro-
cess learned by the model at the point of emergence.      Figure 1: Emergence as phases of learn-
The intuition, borrowed from the study of emergence       ing. Emergence is a well-characterized phe-
in other fields (see Fig. 1), is that if multiple tasks   nomenon in natural sciences (Anderson, 1972;
witness improvement in performance, there is likely       Newman et al., 2001; Newman, 2003) and
some shared structure to them and the model learns        deeply entangled with the notion of phase
this structure at the point of emergence. For exam-       changes, i.e., when change in some control
ple, when in-context learning emerges in LLMs, the        variable (e.g., temperature) yields systematic
model learns that past context helps disambiguate the     changes in a system’s underlying regularities
next token better (Elhage et al., 2021)—a regularity      (e.g., formation of hexagonal configurations
present in natural language. This leads to in-parallel    in a crystal) and simultaneously affects sev-
improvement in several downstream tasks’ perfor-          eral of its properties. We argue for a simi-
mance (Wei et al., 2022; Wei, 2022; Lu et al., 2023);     lar characterization of emergence in machine
thus, in-context learning can be deemed an emergent       learning: identifying systematic changes in
capability under the scope of our definition. In this     a model’s behavior that influence its down-
sense, understanding emergence can be formalized          stream abilities and lead to sudden perfor-
as a study of identifying which data-regularities the     mance improvements. For example, learning
model learns at the point of sudden learning of a set     a language’s syntax will affect all downstream
of capabilities, and understanding why those regular-     capabilities where coherent, grammatically
ities are relevant to said capabilities. Adopting this    correct generations are necessary.
perspective, we make the following contributions.
 • Formal Languages as an Experimental System for Studying Emergence. We define a proba-
   bilistic context-sensitive grammar (PCSG) with type constraints that allow an entity or a subject in
   a sentence (e.g., man) to be seen in the context of only a predefined set of properties (e.g., walk).



                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    We train models to perform minimalistic reasoning tasks over samples of this language and find
    their data scaling curves simultaneously show sudden learning across several metrics.
 • Learning of general data regularities underlies simultaneous jumps in specific metrics. We
   find points of sudden change for metrics evaluating individual tasks correlate with the model
   learning two relevant regularities that underlie our formal language: grammatical rules and type
   constraints. Despite the simplicity of our setup, we claim learning of such data-regularities is what
   leads to sudden growth in the performance of narrower tasks in large-scale models.
 • A percolation model predicts the scaling of when capabilities emerge. We propose a formal
   model grounded in the theory of graph percolation (Cohen et al., 2002) that captures our experimen-
   tal observations, and show that if we can describe the regularities the model is learning at the point
   of emergence, a predictive theory for sudden learning can (at times) be constructed—analogous to
   theories of phase transitions in physics; see Fig. 1.

2    A P HENOMENOLOGICAL D EFINITION OF E MERGENCE

To analyze emergence, we first establish what we mean by the term for the purpose of this work.
Specifically, we define emergence in a phenomenological manner, i.e., by assembling the characteristic
properties associated with scaling curves claimed to depict emergent learning. We emphasize our
definition is merely a definition for emergence, and does not necessarily represent all possible
perspectives (Luccioni & Rogers, 2023).
Definition 1. (Emergence of a capability.) We say a capability C is emergent with scaling along a
relevant axis (e.g., amount of data, compute, parameters) if:
• discontinuous improvement occurs in the performance of a task where C is required;
• multiple tasks simultaneously show discontinuous performance improvement; and
• the model learns regularities underlying the data generating process such that discontinuous
  progress in C’s learning directly correlates with the learning of said regularities.

The definition above assigns a broader meaning to emergence than mere sudden performance im-
provement on a narrow task: it argues there should be precise regularities underlying the data that
are learned by the model, yielding downstream effects on several capabilities and hence sudden im-
provements in performance of several tasks. Note that we intentionally leave the notion of ‘regularity’
informal in the definition. The salient property of a regularity is that if a model learns it, downstream
tasks should become easier to perform. For example, a fine-grained notion of a data regularity can
be learning of context-sensitivity, which can aid in-context learning (Reddy, 2023; Edelman et al.,
2024; Olsson et al., 2022); a more coarse-grained regularity can include the model learning the
syntactical rules of a language that help it with generation of coherent language and hence with any
task where coherence is important (Chen et al., 2024). In this sense, what is emergent is the learning
of a regularity, and what is observed is a change in the model’s capabilities. Hypothesizing what this
regularity is by identifying shared characteristics of a set of tasks that simultaneously show sudden
learning, one can likely develop an evaluation meant to precisely gauge learning of the corresponding
regularity and hence infer at what point an independent training run will show sudden improvements.
We note the intuition for Def. 1 comes from prior work in the fields of complex systems and
physics (Anderson, 1972; Newman et al., 2001; Newman, 2003), from where the term has sought
its inspiration in recent machine learning literature (Steinhardt, 2023; Wei et al., 2022). Therein,
emergence describes the scenario where rapid changes occur in a system’s properties as some control
parameter is varied. A range where the system’s properties change relatively smoothly is called a
phase, and a change of phase with a change in the control variable is called a phase transition. A
crucial step in studying emergence in physics is identifying an order parameter—a measure that
captures the formation of some specific regularity in the system such that the development of this
regularity is what alters the system’s properties and drives a phase transition. For example, in Fig. 1a,
a system of particles transitions through phases (solid, liquid, gas) as the temperature is changed; the
formation of a crystalline structure with the decrease in temperature can be identified by analyzing
the bond-orientation order parameter, while the liquid-to-gas transition can be described by a jump in
particle density. We argue that we must similarly define order parameters for studying emergence in
neural networks as well, i.e., we must develop evaluation measures that are focused towards detecting
the learning of specific data regularities that are generally of use to several downstream capabilities.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          (a)                      (b)                            (c)
                                          Man            tall                        S
                 S → NP VP                              walk
                                     Woman
                   p1                                                    NP                       VP
                                         Lawyer          eat
                NP → Adj N
                   p2
                NP → N
                   p3                    Doctor         jump                             VP              NP
                NP → NP Conj. NP
                   p′1
                                          Table        wooden
                                                                        Adj N     Adj         V        Adj    N
                VP → Adv V                Chair        vintage
                   p′2
                VP → VP Conj. VP          Sofa         antique          Tall man slowly walked     to small library
                   p′3
                VP → VP NP                                              Tall sofa slowly walked    to small library
                                         Kitchen       foldable             Incompatible type!



Figure 2: Grammar and type constraints to define our formal language. (a) We use a PCFG
to define our language’s grammar (shown rules are examples; see App. F.3 for precise details).
The grammar’s terminals are parts-of-speech from English and yield symbolic sentences that can
be populated by tokens from the language’s vocabulary. (b) Akin to natural language, wherein
properties of an entity constrain sentences seen in a dataset corresponding to that entity, we define
constraints (called type constraints) on our language that restrict which tokens can be seen together in
a sentence. These constraints map entities to descriptive or relative properties, hence restricting which
descriptive
  ￼
            adjectives and verbs are valid for an entity. (c) Once a symbolic sentence is sampled from
the grammar, we populate it with tokens from the language while respecting the type constraints.
Training on string from this language in fact shows that the model deems sentences that do not respect
type constraints to be extremely unlikely (see App. F.2).

3    F ORMAL L ANGUAGES AS AN E XPERIMENTAL S YSTEM FOR E MERGENCE
Having defined our perspective on emergence, we now define a toy experimental system that allows
us to precisely study the concept in a controlled setting. We note that our focus will be on emergence
under data scaling in an online learning scenario (i.e., a sample is unlikely to be seen multiple times).
To this end, we follow recent work on understanding language modeling and use formal languages to
define our experimental setup (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023; Jain et al., 2023; Murty et al., 2023; Valvoda
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023a; 2022a). As discussed in detail next, the formal language we use in this
work is (minimally) context-sensitive, with underlying syntactical rules defined using a probabilistic
context-free grammar (PCFG) and context-sensitivity enabled through posthoc type constraints. The
grammar and type constraints serve as two regularities that underlie our language, and, as we show in
Sec. 5, their learning bottlenecks learning of other, narrower capabilities.
Definition 2. (Grammar.) A PCFG, denoted G, is a randomized process that generates strings using
two sets of symbols: terminals (T) and non-terminals (NT). A string σ is a sequence of terminals,
ending with a special end-of-string symbol (EOS), e.g., σ = t1 t2 . . . EOS. The grammar includes
production rules (denoted R), which define how non-terminals can be expanded. Specifically, a rule
has the form A → α, where A ∈ NT (the left-hand side) and α (the right-hand side) is a sequence
of symbols from T ∪ NT. The process begins with a special start symbol (S ∈ NT). To generate a
string, the PCFG repeatedly applies production rules: a non-terminal is replaced by the sequence
on the right-hand side of a randomly chosen rule with that non-terminal on the left-hand side. This
process continues until all non-terminals are replaced by terminals, producing a string σ. The set of
all strings the grammar can generate is denoted as Σ. A string σ is called grammatical if σ ∈ Σ.

See Fig. 2 (a) for a visualization and App. C.1 for a more detailed treatment of PCFGs in general.
The terminal symbols used in our work include standard parts-of-speech from English, specifically:
subjects, objects, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, conjunctions, determiners, and prepositions. Multiple
short phrases can be combined together via conjunctions and verbs to form longer sentences (e.g.,
a verb can connect a subject phrase and an object phrase). Overall, the grammar G yields symbolic
strings that are solely comprised of parts of speech (see Fig. 2 (a)); e.g., our grammar might yield
a symbolic string like adjective subject adverb verb preposition adjective
object. We next map these strings to our language.
Let V denote the vocabulary of our language L. Each token v ∈ V has a part-of-speech t := part(v)
associated with it. Thus, one can define a context-free language by simply sampling a symbolic string
σ from G, and then replacing symbols therein with tokens from the vocabulary that match the sampled
parts (e.g., a subject symbol may be replaced by the token man). For example, the example string
above can be resolved as Tall man slowly walked to short building. However,
natural language is rich with constraints defined by the physical properties of an entity, which thereby
restrict which tokens are seen in the context of which other tokens, hence yielding context-sensitivity.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For example, one does not expect to see a sentence Tall telephone slowly walked to
short building, since the entity telephone is neither expected to be tall nor the ability
to walk. We develop an abstraction for such constraints by representing them as a bipartite graph
(see Fig. 2 (b,c)). In the following, we often use the term ‘entities’ to jointly refer to subjects and
objects. We also use the term ‘descriptors’ to refer to adjectives that modify entities, reserving the
term ‘adjectives’ for ones that do not.
Definition 3. (Type Constraints Graph.) Let a property k be a binary variable; the set of all
properties is denoted K. Properties can be either descriptive (used to define descriptors; e.g., tall)
or relative (used to define verbs; e.g., walk). A concept class C is defined via the set KC ⊂ K that
denotes which properties are valid for that class. When the properties in KC take values, we get an
entity e from the class, denoted as e ∈ C. The set of all possible entities is denoted E. The type
constraints graph G := (E, K, I) is a bipartite graph over entities and properties in the language
whose edges I denote whether an entity e ∈ E possesses property k ∈ K.
As an example, consider the class of Humans, which includes entities connected to properties like
tall, right-handed, etc.; an entity from Humans will be assigned a subset of these properties.
When sampling sentences from our formal language, the type constraints will restrict which tokens
can be seen together, i.e., which descriptors and verbs go with an entity, hence yielding context-
sensitivity and making L a probabilistic context-sensitive language. Given two randomly sampled
entities from the same class, they can be expected to share a subset of properties, giving a signal to
the model trained on L that these entities are related (i.e., they belong to the same class).

4    L EARNING TASKS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Having described our language L, Task Input                          Output

now we briefly discuss our experimen- Free: [null] “tall man slowly walked to small library.”
tal setup (see App. E for details). We Unscramble: [library, walked, …, to, slowly] “tall man slowly walked to small library.”
train a GPT architecture model (An- Conditional: [man, walked] “tall man slowly walked to small library.”
drej Karpathy, 2023) with the stan-
dard autoregressive language model- Figure 3: Task definitions. Our model is trained and evalu-
ing objective. Data is sampled “on- ated on three types of tasks. (i) Free generation: the model
line”, i.e., we sample a fresh batch of generates sentences with correct grammar. (ii) Unscrambling:
strings every iteration from L. Un- the model is provided with a set of words and must reorder
less mentioned otherwise, L is con- them to form valid sentences. (iii) Conditional generation:
stituted of |E| = 900 entities and model is given a set of entities or properties and must gen-
|K| = 18000 properties, equally and erate valid sentences using them. Note that examples in the
disjointly distributed over |C| = 10 figure are merely indicative. See App. C.1 for details.
classes, and with edges connecting en-
tities to p = 0.15 fraction valid properties of a class in a uniformly random manner; results ablating
these settings are in App. F. Before being fed into the model for training or evaluation, strings sampled
from the language are restructured into a format that enables the specification of particular tasks (see
Fig. 3). Specifically, we train the model to learn the following tasks with 80/10/10% splits.
 • Free generation: Produce a valid string, i.e., one that respects the grammar and type constraints.
 • Unscrambling: A string is sampled from L and randomly permuted; the model is expected to
   unscramble it. This task is known to show sudden learning in LLMs (Wei et al., 2022).
 • Conditional Generation: A set of tokens corresponding to entities or properties are shown to the
   model, which is expected to generate a string combining these tokens in a valid manner.
Evaluation Protocols. Given an input x, which may correspond to any of the three tasks above,
denote the model output as f (x). Let 1(.) be an indicator variable that evaluates to 1 if its input is
logically true. We often decompose evaluations according to strings of two types: (i) descriptive,
i.e., ones that describe that an entity possesses a descriptive property, and (ii) relative, i.e., ones that
demonstrate a subject, object, and verb can be combined to create a valid sentence. We track several
metrics throughout training to avoid confounding from discontinuous scores (Schaeffer et al., 2023).
 • Grammaticality/Type Check. Grammaticality involves checking whether model output follows
   the underlying grammar G, i.e., 1(f (x) ∈ Σ); several other evaluations stress-testing how ac-
   curately the model learns the grammar, e.g., by assessing likelihoods of invalid sentences (see
   App. F.3–F.5). Type checks involve first extracting subjects, objects, and properties from the


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   sentence and then evaluating whether this set of tokens is allowed in the context of each other. We
   decompose type checks as descriptive (do entities and descriptors match), relative (do subject,
   object, and verb match), and all (product of all constraints, including adjectives and adverbs).
 • Exact Match / Per Token Accuracy. Used for evaluating unscrambling. Assume the ground-truth
   unscrambled sentence y has l tokens. We compare whether the model    P  output exactly matches
                                                                                                  the
   ground-truth Πi=1 1(yi = f (x)i ) or the per-token match ratio /l i=1 1(yi = f (x)i ) .
                   l

                                                                       1     l


 • Conditions Satisfied. Used for evaluating conditional generation. If the model is expected to
   produce a sentence with m conditioning tokensP    {vc1 , . . . , vcm }, we analyze how many of those
   tokens are present in f (x), i.e., we evaluate 1/m i=1 1(vci ∈ f (x)).
                                                       m

 • Average Probability of Valid Tokens. Used for evaluating descriptive type constraints in free
   generation and unscrambling. Specifically, we sample a sentence from L that remarks on an
   entity possessing a property (i.e., a descriptive sentence), and then evaluate the probability of
   the property being the next token when this sentence is inputted to the model. For example, let
   x = The fire was large. We evaluate Pr (1(f (x)1 = large)|x−1 ), where x−1 denotes
   the sentence up to the last token and f (x)1 denotes the first token predicted by the model.
Other Evaluations. We perform several other evaluations, e.g., analyzing likelihoods of sentences
that do not follow grammar or type constraints to check how well the model follows our language;
comparing the distribution of lengths and parse tree depth for model’s generations with the language’s;
analyzing grammaticality and type check accuracy for unscrambling and conditional generation; rank
of property predictions; and the evolution of attention maps across time. See App. F for these results.

5     R ESULTS : E MERGENT C APABILITIES IN F ORMAL L ANGUAGE L EARNING
We now evaluate (i) whether our setup demonstrates emergence (see Def. 1), and (ii) whether we
can extract insights into the mechanisms of what leads to emergence (all results are averaged over
3 seeds). While experiments below are for a specific setup, in App. F we show that our claims
consistently generalize to an extremely broad array of setups and metrics. In the following, we often
use the terms “phase” and “phase change”; see discussion around Def. 1 for context on these terms.
5.1   P HASES OF L ANGUAGE AND C APABILITIES ACQUISITION
We plot the model’s performance as a function of training iterations. Since we are in an online
learning, constant stepsize setting, this analysis corresponds to studying the effects of data scaling.
Results are reported in Fig. 4 and show there are three phases to the learning dynamics.
Phase 1: Grammar acquisition. We find the model first learns to produce grammatically correct
sentences, as measured by the grammaticality measure defined in Sec. 4. This process is relatively
rapid, as we see the model starts generating grammatically accurate sentences in a short period of
approximately 100 iterations; attention heads also rapidly evolve and reflect the parse structure of a
sentence (see App. F.5) In this regime, however, the narrower tasks of unscrambling and conditional
generation exhibit poor performance. However, precisely when grammaticality improves, we find
that per-token accuracy starts to improve. This indicates that the model learning a broad regularity
underlying the data (i.e., grammar) impacts learning of narrower capabilities.
Phase 2: Acquisition of relative type constraints. At around 1000 iterations, we find there is a
sudden increase in the model’s performance on relative types from essentially zero to perfect accuracy;
precisely at this point, we find the loss for all tasks, especially free generation, shows a sudden drop.
Interestingly, we find this sudden improvement occurs precisely at the point where the model reaches
its maximum performance on grammaticality for the first time. That is, as soon as the first regularity
underlying the data is learned, the model rapidly learns the next relevant regularity of relative
type constraints. Improvement occurs in descriptive constraints as well (and hence the overall Type
Check performance), but hovers around slightly above 0.1. This is expected, since with |C| = 10
classes, if a model produces grammatically correct sentences, it will achieve a random performance
of 1/|C| = 0.1 on descriptive type checks. This also implies that the model is primarily relying on its
syntactical knowledge and does not respect descriptive type constraints much.
During this phase, we see that shortly after the phase change, there is a sudden increase in performance
for both unscrambling and conditional generation, across all metrics. These tasks’ losses also show
another loss drop occurs at this point; though the drop seems smoother in the total loss, likely due


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a)                            (b)                           (c)


     (d)


     (e)


Figure 4: Learning of regularities in the data drives emergent capabilities. For a detailed discus-
sion, see main text. (a) Grammaticality and Type Check evaluations as a function of iterations (or,
equivalently, data). We see phases in the learning dynamics corresponding to emergent acquisition
of regularities underlying our language: grammar, relative type constraints, and descriptive type
constraints, shaded gray, pink, and green respectively. (b, c) Performance on Unscrambling and
Conditional Generation. After a slight delay from phase boundaries, we see sudden improvements
in the performance of individual tasks. (d) Learning curves. Loss also shows sudden changes at
phase boundaries corresponding to the learning of regularities present in the data. (e) Performance
on descriptive/relative sentences. Decomposing by sentence type, we find a sublinear growth in
descriptive type checks drives performance boost on descriptive sentences for the unscrambling task.


to averaging effects (Michaud et al., 2023). As shown in Fig. 4e, we find that this performance
improvement is driven by sentences that require primarily correctness of grammar and relative type
constraints, i.e., knowledge of which descriptors are associated with an entity is not necessary to
perform well on these sentences. This also explains the loss drop seen in Fig. 4: once grammar and
relative type constraints are learned, the model learns to use them to solve inputs that do not require
knowledge of descriptive properties, leading to a sudden improvement in both loss and accuracy.
Phase 3: Learning of descriptive type constraints. During Phase 2, we find that the model’s per-
formance on descriptive type checks witnesses minimal improvement. However, as training proceeds,
the model enters a third phase at whose boundary we see a sudden change of slope from a saturation
region to approximately proportional growth in the performance of descriptive type checks with
log-amount of data/iterations (i.e., sublinear growth). With a slight delay, we see a similar effect kicks
in for the unscrambling and condition generation tasks as well, which start to show approximately
linear improvement with log-amount of data/iterations. Zooming in at this point (see inset plots in
Fig. 4), we see there is in fact a small, but nevertheless noticeable, loss drop in the unscrambling
and condition generation tasks. We emphasize that since the model has seen merely an order of 104
iterations up to this point, if we assume the model can perfectly learn in only a few observations
that some entity and a property can be seen together in a sentence, then our experimental setting
can on average see only up to 15% performance (which matches the observed performance) and
20% at best (see App. E.0.1; the argument is that only a subset of pairs is shown during training,
restricting maximum performance). However, as the model enters and progresses through the third
phase, it shows a much larger rate of improvement and reaches ∼30–35% performance, indicating it
is generalizing beyond the pairs of entities and properties it has seen together during training. If the
model were simply relying on memorized knowledge, the observed performance would be infeasible.
We thus claim that the model is implicitly inferring, based on the regularity of type constraints
that underlies our data, which properties and entities constitute a valid context. This suggests a
memorization effect is at play during Phase 2, and the end of this phase corresponds to a transition
from a memorizing to a generalizing solution.

                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                         14800          18000           21200         24400             27600          30800         34000           37200
                         16400          19600           22800         26000             29200          32400         35600           38800
                 Type Check (Desc.)                Unscramble (Desc.)             1.0
                                                                                               Type Check (Rel.)                 Unscramble (Rel.)
        0.35                                0.4
        0.30                                                                      0.8                                    0.3
                                            0.3
        0.25                                                                      0.6
                                            0.2                                                                          0.2
        0.20                                                                      0.4
        0.15                                0.1                                                                          0.1
                                                                                  0.2
        0.10                                0.0                                                                          0.0
                                                                                  0.0
               103       104          105         103           104       105            103           104         105         103           104     105
                     Iterations                          Iterations                               Iterations                           Iterations
Figure 5: Effect of Scaling number of descriptive properties. Scaling descriptive properties in
our language, we find relative type checks and unscrambling performance for relative sentences are
essentially unaffected by the number of properties. Meanwhile, both descriptive type checks and
unscrambling performance for descriptive sentences show a change in performance and delay in
transition points. Interestingly, we find the geometry of performance curves is extremely consistent;
for descriptive type checks, this geometry indicates a memorization to generalization picture.

5.2   E FFECT OF N UMBER OF D ESCRIPTIVE P ROPERTIES ON L ANGUAGE ACQUISITION
Given the above picture of a model’s learning dynamics, we next ask how the phase boundaries
change with an increase in the number of properties |K| (see Fig. 5). We intentionally scale only
the number of descriptive properties and hypothesize the learning of both grammar and relative
type constraints to not be affected by this change. We relegate grammar learning to appendix (see
App. F.2), which, as expected, is not affected by |K| since it is an entirely independent data-regularity
from type constraints. However, we see that even relative type constraints’ learning is not affected by
the increase in descriptive properties, indicating the model deems them (justifiably) to be independent
regularities. Focusing on descriptive type constraints then, we see performance curves for descriptive
type checks and unscrambling performance on descriptive sentences are indeed affected, achieving
higher values for fewer properties (i.e., the easier task). We further make two more interesting
observations. (i) The point of transition from memorization to generalization is delayed as we
increase the number of properties. This is most prominently seen in the delay in the transition point
where the ability to unscramble descriptive sentences emerges. (ii) We find the geometry of these
performance curves are extremely similar to the geometry we observed for our base setting studied in
Sec. 5.1, indicating despite the increase in difficulty of the task, the same learning dynamics are at
play. We devote the next section to formulate a hypothesis justifying these observations.

6     E MERGENCE AS P ERCOLATION                                                    (a)                                          (b)

We next propose a framework for modeling the
emergence of capabilities that require a model
to compose unseen entities and descriptive prop-
erties, e.g., learning descriptive type constraints,
which, beyond allowing a model to produce accu-
rate free generations, will aid with narrower tasks
                                                                                   Figure 6: Casting the ability to compose un-
like conditional generation and unscrambling. We
                                                                                   seen entities and properties as percolation on
argue the relevant data-regularity to analyze for
                                                                                   a bipartite graph. (a) When only a fraction of
this purpose is the concept class: if a model un-
                                                                                   the concept classes are included in the dataset
derstands what entities and properties belong to
                                                                                   and the edge density is low, nodes (e.g., en-
a concept class, regardless of whether they have
                                                                                   tities and properties) form many disconnected
been seen together in a string, it will deem their
                                                                                   clusters, indicated by different colors (left). As
co-occurrence valid. We thus develop an abstrac-
                                                                                   more concept classes are added (dashed edges)
tion for concept classes as bipartite graphs, casting
                                                                                   to the bipartite graph, the small clusters begin
their learning as a problem of percolation on such
                                                                                   to merge (middle). With a sufficient number
graphs (see also App. D.1).
                                                                                   of edges, a macroscopic number of nodes be-
                                                                                   come connected, forming a single cluster (right).
6.1   M ATRIX REPRESENTATION OF DATA                                               (b) Our formalism establishes this transition as
                                                                                   a second-order phase transition, where the size
Recall that a concept class is defined as a set of                                 of the largest cluster increases non-linearly as
entities that are expected to have shared properties                               the fraction of connected node pairs is scaled.
(see Def. 3). The question is whether upon sub-                                    Shown curves are from simulations on bipartite
sampling pairs of entities and properties from a                                   graphs with the number of nodes equal to the
concept class, can the model learn that, in fact, all                              number of entities and properties in our formal
                                                                                   language experiments (see Sec. 4 or App. E).
                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


pairs of entities and properties are valid and compose the concept class. For instance, in the case of a
concept class such as human, the set of entities can include humans with different genders (e.g., man)
as well as human-associated entities such as a lawyer (see Fig. 2). The corresponding properties
for the human concept class will be, for example, walk, jump, tall. A man, being human,
is expected to have all these properties, although strings specifying these properties for a lawyer
may be rare or even absent in the training data. We are interested in the case where the data, such as
strings, includes examples of these pairs of entities and properties. We can represent this by a matrix
whose rows and columns represent the entities and the properties, and the matrix values indicate the
quantity or density of data available for each composition, e.g., an entity-descriptor pairing.
Definition 4. (Concept Density Matrix.) Let D be an |E| × |K| matrix with real-valued entries
between 0 and 1, inclusive. Each entry Dek represents the density for the entity and property pair
(e, k) (e.g., the amount of data that represents the specific composition), where e ∈ {1, ..., |E|} and
k ∈ {1, ..., |K|} are the indices of the entities and properties, respectively.

For example, consider the case where there are three values of entities and properties (|E| = |K| = 3),
with entities (rows) being {Man, Lawyer, Telephone}, and properties (columns) being {Walk,
Stoic, Ring}. The corresponding D can be: A common composition such as Man walking will
lead to a value of 1 at the intersection of Man and Walk, i.e., D00 = 1, where Dij denotes element
at row-i and column-j. Conversely, a highly unlikely composition like Lawyer ringing will be
absent in the dataset, and will be represented by a zero at the respective matrix position, i.e., D12 = 0.
We can also assume for example that Man ringing or a Telephone walking are rare, which
yields D13 = D31 = 0. We next introduce the concept propagation matrix to model the inference
of novel entity-feature combinations from the incomplete data represented in D.
Definition 5. Concept Propagation Matrix. An n-th order concept propagation matrix (n ≥ 0) is
defined as T (n) = (DDT )n D = C n D, where C := DDT .
The concept propagation matrix can be intuitively understood using a bipartite graph, as shown in
Figure 6a. A bipartite graph in this case is a sub-graph of the type constraints graph (see Def. 3 and
Fig. 2), where one set of nodes represents entities while the other represents properties, and edges
indicate the presence of entity-feature pairings in the training data. The strength of connectivity of
the graph directly corresponds to the values in the concept composition propagation matrix, T (n) .
Specifically, if two concepts are connected by a path of minimal length 2k + 1 (i.e., the shortest path
between them alternates between the two sets k times), the corresponding entry in T (n) becomes
non-zero only for n ≥ k. That is, the number of propagation steps n required for the object and
feature pair to be associated is determined by the minimal number of hops needed to connect the
two nodes in the graph. Conversely, if two nodes belong to disconnected regions of the graph, their
composition remains fundamentally unlearnable, regardless of the order of propagation. This is
reflected by the corresponding entry in T (n) remaining zero for all n. In the bipartite graph, this
amounts to having two distinct clusters that are connected within themselves but not across each
other. For example, in the case where the concepts represented by the first and third rows belong to
disconnected regions of the graph, and consequently, their composition (e.g., Lawyer ringing)
cannot be achieved even after an infinite number of hops between nodes. We call such a situation
learning of a concept class: the system understands that Man and Laywer are both humans, whereas
Telephone is not. Our experiments show that the model deems sentences composing entities and
properties from incorrect classes to be much less likely than the correct ones (see Fig. F.3), i.e., the
model indeed learns the structure of concept classes.

6.2   P ERCOLATION T RANSITION ON D ESCRIPTIVE C ONSTRAINTS

Using the bipartite graph framework, the generalization, or the learning of the concept class, can be
defined as the situation where a large cluster of entity-property connected pairs arises despite the
sparse concept density matrix. A critical aspect to examine is the proportion of the inference matrix
                (∞)
values where Tek is non-zero, out of the total possible pairs |E| × |K|. This particular scenario aligns
with the bond percolation problem on a bipartite graph. In bond percolation, we investigate how
the largest connected cluster’s size varies with the probability p of each edge (bond) being present.
In a typical setting, there exists a critical threshold value, p = pc , called the percolation threshold.
Below this threshold (p < pc ), the graph typically exhibits a disconnected phase characterized by the
absence of extensively connected clusters, with most nodes either isolated or part of smaller clusters.
Above this threshold (p > pc ), the graph transitions to a connected phase, significantly increasing


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                14800           18000          21200        24400               27600          30800     34000       37200
                16400           19600          22800        26000               29200          32400     35600       38800
           Avg. Prob. (Freegen) × |K|1.5     Ty. Check (Desc.) × |K|0.5    Avg. Prob. (Unscmb) × |K|0.0 Ex. Match (Unscmb) × |K|0.0
         700                            40                                                               0.4
                                                                          0.3
                                        35
         600                                                                                             0.3
                                        30                                0.2
         500                                                                                             0.2
                                        25
         400                                                              0.1                            0.1
                                        20
         300
                                        15                                0.0                            0.0
               101        102                   101       102               10 4        10 3   10 2        10 4   10 3   10 2
               Iterations / |K|0.5 Iterations / |K|0.5                             Iterations / |K|1.5
                                                                            Iterations / |K|1.5
Figure 7: Scaling of point of emergence matches with our theory. We replot the result from Fig. 5
by rescaling the x-axis with a power of the number of descriptive properties; see App. G.1 for further
discussion on the intuition underlying this visualization. For Average probability of generating a
valid descriptive property given some object in context under free generation and descriptive type
check accuracy, we see a 0.5 exponent scaling yields a collapse of the transition point—this matches
the toy model of percolation posited in Sec. 6.2. We also see a very clear scaling of the point where
the ability to unscramble descriptive sentences starts to emerge, but with an exponent of 1.5.

the likelihood of a vast connected component spanning a large portion of the graph. This shift from
a predominantly disconnected state to one with a macroscopic cluster is a defining characteristic
of the percolation process, and this transition sharpens as the number of components in the system
increases. (see Fig. 6b for a schematic). In a setting where connecting edgespare selected randomly
                                                                         pc ≃ 1/|E||K| for large |E|
on the graph with probability p, the percolation threshold is obtained asp
and |K| (see App. D.2 for a derivation). This means that when around |E||K| edges are connected,
there is a qualitative change in the growth of the cluster size. For p > pc , the number of nodes
included in the connected cluster becomes macroscopic, i.e., the probability a randomly selected
pair of entity and property are connected becomes finite. We posit that the percolation threshold
corresponds to the point at which our Transformer generalizes from the sparse learning of pairs to a
complete representation of concept classes. Since increasing the iterations through online learning
should amount to increasing p (i.e., seeing more combinations in data), p the iteration at which the
transition occurs in the model performance should be proportional to |E||K|. When the number of
seen pairs surpasses this threshold, the model can infer novel compositions, even for entity-property
pairs not explicitly present in the training data.
We next check whether the theoretically posited scaling manifests in our experiments. Specifically,
we plot again the various performances of the model as a function of iterations divided by the square
root of the number of properties (i.e., number of entities is kept constant). See Fig. 7 for results.
We find that indeed there is a growth trend in the descriptive type check metric and the average
probability
p            scores of free generation of descriptive sentences that occur at iterations proportional to
   |K|. This is in contrast to the first large growth that is observed in these evaluations, which seems
to be occurring at iteration numbers that do not depend on |K| (see Fig. 5 and Fig. 53), likely because
this step corresponds to the point where the model learns about syntax, which requires a constant
amount of data irrespective of the number of properties (see Fig. 18). We also analyzed the scaling of
the transition point for the narrower task of unscrambling upon change in the number of properties.
Here, we found a different scaling of |K|3/2 . While we leave explaining this scaling for future work,
since the task involves the composition of entities and properties, we expect a transition and scaling
effect to occur for it as well; however, learning the precise circuit to perform unscrambling over the
learned grammar and type constraints will yield a delay (as was seen in experiments) that likely has
some interaction with the complexity of the language.

7    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a phenomenological definition for emergence that implicates learning of
general regularities underlying the data process as the source of rapid performance improvements
on narrower tasks. We then use a formal language that involves two precisely defined regularities—
grammar and type constraints—and a set of narrowly defined tasks on its strings. We define “order
parameters” for these regularities and find (i) precise phases in the learning dynamics of a Transformer
trained on the language and (ii) the model suddenly acquiring capabilities corresponding to the
narrower scope tasks close to said phases’ boundaries. To explain these results, we propose a model
that analogizes learning of type constraints to the problem of graph percolation, finding a strong
qualitative match with this hypothesis.


                                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Intelligent Systems group at Harvard, especially Maya Okawa, Core Francisco
Park, and Leni Shor for feedback on the project and contributions to predecessors of this work.
ESL thanks Gautam Reddy, Naomi Saphra, Pulkit Gopalani, Wei Hu, and Yonatav Belinkov for
fruitful conversations. ESL’s time at University of Michigan was supported by NSF under award CNS-
2211509 and at Harvard by the CBS-NTT Physics of Intelligence program. KK acknowledges support
from JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP19H05795, JP19H05275, JP21H01007, and JP23H00095.

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, ...,
 and Andy Zeng. Do As I Can and Not As I Say: Grounding Language in Robotic Affordances. In
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of Language Models: Part 1, Context-Free Grammar.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13673, 2023.
Shun-Ichi Amari. A universal theorem on learning curves. Neural networks, 6(2):161–166, 1993.
Philip W Anderson. More is different: Broken symmetry and the nature of the hierarchical structure
  of science. Science, 177(4047):393–396, 1972.
Andrej Karpathy. nanoGPT, 2023. https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT.
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, ..., and Yonghui Wu. PaLM 2 Technical Report, 2023.
Anthropic. Introducing Claude, 2023.     https://www.anthropic.com/index/
  introducing-claude. Accessed on: June 21, 2023.
Sanjeev Arora and Anirudh Goyal. A theory for emergence of complex skills in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15936, 2023.
Boaz Barak, Benjamin Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, Eran Malach, and Cyril Zhang. Hidden
  progress in deep learning: SGD learns parities near the computational limit. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:21750–21764, 2022.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. Pmlr, 2023.
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing
  text with the natural language toolkit. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2009.
Anselm Blumer, Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, David Haussler, and Manfred K Warmuth. Learnability and
  the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 36(4):929–965, 1989.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,
  Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, ..., and Percy Liang. On the Opportunities and Risks of Foun-
  dation Models, jul 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258. arXiv:2108.07258
  [cs].
Olivier Bousquet, Steve Hanneke, Shay Moran, Ramon Van Handel, and Amir Yehudayoff. A theory
  of universal learning. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pp. 532–541, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language
  models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  1877–1901, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Francesco Cagnetta and Matthieu Wyart. Towards a theory of how the structure of language is
  acquired by deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00048, 2024.
Angelica Chen, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Kyunghyun Cho, Matthew L. Leavitt, and Naomi Saphra.
  Sudden Drops in the Loss: Syntax Acquisition, Phase Transitions, and Simplicity Bias in MLMs.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=MO5PiKHELW.
Noam Chomsky. Three models for the description of language. IRE Transactions on information
  theory, 2(3):113–124, 1956.
Reuven Cohen, Daniel Ben-Avraham, and Shlomo Havlin. Percolation critical exponents in scale-free
  networks. Physical Review E, 66(3):036113, 2002.
Michael Collins. Probabilistic context-free grammars (pcfgs). Lecture Notes, 2013.
Hugo Cui, Freya Behrens, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. A phase transition between
  positional and semantic learning in a solvable model of dot-product attention. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.03902, 2024.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan
  Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Zhengxiao Du, Aohan Zeng, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Understanding emergent abilities of
  language models from the loss perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15796, 2024.
Benjamin L Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, Eran Malach, and Cyril Zhang. Pareto frontiers in
  neural feature learning: Data, compute, width, and luck. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03800, 2023.
Benjamin L Edelman, Ezra Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Eran Malach, and Nikolaos Tsilivis. The
  Evolution of Statistical Induction Heads: In-Context Learning Markov Chains. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.11004, 2024.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac
  Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse,
  ..., and Chris Olah. A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits. Transformer Circuits
  Thread, 2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
EU Council. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Artificial
  Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act), 2024. https://data.consilium.europa.eu/
  doc/document/ST-5662-2024-INIT/en/pdf.
Dan Friedman, Alexander Wettig, and Danqi Chen. Learning Transformer Programs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.01128, 2023.
Gemini Team. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models.                   arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Shreyas Gokhale. The semantic landscape paradigm for neural networks.                arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.09550, 2023.
Pulkit Gopalani, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, and Wei Hu. Abrupt learning in transformers: A case study
  on matrix completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.22244, 2024.
David Haussler, H Sebastian Seung, Michael Kearns, and Naftali Tishby. Rigorous learning curve
  bounds from statistical mechanics. In Proceedings of the seventh annual conference on Computa-
  tional learning theory, pp. 76–87, 1994.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tianyu He, Darshil Doshi, Aritra Das, and Andrey Gromov. Learning to grok: Emergence
  of in-context learning and skill composition in modular arithmetic tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.02550, 2024.
David T Hoffmann, Simon Schrodi, Nadine Behrmann, Volker Fischer, and Thomas Brox. Eureka-
  moments in transformers: Multi-step tasks reveal softmax induced optimization problems. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.12956, 2023.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:30016–30030, 2022.
Dieuwke Hupkes, Verna Dankers, Mathijs Mul, and Elia Bruni. Compositionality decomposed: How
  do neural networks generalise? Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 67:757–795, 2020.
Samyak Jain, Robert Kirk, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P. Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, Edward Grefen-
  stette, Tim Rocktäschel, and David Scott Krueger. Mechanistically analyzing the effects of
  fine-tuning on procedurally defined tasks, 2023.
Margot Kaminski. Regulating the Risks of AI. Boston University Law Review, 103:1347, 2023.
Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Luke Metz. General-purpose in-context
  learning by meta-learning transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04458, 2022.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Transformers
  learn shortcuts to automata. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10749, 2022a.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Exposing
  Attention Glitches with Flip-Flop Language Modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00946, 2023a.
Ziming Liu, Ouail Kitouni, Niklas Nolte, Eric J. Michaud, Max Tegmark, and Mike Williams.
  Towards Understanding Grokking: An Effective Theory of Representation Learning, October
  2022b.
Ziming Liu, Eric J. Michaud, and Max Tegmark. Omnigrok: Grokking Beyond Algorithmic Data,
  March 2023b.
Sheng Lu, Irina Bigoulaeva, Rachneet Sachdeva, Harish Tayyar Madabushi, and Iryna Gurevych.
  Are Emergent Abilities in Large Language Models just In-Context Learning? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.01809, 2023.
Yue M Lu, Mary I Letey, Jacob A Zavatone-Veth, Anindita Maiti, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Asymptotic
  theory of in-context learning by linear attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11751, 2024.
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni and Anna Rogers. Mind your language (model): Fact-checking llms and
  their role in nlp research and practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07120, 2023.
William Merrill, Nikolaos Tsilivis, and Aman Shukla. A Tale of Two Circuits: Grokking as
 Competition of Sparse and Dense Subnetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11873, 2023.
Eric J Michaud, Ziming Liu, Uzay Girit, and Max Tegmark. The quantization model of neural scaling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13506, 2023.
Shikhar Murty, Pratyusha Sharma, Jacob Andreas, and Christopher D Manning. Grokking of
  hierarchical structure in vanilla transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18741, 2023.
Yoonsoo Nam, Nayara Fonseca, Seok Hyeong Lee, and Ard Louis. An exactly solvable model for
  emergence and scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17563, 2024.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures for
  grokking via mechanistic interpretability. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, sep 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9XFSbDPmdW.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent Linear Representations in World
  Models of Self-Supervised Sequence Models, sep 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2309.00941. arXiv:2309.00941 [cs].
M. E. J. Newman. The Structure and Function of Complex Networks. SIAM Review, 45(2):167–256,
 January 2003. ISSN 0036-1445, 1095-7200.
Mark EJ Newman, Steven H Strogatz, and Duncan J Watts. Random graphs with arbitrary degree
 distributions and their applications. Physical review E, 64(2):026118, 2001.
NIST. Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0), 2023.
Maya Okawa, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P Dick, and Hidenori Tanaka. Compositional abil-
 ities emerge multiplicatively: Exploring diffusion models on a synthetic task. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.09336, 2023.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, ..., and Chris Olah. In-context Learning and Induction Heads. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2022. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html.
OpenAI. Gpt-4, 2023. https://openai.com/research/gpt-4. Accessed on: June 21,
  2023.
The White House OSTP. Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights, 2023.
Alexander Pan, Kush Bhatia, and Jacob Steinhardt. The effects of reward misspecification: Mapping
  and mitigating misaligned models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03544, 2022.
Core Francisco Park, Maya Okawa, Andrew Lee, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, and Hidenori Tanaka.
  Emergence of hidden capabilities: Exploring learning dynamics in concept space. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.19370, 2024.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gen-
  eralization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177,
  2022.
Gautam Reddy. The mechanistic basis of data dependence and abrupt learning in an in-context
  classification task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03002, 2023.
Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of Large Language
  Models a mirage? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.15004, 2023.
Rylan Schaeffer, Hailey Schoelkopf, Brando Miranda, Gabriel Mukobi, Varun Madan, Adam Ibrahim,
  Herbie Bradley, Stella Biderman, and Sanmi Koyejo. Why has predicting downstream capabilities
  of frontier ai models with scale remained elusive? arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04391, 2024.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach
  themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Hyunjune Sebastian Seung, Haim Sompolinsky, and Naftali Tishby. Statistical mechanics of learning
  from examples. Physical review A, 45(8):6056, 1992.
Aaditya K Singh, Ted Moskovitz, Felix Hill, Stephanie CY Chan, and Andrew M Saxe. What needs
  to go right for an induction head? a mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits and their
  formation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07129, 2024.
Michael Sipser. Introduction to the theory of computation. ACM Sigact News, 27(1):27–29, 1996.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jacob Steinhardt. Emergent Deception and Emergent Optimization, feb 2023. URL https:
  //bounded-regret.ghost.io/emergent-deception-optimization/.
Curt Tigges, Michael Hanna, Qinan Yu, and Stella Biderman. Llm circuit analyses are consistent
  across training and scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10827, 2024.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-
  tian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu,
  Wenyin Fu, ..., and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models,
  2023.
Josef Valvoda, Naomi Saphra, Jonathan Rawski, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell. Benchmarking
  compositionality with formal languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08195, 2022.
Tom Viering and Marco Loog. The shape of learning curves: a review. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
  Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Timothy LH Watkin, Albrecht Rau, and Michael Biehl. The statistical mechanics of learning a rule.
  Reviews of Modern Physics, 65(2):499, 1993.
Jason Wei. 137 emergent abilities of large language models, 2022. https://www.jasonwei.
  net/blog/emergence. Accessed on: October 20, 2023.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Kaiyue Wen, Yuchen Li, Bingbin Liu, and Andrej Risteski. (Un)interpretability of Transformers: a
  case study with Dyck grammars. 2023.
Dingli Yu, Simran Kaur, Arushi Gupta, Jonah Brown-Cohen, Anirudh Goyal, and Sanjeev Arora.
  Skill-Mix: A flexible and expandable family of evaluations for AI models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.17567, 2023.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2(3):5, 2022.

Bojan Žunkovič and Enej Ilievski. Grokking phase transitions in learning local rules with gradient
  descent, October 2022.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    F URTHER D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this work, we take inspiration from other fields (e.g., physics and complex systems) and propose
a phenomenological definition for emergence of capabilities in neural networks. Specifically, the
definition argues that at the point of emergence, the model learns general regularities underlying
the data-generating process which are instrumental to the learning of specific, narrower capabilities;
acquisition of such regularities then leads to sudden performance improvement on several tasks (often
with some delay). While relatively informal, this definition brings the notion of emergence in the
context of neural networks closer to its meaning in physics, wherein the formation of systematic
regularities is known to drive phase changes that involve sudden changes in the system’s properties.
Characterizing these phase changes requires hypothesizing what the regularity is, and defining an
“order parameter” that can help gauge its change. Drawing on this definition and perspective, we
then propose an experimental setup that involves learning of a formal language with two precisely
defined regularities in the data—grammar and type constraints (what properties are valid in the
context of what entities)—and a set of narrowly defined tasks. Defining order parameters for these
regularities (grammaticality and type checks), we find there indeed are phases in the model’s learning
dynamics, and the model suddenly acquires capabilities corresponding to the narrower scope tasks
(unscrambling and conditional generation) close to these phase boundaries. Interestingly, the learning
curves show a rather distinct geometry that remains consistent as we alter the number of properties in
our language.
To explain these results, we propose a model that analogizes learning of type constraints in the formal
language learning task to the problem of graph percolation. Drawing on the theory of percolation on
bipartite graphs, which shows phase transitions in the formation of connected components on a graph,
we argue this problem is similar to learning of concepts classes or type constraints in our setting, and
hence should show scaling of the pointp   of emergence where the model starts to follow descriptive
type constraints that is of the order of |E||K|. Our results show a strong qualitative match with
this hypothesis. We also find an extremely clean scaling for other tasks’ transition point, e.g., for
unscrambling’s results on descriptive sentences; explaining these results is left for future work.
While our goal in this work was primarily demonstrative, i.e., to develop a bridge with other fields
studying emergence, we believe several exciting avenues now open up. For example, given that the
whole point of the theory of phase transitions is that we can predict the point of emergence, can we
draw on this rich literature to propose models for explaining and predicting emergent capabilities in
neural networks? Can we go beyond the toy task of formal language learning studied in this work
and analyze a more naturalistic setting? For example, can we identify data-regularities underlying
emergent capabilities in open-source models, e.g., Pythia checkpoints (Biderman et al., 2023), and
demonstrate that our proposed perspective enables prediction of when capabilities emerge in LLMs?
To begin, we can perhaps focus on capabilities that require similar knowledge acquisition and its
compositional generalization on a downstream task.


B    R ELATED WORK

Explaining emergence. Focusing on the sudden learning characteristic of emergent capabilities, a few
recent works have tried to explain the factors driving this phenomenon. For example, compositionality
has been implicated for having a “multiplicative” effect on a model’s performance, where the argument
is that a model cannot perform well on a compositional task until the abilities needed to perform
individual tasks involved in that composition are acquired (Okawa et al., 2023; Arora & Goyal, 2023;
Yu et al., 2023; Srivastava et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Gokhale, 2023);
when they are acquired, performance suddenly grows. A few papers have also shown that learning of
specific capabilities (i.e., ones not compositional in nature) can be sudden (Chen et al., 2024; Nam
et al., 2024; Kirsch et al., 2022; He et al., 2024; Michaud et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2024).
Grokking vs. Emergence. We focus on the effect of data scaling on a model’s capabilities; often
called ‘learning curve’ or ‘data scaling’ analysis (Viering & Loog, 2022; Blumer et al., 1989; Bousquet
et al., 2021; Seung et al., 1992; Watkin et al., 1993; Amari, 1993; Haussler et al., 1994). On surface,
this might look similar to the seemingly related phenomenon of grokking (Power et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2023b; Žunkovič & Ilievski, 2022; Murty et al., 2023; Barak et al., 2022; Edelman et al., 2023;
Nanda et al., 2022), wherein a model’s performance on a task rapidly improves long after it has fit the


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


training data. However, we emphasize that we focus on an online learning setting in our experiments,
i.e., a given sample is unlikely to be seen multiple times during training. Emergence is generally
studied in such online learning scenarios. Since there is no distinction between train versus test data
in such a setting, we argue mechanistic explanations of grokking identified in past work that involve
a perfect training data memorization phase (Nanda et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022b) are unlikely to help
explain our results of emergence under data scaling in an online learning scenario.

B.1    I S EMERGENCE A MIRAGE , EXPLAINED VIA USE OF POOR METRICS ?

Schaeffer et al. (2023) argue emergent scaling curves are a consequence of poorly defined, discontin-
uous evaluation metrics, and the seemingly sudden learning goes away once partial, continuous credit
is given to the model. While a credible claim, we provide three arguments below to demonstrate it is
certainly not the complete story.

• Emergence with continuous metrics. There is significant evidence for emergent abilities in
  neural networks that does not rely on use of discrete metrics at all. For example, in a recent
  work, Gopalani et al. (2024) show a sudden performance increase in a regression setting with an
  entirely continuous metric—specifically, mean square error. Phase transitions and corresponding
  emergent abilities have been formally discussed in other relevant works, e.g., by Lu et al. (2024)
  in regards to in-context learning and by Cui et al. (2024) in regards to positional code learning in a
  histogram computation task. Meanwhile, Chen et al. (2024) show a sudden loss drop in BERT
  training, which, again, is not a continuous metric. Similarly, Okawa et al. (2023) have shown
  task compositionality can drive emergent abilities, with their follow-up work using continuous
  metrics to demonstrate learning to compose yields emergent learning curves (Park et al., 2024).
  Overall, given this substantial evidence, we believe the argument by Schaeffer et al. (2023) is
  narrower in scope than what is claimed by the authors—it undermines and ignores legitimate cases
  of emergence in neural network training.
      – Relation to our work. In our work, we show performance improvements co-occur with loss
        drops (Fig. 4), i.e., a continuous metric. Thus, we can comfortably say our results are not
        confounded by Schaeffer et al.’s argument that poorly defined metrics drive emergence. In
        fact, as we mention in Sec. 4, we also report several other (both continuous and discrete)
        metrics that show sudden improvements, further providing evidence that our results are not
        confounded by use of poorly defined metrics.
• Assumption on per-token power law scaling. To develop their claim, Schaeffer et al. (2023)
  propose a toy theoretical model that involves the assumption that an individual token’s loss follows
  power-law scaling. This assumption is too strong: the loss, when averaged across a large number
  of tokens, indeed follows a power law (as popularly shown in literature on scaling laws); however,
  individual token dynamics are in general drastically different, and in general extremely
  unlikely to follow a power law scaling. In fact, this point was most recently demonstrated by
  Schaeffer et al. (2024) themselves! In this follow-up work, the authors show that learning dynamics
  of individual tokens corresponding to task output locations can show discontinuous progress. For
  further evidence in this vein, see the papers by Michaud et al. (2023) and Du et al. (2024). We
  thus believe that beyond the scope of their argument being narrower than original presented in
  the paper, the underlying rationale behind Schaeffer et al.’s argument also involves a very strong
  assumption.
      – Relation to our work. In our work, we can concretely show Schaeffer et al.’s assumption
        does not hold: e.g., in Figure 4, we show loss curves for individual tasks, finding that learning
        dynamics of tokens corresponding to just these individual tasks (a subset of the overall tokens
        in a sentence) does not follow a power law! Thus, we can again comfortably conclude that
        Schaffer et al.’s assumption, which was too strong to begin with, does not hold in our setting
        and hence their claims cannot explain our results.
• A “metric” must at least gauge progress towards learning of task. To demonstrate their claim
  empirically, Schaeffer et al. (2023) propose several alternative metrics that turn a discontinuous
  learning curve into a continuous one. However, we emphasize a metric is only useful if it captures
  progress towards learning of the task. For example, if the structure of a task is ignored, it is
  certainly easy to define arbitrary continuous metrics for a task; however, such metrics are unlikely
  to help measure progress toward learning a task. As a precise example, consider the addition of


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    two numbers, say 10 and 11, and the metric called token edit distance (Schaeffer et al., 2023) that
    assesses the average distance between digits in the model’s output, denoted xy, from the ground
    truth of 21; that is, (|x−2|+|y−1|)/2. For both xy = 22 and xy = 11, this metric equals 1; however,
    clearly 22 is a better approximation for the ground truth of 21. That is, once we account for the
    structure of the task, i.e., the fact that error in the most significant digit should be penalized more
    than error in the least significant one, we see limitations in token edit distance as a metric for
    assessing a model’s ability to add numbers. We argue claims relating emergence to sensitivity of
    metrics can be confounded by use of metrics that do not respect the structure of the task, but give
    the impression of continuous learning.
      – Relation to our work. As a stress-test of our claims, we intentionally evaluate metrics that
        do not respect the structure of the task; e.g., in our unscrambling task, we evaluate the metric
        of per-token accuracy. This metric can be deemed equivalent to the token edit distance metric
        proposed by Schaeffer et al. (2023), since it does not respect sentence order. Intriguingly, we
        find that even this metric demonstrates sudden improvements in our experiments. The first
        sudden improvement, corresponding to syntax acquisition, is easily visible; the latter sudden
        improvement, corresponding to learning of type constraints, is only visible when zoomed.
        This possibly indicates that even metrics that do not respect task structure show sudden
        improvements, but the improvement is relatively marginal and hence not easily visible.

C     DATA -G ENERATING P ROCESS : D EFINING OUR FORMAL LANGUAGE

Our data-generating process involves defining a formal language, sampling sentences from this
language, and then defining tasks to be performed upon these sentences (specifically, free generation,
unscrambling, or conditional generation). In this section, we discuss the precise details of how the
language is implemented.

C.1     D EFINING A GRAMMAR USING PCFG S

To define a grammar for our language, we use the framework of Probabilistic Context-Free Grammars
(PCFGs). To keep the paper self-contained, we provide a short primer on PCFGs below and then
discuss our precise version of it in detail. For a more thorough discussion on PCFGs, we refer the
reader to one of the several well-written tutorials (Collins, 2013) and books (Sipser, 1996).

C.1.1    S HORT P RIMER ON PCFG S
Broadly, a PCFG is defined via a 5-tuple G = (NT, T, R, S, P), where:

        • NT is a finite set of non-terminal symbols.
        • T is a finite set of terminal symbols, disjoint from NT.
        • R is a finite set of production rules, each of the form A → αβ, where A ∈ NT and
          α, β ∈ (NT ∪ T).
        • S ∈ NT is the start symbol.
                                                                       P
        • P is a function P : R → [0, 1], such that for each A ∈ NT,       α:A→α∈R P(A → αβ) = 1.

To generate a sentence from a PCFG, the following process is used. Pseudocode for this generation
process is provided in Algo. 1.

       1. Start with a string consisting of the start symbol S.
       2. While the string contains non-terminal symbols, randomly select a non-terminal A from the
          string. Choose a production rule A → αβ from R according to the probability distribution
          P(A → α).
       3. Replace the chosen non-terminal A in the string with α, the right-hand side of the production
          rule.
       4. Repeat the production rule selection and expansion steps until the string contains only
          terminal symbols (i.e., no non-terminals remain).


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      5. The resulting string, consisting entirely of terminal symbols, is a sentence sampled from the
         grammar.

Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for generating a sentence from a PCFG: Process to sample a
sentence from a given PCFG G.
def generate_sentence(G):
   # Initialize the string with the start symbol S
   string = [S]
   # While the string contains non-terminal symbols
   while any(is_nonterminal(symbol) for symbol in string):
      # Select a non-terminal A from the string
      A = select_nonterminal(string)
      # Choose a production rule A → α according to P
      rule = sample_rule(A, G.P )
      # Replace A in the string with α
      string = apply_rule(string, A, rule)
   # Return the generated sentence composed of terminal symbols
   return string


C.1.2    I NSTANTIATING THE G RAMMAR U NDERLYING OUR L ANGUAGE
While generally one directly samples sentences from a grammar, in this work, we define a grammar
that operates over symbols, i.e., whose terminals are variables that are not yet populated by any
specific values from the language’s vocabulary. We emphasize this is an unconventional manner for
defining a PCFG, as one would generally use a standard vocabulary of the language to directly define
terminal symbols. However, to enforce type constraints, we find this unconventional format aids in
making the implementation easier. Specifically, one can simply sample an entirely symbolic sentence,
and then enforce type constraints at the step when these symbols have to be populated.
Overall, our grammar, denoted G, is defined using the following.

        • Terminal symbols: T = {Subj, Obj, Verb, Conj, lVerb, Desc, eAdj, dAdj, Adv, Prep}.
            – Here, Subj is a symbol for a subject, Obj for an object, Verb for verbs, Conj for
              conjunctions, lVerb for a linking verb, Desc for descriptors, eAdj for adjectives used
              for entities, dAdj for adjectives used for descriptors, Adv for adverbs, and Prep for
              prepositions.
        • Non-terminal symbols: NT = {S, sNP, sT, oNP, oT, VP, vT, descT}.
            – Here, S denotes the start symbol, sNP can be interpreted as a noun phrase with a subject
              in it, sT as the immediate ancestor of the subject symbol, oNP as a noun phrase with an
              object in it, oT as the immediate ancestor before the object symbol, VP as a verb phrase,
              vT as the immediate ancestor of the verb symbol, and descT as the immediate ancestor
              of a descriptor symbol.
        • Production rules R:
                     S → sNP VP [1.0]
                   sNP → sT [0.8] | sNP Conj sNP [0.2]
                    VP → lVerb descT [0.4] | Verb Prep oNP [0.4] | VP Conj VP [0.2]
                   oNP → oT [0.7] | oT Conj oNP [0.3]
                    sT → eAdj Subj [0.8] | Subj [0.2]
                    oT → eAdj Obj [0.8] | Obj [0.2]
                 descT → dAdj Desc [0.8] | Desc [0.2]


Note that since non-terminals can appear on both left and right hand side of a rule, there is recursion
possible in our grammar and hence sentences can get very long. We restrict sentence lengths to
75, yielding a language where sentence lengths vary from 4–75 tokens. Probability over rules was
partially adapted from prior work by (Hupkes et al., 2020).


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given the above, we can now sample symbolic sentences such as Subj lVerb Desc. We will populate
these symbols with tokens from our vocabulary V. As noted above, while in general this population
step would be performed as the final step of the grammar, to enforce type constraints and enable
context-sensitivity, we separate it from the grammar.
Implementation. To implement the grammar, we use the NLTK package (Bird et al., 2009), which
provides an easy interface to define PCFGs. Moreover, the package provides pre-implemented parsers
that help perform grammaticality checks, i.e., if our model produces a sentence f (x) for some input
x, we can simply use the parser to check whether f (x) is grammatically correct.

C.2   T YPE C ONSTRAINTS

As described in the main paper, we instantiate a minimal notion of context sensitivity by constraining
when an entity is seen in the context of a property or verb. There are two subtle ways in which such
constraints will affect the generated sentences.

       • Constraining properties. When a symbolic sentence with a descriptor is sampled, the
         descriptor symbol will be populated with a property that is valid for the relevant entity in
         the sentence.
       • Constraining subjects and objects. Subjects and objects broadly distinguish entities (or,
         to be precise, nouns) in a sentence. For properties that help define verbs (e.g., Walk), we
         instantiate a notion of directionality that determines whether the entity can take the action
         suggested by the verb corresponding to the property or whether the action can be taken upon
         it. Accordingly, when a verb is selected, only a subset of subjects and objects that can take
         and have the action of verb be taken upon them are left valid to form a sentence.

Overall, then, say we have a symbolic sentence. We populate the symbols in the sentence as follows.

       • Check if there is a verb to populate. If so:
           1. Randomly sample a verb from the vocabulary and fill it in.
           2. Sample required number of entities that can occur on the right side of the verb, i.e., can
              populate objects
           3. Sample required number of entities that can occur on the left side of the verb, i.e., can
              populate subjects
       • Check if there are descriptor to populate. If so:
           1. If the entities are not populated yet, populate them.
           2. Use the parse tree for the symbolic sentence to identify property of which entity should
              populate the descriptor.
           3. Randomly sample a descriptor from the valid properties of said entity.
       • Check if there are adjectives to populate. If so:
           1. Identify whether the adjective corresponds to an entity or a property
           2. Populate the adjective with a valid adjective from the group of adjectives reserved for
              entities versus properties
       • Check if there are adverbs, link verbs, prepositions, or conjunctions to populate. If so:
           1. Sample an adverb, link verb, preposition, or conjunction from the vocabulary. We
              intentionally do not make these parts context-sensitive, since the remaining parts are
              sufficient to induce context-sensitivity and enable our experiments.

Pseudocode describing the process above is detailed in Algo 2.


C.3   D EFINING THE OVERALL CONTEXT- SENSITIVE LANGUAGE

Our language L is defined by first instantiating the underlying grammar as described in App. C.1
and then the type constraints in App. C.2. We note that since the grammar is a randomized process
and token roles are randomly filled by using the type constraints graph, the odds of seeing the same


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2: Pseudocode for populating a symbolic sentence: Fills in symbols while respect-
ing the type constraints.
def populate_sentence():
   # Check if there is a verb to populate
   if has_verb():
      # Sample a verb from the vocabulary and fill it in
      verb = sample_verb(vocabulary)
      populate_verb(verb)
      # Sample entities for the right side (objects)
      objects = sample_entities(right)
      # Sample entities for the left side (subjects)
      subjects = sample_entities(left)
   # Check if there are descriptors to populate
   if has_descriptors():
      # Populate entities if not already populated
      if not entities_populated():
         populate_entities()
      # Use parse tree to identify which entity’s property to populate
      entity = get_entity_for_descriptor(parse_tree)
      # Sample a descriptor from the valid properties
      descriptor = sample_descriptor(valid_properties, entity)
      populate_descriptor(descriptor)
   # Check if there are adjectives to populate
   if has_adjectives():
      # Identify if the adjective corresponds to an entity or a
       property
      role = identify_role(token)
      # Sample a valid adjective based on the role
      adjective = sample_adjective(role)
      populate_adjective(adjective)
   # Check if there are adverbs, link verbs, prepositions, or
    conjunctions to populate
   if has_adverbs_etc():
      # Sample an adverb, link verb, preposition, or conjunction from
       the vocabulary
      word = sample_word(vocabulary)
      populate_word(word)


                                               21
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Iters = 1    Iters = 1000    Iters = 5000        Iters = 10000   Iters = 50000   Iters = 100000

Entities


           Properties    Properties      Properties          Properties      Properties       Properties

Figure 8: Adjacency matrix with time. As the model undergoes training, entities are seen in the
context of more properties. Recording whether a pair of object and property have been seen together,
we can get the adjacency matrix for a bipartite graph corresponding to entities and properties that
constitute the data-generating process, as shown in the plots. The red-dotted lines indicate class
boundaries. This matrix can be deemed as the adjacency matrix representation of the empirical type
constraints graph, and, as training goes on, it will get closer to the ground truth graph. Note that
several entities and properties will never be seen together, however, other entities from the class may
be paired with a property, allowing the model a signal to infer that the entities likely belong to the
same class.


sample multiple times are exceedingly low. Primary hyperparameters for defining L include number
of entities and number of properties, denoted |E| and |K|, respectively. Unless mentioned explicitly,
we fix these hyperparameters to 900 and 18000 respectively. In several experiments we do vary these
variables though. Thus, we also note that we are slightly abusing notations here and using L to refer
to a single language. In actuality, however, what we have is a family of languages with the same
grammar, but varying number of entities and properties. The vocabulary consists of entities (subjects
and objects), descriptors, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, and conjunctions. All languages
we analyze have the same number of verbs (= 200), linking verbs (= 2), adjectives (= 20), adverbs
(= 20), prepositions (= 3), and conjunctions (= 2).
We also note that the type constraints graph merely describes which properties are valid for a class.
For a specific entity, only a fraction of these entities might be visible during training. Specifically, we
constrain the sampling process such that only 15% of valid properties of a class are actually associated
with an entity. However, as training occurs, the model gets to see several entities in the context
of several properties. Even though certain pairs will never be seen together due to the restriction
discussed above, two randomly sampled entities will still have a non-zero proportion of properties in
whose context they have both been seen, hence giving the model some signal that the entities have
shared characteristics (see Fig. 8). This is likely what leads to the percolation-like process we observe
in the main paper to come into play, and hence yields us a 0.5 power law scaling for the transition
point where model’s performance on generating sentences with descriptors or performing reasoning
tasks on sentences with descriptors starts to improve.
A few example sentences from the language are reported in Figs 9, 10. Note that there are a large
number of symbolic sentences possible; we merely report two of these to provide intuition. We also
reemphasize that naturalistic sentences used as examples in the main paper were to merely analogize
the structures our language is trying to capture. It is not difficult to see that the sentences in the
examples provided here have a similar structure and constraints as those naturalistic examples.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task: free generation
   Input: null
   Output: eAdj19 subj5 has pAdj7 descriptor1496


   Task: unscrambling
   Input: has eAdj19 descriptor1496 pAdj7 subj5
   Output: eAdj19 subj5 has pAdj7 descriptor1496


   Task: conditional generation
   Input: subj5 descriptor1496
   Output: eAdj19 subj5 has pAdj7 descriptor1496


Figure 9: Exemplars where an entity’s properties are described. Each box represents a different
task; specifically, free generation, unscrambling, and conditional generation.


   Task: free generation
   Input: null
   Output: eAdj16 subj102 adv9 verb64 in eAdj1 obj41


   Task: unscrambling
   Input: eAdj16 subj102 adv9 verb64 in eAdj1 obj41
   Output: eAdj16 subj102 adv9 verb64 in eAdj1 obj41


   Task: conditional generation
   Input: verb64 obj41
   Output: eAdj16 subj102 adv9 verb64 in eAdj1 obj41


Figure 10: Exemplars where a subject and object are bound via a verb. Each box represents a
different task; specifically, free generation, unscrambling, and conditional generation.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Man             Walk    Man              Walk         Man            Walk     Man             Walk



    Woman            Talk   Woman             Talk        Woman           Talk    Woman             Talk


    Lawyer           Tall   Lawyer            Tall        Lawyer          Tall    Lawyer            Tall



    Student          Eat    Student           Eat         Student         Eat     Student           Eat



    Doctor           Jump   Doctor            Jump        Doctor          Jump    Doctor           Jump

               (a)                    (b)                           (c)                     (d)

Figure 11: Viewing learning of descriptive type constraints as the problem of percolation on a
bipartite graph. Imagine entities and properties of a class represented as nodes of a bipartite graph.
As training proceeds (marked using large gray arrows in the figure), edges are added to this graph
to denote the model has seen sentences containing nodes connected by the edge, i.e., an entity and
a property. (a) At initialization, there will be no edges in the graph. (b) However, with time, edges
begin to get added (bold, colored edges). (c) With time, the model will see the same properties being
used for the different entities (dotted, colored edges). For ex., it may see that both a Woman and a
Student can Eat. This leads to a path of edges that connect entities and properties which have
not been seen by the model in a shared context (e.g., the model may be able to infer in panel (c) that
a Woman can Jump). (d) If enough properties are shared between different entities, the model can
infer that in fact all such entities belong to the same class and hence can be seen in the context of any
property that is valid for the class. This will yield the learning of the broader concept class structure,
as indicated by evolution of color of nodes and edges: from left to right, color is increasingly red,
indicating there is a path of edges that connects all entities and properties to each other. We analogize
this overall process to execution of the process of percolation on a bipartite graph: as edges are
added, we can define the existence of a valid path between two nodes to suggest that there is enough
information available to believe these nodes are related to each other; with enough edges, there is a
sudden transition that leads to the emergence of a large connected component in the graph, indicating
enough information is available to learn the structure of the class. This can enable generalization to
unseen combinations of entities and properties.


D       L EARNING OF DESCRIPTIVE TYPE CONSTRAINTS AS PERCOLATION ON A
        BIPARTITE GRAPH

We analogize learning of type constraints as a function of time to the addition of edges to a bipartite
graph whose nodes denote entities and properties; an edge denotes a given combination of entity and
property has been seen by the model during training. Consequently, as time goes on, more edges are
added to this graph, yielding a percolation phase transition once a critical edge density necessary for
achieving the transition is met. This transition leads to the emergence of a large connected component.
We claim this percolation process captures the dynamics of our model learning type constraints.
Below, we first discuss the analogy between percolation and learning of type constraints in some
detail (App. D.1), and then derive the scaling of the critical edge density needed for the percolation
phase transition (App. D.2). Latter forms the basis of our experiments in Sec. 6.2.

D.1        M ORE DISCUSSION OF THE A NALOGY

Below, we discuss steps involved in the reasoning that help analogize learning of type constraints
with the problem of percolation phase transition on a bipartite graph. See Fig. 11 for a visualization.
Step 1: Defining the type constraints graph. Imagine a bipartite graph whose nodes on one side
are entities of a class (e.g., Man, Woman, Lawyer, Doctor, etc. forming the class of Humans);
meanwhile, the other set of nodes is the properties these entities can have (e.g., Walk, Talk, Eat,
Jump, etc. for class of Humans). We call this graph the type constraints graph (see also Figure 2b).
When sampling a sentence from our language to train our models, we use the type constraints graph
to constrain which entities and properties can be seen together in a sentence. While all entity-property


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


combinations of a class form valid sentences, given the combinatorially many combinations, at a
given point of time, the model is unlikely to have seen (and hence learned) all possible combinations.
We can however test whether the model “knows” that an unseen combination of entities and properties
can form a valid sentence: if it does, the model has learned to combine an unseen entity and property
belonging to the same class.
Step 2: Analogizing what the model knows to percolation on a bipartite graph. At initialization,
the model does not know that an entity of a class can possess properties of that class. For example,
the model does not know that the entity Man can have the property of being Tall. As the model
undergoes training, it will see sentences connecting entities to properties valid for them; e.g., seeing
the sentence “That man is very tall” can lead to the model learning that the entity Man can be Tall.
We define the concept density matrix (Definition 4) to capture this dynamic at any given time. The
matrix entry corresponding to a pair of entities and properties is assigned the value of 1 at a given
time t if the model has seen this pair of entity and property in a sentence. This matrix can be deemed
as the adjacency matrix of a bipartite graph whose nodes, again, are entities and properties of a class,
and whose edges denote whether the model has the knowledge that an entity–property combination
can produce a valid sentence. As the model undergoes training, more edges are added to this graph
(see Figure 6, left panel). We argue this is reminiscent of the problem of bond percolation on a
bipartite graph, wherein edges are added to the graph one-by-one, and, at some critical edge density,
there is a phase transition that yields a large connected component covering a large proportion of
the graph. That is, there is the sudden emergence of a path between any two randomly selected
nodes of the graph. Beyond the point of transition, the rate of growth of this connected component is
approximately log-linear in edges added.
Step 3: Percolation as a model for predicting unseen combinations of entity–property pairs
can be composed to form a valid sentence. If the percolation analogy is correct, we expect the
transition point in our empirical results where the model starts to learn descriptive constraints in a
log-linear manner with respect to time
                                    p to scale as a power-law of exponent 0.5 in the number of node
combinations of the graph (i.e., ∝ |E||K|). As results in Figure 7 show, this is indeed the case!

D.2    P ERCOLATION THRESHOLD IN THE BIPARTITE GRAPH SETUP

For general bipartite graphs that are uncorrelated, meaning that they are completely described by
the degree distributions P1 (k) and P2 (k) for the entities and properties, respectively, the percolation
threshold is
                                     s
                                                 ⟨k⟩1 ⟨k⟩2
                                pc =                               .                                   (1)
                                        ⟨k(k − 1)⟩1 ⟨k(k − 1)⟩2
Here, ⟨·⟩i denotes the expected value with respect to Pi (k), and we require |E|⟨k⟩1 = |K|⟨k⟩2 for
consistency. The case of randomly selecting connecting edges as demonstrated in the main text
will correspond to starting from a complete bipartite graph, in which case P1 (k) = 1k,|K| and
P2 (k) = 1k,|E| , leading to pc = 1/(|E| − 1)(|K| − 1) ≃ 1/|E||K|.
                                 p                        p

To derive Eq. (1) we use the generating function as explained in (Newman et al., 2001). Firstly, we
introduce the generating function for the degree distribution of two concepts, i = 1, 2:
                                                       ∞
                                                       X
                                      G0i (x)   :=           Pi (k)xk                                       (2)
                                                       k=0

The generating function can be used to calculate moments of the probability distribution, such as the
mean and variance, by taking derivatives:
                            ∞                              ∞
       dG0i (x)             X                              X
                       =          kPi (k)xk−1         =          kPi (k) = ⟨k⟩i                             (3)
         dx x=1
                            k=0                 x=1        k=0
                            ∞                                        ∞
      d2 G0i (x)            X                                        X
                       =          k(k − 1)Pi (k)xk−2             =         k(k − 1)Pi (k) = ⟨k(k − 1)⟩i .   (4)
         dx2     x=1        k=0                            x=1       k=0

Here we denoted the average over the degree distribution of concept i as ⟨·⟩i .


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Another useful property of generating functions is that the generating function of the sum of the
degrees can be described by the power of generating functions. For example, the distribution of the
sum of degrees from two randomly selected nodes from sets i and j, denoted by P̃ij (k), will satisfy
                                   ∞
                                   X
                                         P̃ij (k)xk = G0i (x)G0j (x).                                         (5)
                                   k=0

With these properties in mind, we further introduce the generating function for the distribution of
outgoing edges from a node that we arrive at by following a randomly chosen edge:
                                        P∞              k−1        ′
                                           k=0 kPi (k)x         G0i (x)
                          G1i (x) :=       P  ∞              =          .                       (6)
                                              k=0 kPi (k)        ⟨k⟩i
which can be obtained by noticing that the probability of the degree of a node arrived at from a
randomly chosen edge is proportional to kPi (k). The decreased power of x by one in the numerator
is to exclude the originally chosen edge.
We further introduce the generating function for the distribution of the number of concepts in i that
can be reached from a node in the concept j(̸= i) that is connected to a randomly chosen edge as
G̃1i (x), and the same when randomly choosing a node in concept j, G̃0i (x). These functions satisfy
                                          G̃0i (x)   =      G0i (G1j (x))                                     (7)
                                          G̃1i (x)   =      G1i (G1j (x)).                                    (8)
We also introduce the generating function for the distribution of the sizes of components in concept
i that are reached by choosing an edge, Hi1 (x), and the same when choosing a node in concept i,
Hi0 (x). These satisfy
                                         Hi0 (x)     =     xG̃0i (Hj1 (x))                                    (9)
                                         Hi1 (x)     =     xG̃1i (Hj1 (x)).                                  (10)
Here, the key assumption is that there is no closed loop of edges in the network, which holds if the
fraction of connection is low and there is no cluster (i.e., sub-critical regime).
The average cluster size of concept i, i.e., the number of nodes in i that are connected with each other,
                   ′
is then ⟨Si ⟩ = Hi0 (1), which is
                                                               ′
                                                           G̃0i (1)
                                     ⟨Si ⟩ = 1 +                 ′
                                                                      ,                                      (11)
                                                         1 − G̃1i (1)
using the derivatives of Eqs. (9),10). The percolation threshold is when the denominator in the second
term of Eq. (11) becomes zero, so
                                     ′′      ′′
           1′       1′    1′      G01 (1)G02 (1)   ⟨k(k − 1)⟩1 ⟨k(k − 1)⟩2
         G̃i (1) = Gi (1)Gj (1) =                =                         =1                                (12)
                                     ⟨k⟩1 ⟨k⟩2            ⟨k⟩1 ⟨k⟩2

Now, when the connection of each a probability of connection p associated with each bond on top of
the original graph, the generating function of the degrees will become
                                    ∞ X ∞
                                   X                n k
                   G0i (x; p) =            Pi (n)      p (1 − p)n−k xk                        (13)
                                                    k
                                    k=0 n=k
                                    X∞
                               =           Pi (n)(px + 1 − p)n = G0i (1 + (x − 1)p).                         (14)
                                    n=0
                                                         P∞ P∞                   P∞ Pn
From the first line to the second line, we used             k=0    n=k =          n=0   k=0 . We can then rewrite
Eq. (12) as
                  ⟨k(k − 1)⟩p1 ⟨k(k − 1)⟩p2      ⟨k(k − 1)⟩1 ⟨k(k − 1)⟩2
                                            = p2                         = 1,                                (15)
                         ⟨k⟩p1 ⟨k⟩p2                    ⟨k⟩1 ⟨k⟩2
                                                                            ′′             ′′
from which we obtain Eq. (1). Here we used ⟨k(k − 1)⟩pi = G0i (1; p) = p2 G0i (1) = p2 ⟨k(k − 1)⟩i
               ′             ′
and ⟨k⟩pi = G0i (1; p) = pG0i (1) = p⟨k⟩i .


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2.1    E XPONENT IN THE CLUSTER SIZE
The critical exponent associated with the number of nodes in the cluster for p > pc , S ∼ (p − pc )β ,
is determined to be β = 1 when there is no specific structure in the graph. To see this, let us consider
that u = Hi0 (1) is the probability that a node in i is included in a finite size cluster (i.e., not the large
connected cluster). Recall that Hi0 (1) was the generating function of the number of nodes in concept
i included in the cluster in the subcritical regime (p < pc ); we are here assuming that the statistics
will not change even in the supercritical regime (p > pc ) when neglecting the large cluster. Then,
from Eqs. (9,10), we have
                           Hi0 (1) = u = G̃0i (Hj1 (1)) = G̃0i (G̃1j (u))                                (16)
                                           =    G0i (G1j (G0j (G1i (u)))) =: f (u)                       (17)
which is a self-consistent equation.
By writing u = 1 − ϵ, we have f (1 − ϵ, p) = 1 − ϵf ′ (1, p) + ϵ2 f ′′ (1, p)/2..., where the derivative is
taken for u. Noticing that f ′ (1, pc ) = 1, we obtain the relation
                                                 "                             #
                        ∂2                         1 ∂3
    ϵ = (p − pc )            f (u, p)                   2
                                                             f (u, p)            + o(p − pc ) + o(ϵ) (18)
                      ∂u∂p              u=1,p=pc 2 ∂u ∂p              u=1,p=pc

        ∼ (p − pc ),                                                                                     (19)
indicating β = 1.
As an interesting generalization, a classic result (Cohen et al., 2002) shows that even for the situation
where pc > 0, the power β can deviate from one. This corresponds to when the differential coefficients
in Eq. (18) diverge, corresponding to cases where the second or third moment being ill-defined. For
the case of Pi (k) ∼ k −γ with 3 < γ < 4, we can show that β = 1/(γ − 3).

D.2.2    T RANSITION B EHAVIOR FOR F INITE I NFERENCE S TEPS
The mapping of the inference scheme to the percolation problem becomes precise only in the context
of infinite inference steps. For a finite number of steps, denoted as n, the pertinent question is the
number of node pairs across the sets connected within 2n + 1 edges. Using the average degrees ⟨k⟩1
and ⟨k⟩2 respectively, a node in the first set can reach approximately ⟨k⟩n+1
                                                                          1   ⟨k⟩n2 nodes after 2n + 1
steps. Hence, the approximate fraction of connected edges within 2n + 1 steps is |E|⟨k⟩n+11    ⟨k⟩n2 .


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Model architecture. We train a two-block Transformer based on the nanoGPT architecture (Andrej
Karpathy, 2023) using the standard autoregressive language modeling objective, i.e., next token
prediction. Each block contains two attention heads, an MLP, GELU activation, and processes /
produces 128 dimension representations. Both token and position embeddings are learned during
training.
Optimization setting. Models are trained using the Adam optimizer with 10−3 stepsize, batch-size
of 128, and 10−4 weight decay for 105 iterations (or until the run collapses due to cluster challenges;
e.g., power outages). Gradient clipping at norm of 1 is applied. No learning rate schedule is used.
Unless stated otherwise, results are averaged over three seeds.
Data configuration. Sentences are sampled “online”, i.e., we sample a fresh batch of data every
iteration by following the rules of the language. The language has M entities and N properties
uniformly distributed over C classes, with edges connecting properties sparsely and randomly
distributed over valid properties for a given object (specifically, only 15% connections are made).
We slightly abuse notations by using L to refer to our language, since in actuality we have a family
of languages with the same grammar, but varying number of entities and properties. We note that
since the grammar is a randomized process and token roles are randomly filled by using the type
constraints graph, the odds of seeing the same sample multiple times are exceedingly low.
Tokenization. We use a one-hot, manually defined tokenization scheme wherein each token is
associated with a unique token ID.

E.0.1   P ERFORMANCE OF A MEMORIZING SOLUTION ON D ESCRIPTIVE SENTENCES
As the model undergoes training, its accuracy
                                                  at getting
                                                           descriptive constraints right can, at max,
                                               0.25Bt|C|
be the following: Acc = 0.1 + f ∗ max 1, |E||K|Rf , where f is fraction of pairs from the type
constraints graph the model can see during training, 0.25 is approximately the proportion of randomly
sampled sentences that are descriptive in nature, B is batch-size, t is number of iterations, and R
is number of repetitions needed to internalize that an entity and property constitute a valid context.
Since we see the third phase in a regime where t ∼ 104 , assuming at least 4 repetitions are necessary
for internalizing a pair, we have Acc ∼ 0.15.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    F URTHER R ESULTS : ROBUSTNESS ACROSS S ETTINGS AND E VALUATIONS
In this section, we report several more metrics relevant to assess how well the model has internalized
the language and how well it is able to perform tasks on top of strings from the language. We report
results across several configurations as well. Rarely, but certainly sometimes, runs crashed due to
cluster issues. These configurations are not reported, or reported until the point of crash if sufficient
time had passed in training.

       • Base setting: This is the setting used throughout the paper, i.e., with 10 classes and 900
         entities.
       • Varying number of properties: ranging from 14800—38800, in increments of 1600.
       • Different class setting: we change number of classes to 2 and repeat all evaluations in this
         setting.
       • Different entities setting: we change number of entities to 1800 and repeat all evaluations in
         this setting.

We specifically report the following results. Both in the main paper and in the results below, evaluation
metrics are averaged over 1000 randomly sampled strings.

       • Loss / learning curves under different settings: App. F.1.
       • Grammaticality and type checks under different settings: App. F.2.
       • Negative log likelihoods of sentences from the langauge and their perturbed versions (e.g.,
         where type constraints are not correct): App. F.3.
       • How well does the model follow our language, where we analyze NLLs of sentences
         generated by the model, distribution of length, and parse tree depth: App. F.4.
       • Evolution of Attention maps: App. F.5.
       • Further results on unscrambling: App. F.6.
       • Further results on Conditional Generation: App. F.7. Conditional generation evaluations
         turn out to be extremely time-expensive, with a single run taking approximately 4 days to
         finish when conditional generation is evaluated (compared to 12 hours without). This is
         likely a result of model generating extremely long sentences to compose conditioning tokens
         that can involve multiple subjects, objects, and properties. We thus primarily focus on free
         generation and unscrambling in the results reported in this section. We do provide results
         for conditional generation in one more setting with 27600 properties to demonstrate that our
         findings from the main paper (i.e., in the 18000 properties setting) generalize.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1         L EARNING C URVES

We plot learning curves for different settings in this section. Results are reported for varying number
of properties, averaged over 3 seeds, and results for the base setting used in the main paper where
number of properties is fixed to be 18000. For the latter setting, we show the average run alongside
individual runs.

F.1.1             BASE SETTING WITH VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
                   14800             18000                   21200             24400               27600           30800            34000                37200
                   16400             19600                   22800             26000               29200           32400            35600                38800
                            Total                              Free generation                         Unscrambling                 Conditional generation
                                               3.8 × 10 1                               8 × 10 1
       6 × 10 1
                                               3.6 × 10 1                               7 × 10 1                           5 × 10 1

       5 × 10 1                                3.4 × 10 1
                                                                                        6 × 10 1
Loss


                                               3.2 × 10 1                                                                  4 × 10 1
                                                                                        5 × 10 1
       4 × 10 1                                 3 × 10 1

                      103          104           105             103       104          105                103     104      105              103         104     105
                          Iterations                                 Iterations                             Iterations                        Iterations

Figure 12: Learning curves with varying number of properties (base setting). As number of
properties are varied, we see the overall loss is substantially more continuous, but individual tasks
can see sudden learning. For example, in free generation, we see a sudden loss drop. This point is
precisely when the model learns to produce grammatically correct sentences. Very slightly after this
point, both tasks of unscrambling and conditional generation see improvement as well. There is a
second change of slope for these tasks between 103 to 7 × 103 iterations, depending on the number
of properties. These points match match the moment where the model starts to improve in its Type
Check performance.
                          Total                               Free generation                              Unscrambling                  Conditional generation
       6 × 10 1      seed 0                                                                 8 × 10 1
                     seed 1                     3.6 × 10 1                                                                        5 × 10 1
                     seed 2                                                                 7 × 10 1
       5 × 10 1      Average                    3.4 × 10 1
                                                                                            6 × 10 1
Loss


                                                3.2 × 10 1                                                                        4 × 10 1
                                                  3 × 10 1                                  5 × 10 1
       4 × 10 1
                                                2.8 × 10 1
                                                                                            4 × 10 1
                    103      104         105                    103      104      105                       103    104     105                     103     104   105
                     Iterations                                  Iterations                                  Iterations                             Iterations

Figure 13: Learning curves for setting with 18000 properties (base setting). We report this plot to
zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some minimal variance across runs, but
mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1.2             C HANGING TO 1800 ENTITIES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of entities to 1800 (compared to base setting of 900) and report learning
curves under varying number of properties. See Figs. 14, 15.
                   14800             18000                  21200             24400              27600           30800            34000                37200
                   16400             19600                  22800             26000              29200           32400            35600                38800
                            Total                             Free generation                         Unscrambling                Conditional generation
                                               4 × 10 1
                                                                                      8 × 10 1
       6 × 10 1
                                                                                      7 × 10 1                           5 × 10 1

       5 × 10 1
Loss


                                                                                      6 × 10 1
                                                                                                                         4 × 10 1
                                                                                      5 × 10 1
       4 × 10 1
                                               3 × 10 1
                      103          104         105              103       104           105              103     104      105              103         104     105
                          Iterations                                Iterations                            Iterations                        Iterations

Figure 14: Learning curves with varying number of properties (1800 entities). As number of
properties are varied, we see the overall loss is substantially more continuous, but individual tasks
can see sudden learning. For example, in free generation, we see a sudden loss drop. This point is
precisely when the model learns to produce grammatically correct sentences. Very slightly after this
point, both tasks of unscrambling and conditional generation see improvement as well. There is a
second change of slope for these tasks between 103 to 7 × 103 iterations, depending on the number
of properties. These points match match the moment where the model starts to improve in its Type
Check performance.
                          Total                              Free generation                             Unscrambling                  Conditional generation
                     seed 0                    3.8 × 10 1                                  8 × 10 1
       6 × 10 1      seed 1
                     seed 2                    3.6 × 10 1                                  7 × 10 1                             5 × 10 1
                     Average
       5 × 10 1                                3.4 × 10 1
Loss


                                                                                           6 × 10 1
                                               3.2 × 10 1                                                                       4 × 10 1
                                                                                           5 × 10 1
       4 × 10 1                                 3 × 10 1

                    103      104         105                   103      104       105                     103    104     105                     103     104   105
                     Iterations                                 Iterations                                 Iterations                             Iterations

Figure 15: Learning curves for setting with 18000 properties (1800 entities). We report this plot
to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some minimal variance across runs, but
mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1.3             C HANGING TO 2 CLASSES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of classes to divide entities and properties over to 2 (compared to base setting
of 10) and report learning curves under varying number of properties. See Figs. 16, 17.
                   14800                18000                   21200             27600               30800           34000             37200                 38800
                   16400                19600                   24400             29200               32400           35600
                                Total                             Free generation                         Unscrambling                  Conditional generation
                                                  3.5 × 10 1                                                                   5 × 10 1
                                                  3.4 × 10 1                               7 × 10 1
       5 × 10 1                                   3.3 × 10 1
                                                  3.2 × 10 1                               6 × 10 1
Loss


                                                                                                                               4 × 10 1
                                                  3.1 × 10 1
       4 × 10 1                                    3 × 10 1                                5 × 10 1

                                                  2.9 × 10 1
                                                  2.8 ×510 1
                          103         104           10              103       104          105                103     104      105                103         104     105
                           Iterations                                   Iterations                             Iterations                          Iterations

Figure 16: Learning curves with varying number of properties (2 classes). As number of
properties are varied, we see the overall loss is substantially more continuous, but individual tasks
can see sudden learning. For example, in free generation, we see a sudden loss drop. This point is
precisely when the model learns to produce grammatically correct sentences. Very slightly after this
point, both tasks of unscrambling and conditional generation see improvement as well. There is a
second change of slope for these tasks between 103 to 7 × 103 iterations, depending on the number
of properties. These points match match the moment where the model starts to improve in its Type
Check performance.
                           Total                                 Free generation                              Unscrambling                   Conditional generation
                     seed 0                        3.4 × 10 1                                                                       4.75 × 10 1
                     seed 1                        3.3 × 10 1                                  7 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                     4.5 × 10 1
       5 × 10 1      seed 2                        3.2 × 10 1
                     Average                                                                   6 × 10 1                             4.25 × 10 1
                                                   3.1 × 10 1                                                                          4 × 10 1
Loss


                                                     3 × 10 1                                                                       3.75 × 10 1
                                                                                               5 × 10 1
       4 × 10 1                                    2.9 × 10 1                                                                        3.5 × 10 1
                                                   2.8 × 10 1                                                                       3.25 × 10 1
                                                                                               4 × 10 1
                    103         104         105                    103      104      105                       103    104     105                       103     104   105
                     Iterations                                     Iterations                                  Iterations                               Iterations

Figure 17: Learning curves for setting with 18000 properties (2 classes). We report this plot to
zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some minimal variance across runs, but
mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2         G RAMMATICALITY AND T YPE C HECKS

As the model learns rules of our language, we can track how grammatical its sentences are and
whether they satisfy type constraints, as done in the main paper. We report similar results for different
settings in this section. Specifically, we report results for varying number of properties, averaged
over 3 seeds, and for the base setting used in the main paper where number of classes is fixed to be
18000. For the latter setting, we show the average run alongside individual runs.
For grammaticality, we merely use the NLTK parser to check whether the generated sentences by
the model under free generation are grammatically valid, i.e., they follow the rules of the grammar.
For Type Checks, we extract the subjects, objects, and any properties in the sentence to checks
whether they are valid under the type constraints graph (see Def. 3).

F.2.1        BASE SETTING WITH VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We report results under varying number of properties with the base experimental setting. See
Figs. 18, 19.
             14800                18000                 21200           24400              27600           30800            34000             37200
             16400                19600                 22800           26000              29200           32400            35600             38800
      100
              Grammaticality                      Type Check (Descriptive)0 Type Check (Relative)                                  Type Check (All)
                                                                                      10
                                            3 × 10 1
                                                                                                                         10 1
 6 × 10 1                                   2 × 10 1

 4 × 10 1                                                                          10 1
                                                                                                                         10 2
 3 × 10 1                                      10 1

 2 × 10 1
                                            6 × 10 2                                                                  10 3
                 103            104         105             103        104      105                103     104     105               103       104      105
                     Iterations                                 Iterations                          Iterations                        Iterations

Figure 18: Grammaticality and Type Checks with varying number of properties (base setting).
As number of properties are varied, we see the grammar is learned around broadly the same time,
i.e., grammar learning is invariant to number of properties (as also seen in learning curves). For type
check, we see as soon as grammaticality reaches its maximum, relative constraints quickly improve,
leading to a boost in accuracy of all constraints evaluation (rightmost panel). Descriptive constraints
see a transition at this point as well, but then after a period of saturation (akin to a saddle point), start
to improve at an approximately linear rate (on log-log scale) until saturating again. These results
match the base setting shown in paper.

      100
              Grammaticality                       Type Check (Descriptive)
                                             4 × 10 1
                                                                                             Type Check (Relative)                   Type Check (All)
                seed 0                                                                 100
                seed 1                       3 × 10 1
6 × 10 1        seed 2                                                                                                      10 1
                Average                      2 × 10 1
4 × 10 1                                                                              10 1
3 × 10 1                                                                                                                    10 2
                                                10 1
2 × 10 1
                                             6 × 10 2                                 10 2                                  10 3

               103        104         105                  103        104    105                   103     104     105                 103       104    105
                Iterations                                      Iterations                           Iterations                            Iterations

Figure 19: Grammaticality and Type Checks with 18000 properties (base setting). We report this
plot to zoom into a specific configuration, in particular the one used in main paper. As can be seen,
there is some minimal variance across runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2.2       C HANGING TO 1800 ENTITIES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of entities to 1800 (compared to base setting of 900) and report results under
varying number of properties. See Figs. 20, 21.
            14800              18000              21200           24400                 27600           30800            34000          37200
            16400              19600              22800           26000                 29200           32400            35600          38800
             Grammaticality                  Type Check (Descriptive)0 Type Check (Relative)                                  Type Check (All)
                                       3 × 10 1                                  10

                                                                                                                      10 1
 6 × 10 1                              2 × 10 1

 4 × 10 1
                                                                                10 1
 3 × 10 1                                 10 1                                                                        10 2


 2 × 10 1
                                       6 × 10 2
                                                                                                                   10 3
               103        104          105             103       104       105                  103     104     105              103     104        105
                    Iterations                            Iterations                             Iterations                       Iterations

Figure 20: Grammaticality and Type Checks with varying number of properties (1800 entities).
To demonstrate robustness of results, we increase number of entities in this experiment. We again
find that as number of properties are varied, the grammar is learned around broadly the same time,
i.e., grammar learning is invariant to number of properties (as also seen in learning curves). For type
check, we see as soon as grammaticality reaches its maximum, relative constraints quickly improve,
leading to a boost in accuracy of all constraints evaluation (rightmost panel). Descriptive constraints
see a transition at this point as well, but then after a period of saturation (akin to a saddle point), start
to improve at an approximately linear rate (on log-log scale) until saturating again. These results
match the base setting shown in paper.

    100
             Grammaticality                      Type Check (Descriptive)                Type Check (Relative)                   Type Check (All)
              seed 0                                                              100
              seed 1                                                                                                   10 1
6 × 10 1      seed 2
              Average                                                            10 1
4 × 10 1                                                                                                               10 2
                                          10 1
3 × 10 1

2 × 10 1                                                                         10 2                                  10 3


              103        104       105                103       104       105                   103     104     105               103     104       105
                Iterations                                Iterations                              Iterations                        Iterations

Figure 21: Grammaticality and Type Checks with 18000 properties (1800 entities). We report
this plot to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some minimal variance across
runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2.3       C HANGING TO 2 CLASSES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of classes to divide entities and properties over to 2 (compared to base setting
of 10) and report results under varying number of properties. See Figs. 22, 23.
            14800               18000                 21200           27600              30800           34000            37200              38800
            16400               19600                 24400           29200              32400           35600
             Grammaticality                     Type Check (Descriptive)0 Type Check (Relative)                                   Type Check (All)
     100                                                                           10
                                                                                                                 6 × 10 1
                                          6 × 10 1
                                                                                                                 4 × 10 1
 6 × 10 1
                                          5 × 10 1                                                               3 × 10 1
 4 × 10 1                                                                     6 × 10 1
                                                                                                                 2 × 10 1
 3 × 10 1                                 4 × 10 1


 2 × 10 1                                                                     4 × 10 1
               103            104         105             103        104      105                103     104     105                103       104      105
                   Iterations                                 Iterations                          Iterations                         Iterations

Figure 22: Grammaticality and Type Checks with varying number of properties (2 classes). To
demonstrate robustness of results, we increase fewer classes in this experiment. We again find that as
number of properties are varied, the grammar is learned around broadly the same time, i.e., grammar
learning is invariant to number of properties (as also seen in learning curves). For type check, we
see as soon as grammaticality reaches its maximum, relative constraints quickly improve, leading
to a boost in accuracy of all constraints evaluation (rightmost panel). Descriptive constraints see a
transition at this point as well, but then after a period of saturation (akin to a saddle point), start to
improve at an approximately linear rate (on log-log scale) until saturating again. The results are less
prominent for this setting, but zooming in (see figure below) shows the claims do follows the base
setting shown in paper.
            Grammaticality                       Type Check (Descriptive)
                                           7 × 10 1
                                                                                            Type Check (Relative)                   Type Check (All)
    100       seed 0                                                                 100
                                                                                                                       6 × 10 1
              seed 1
              seed 2                       6 × 10 1
6 × 10 1      Average                                                                                                  4 × 10 1
                                           5 × 10 1                                                                    3 × 10 1
4 × 10 1                                                                         6 × 10 1
3 × 10 1                                                                                                               2 × 10 1
                                           4 × 10 1
2 × 10 1
                                                                                 4 × 10 1
             103        104         105                  103        104    105                   103     104     105                  103       104    105
               Iterations                                     Iterations                           Iterations                             Iterations

Figure 23: Grammaticality and Type Checks with 18000 properties (2 classes). We report this
plot to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some minimal variance across
runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                              35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3   N EGATIVE L OG L IKELIHOOD OF S ENTENCES FROM L ANGUAGE AND THEIR P ERTURBED
      V ERSIONS

In this section, we report negative log-likelihoods (NLL) assigned by the model to randomly sampled
sentences from the language during the course of training. To check how well the model is learning
the language, and not perhaps overfitting to some specific samples (we note this is unlikely to occur
in online learning, so this evaluation is just a sanity check but not crucial). To this end, we evaluate
the model assigned NLLs for following settings.

       • Seen. This is essentially the training distribution. We define valid sentences from the
         language by using the part of the type constraints graph that has connections between
         entities and properties, and evaluate the model NLLs.
       • Uniform. Since only a fraction of valid connections are shown to the model during training,
         it is not necessary for it to generalize to other valid connections. To assess whether the
         model can make such inferences, in this evaluation, we allow any valid connection between
         entities and properties to be uniformly sampled. This is also the primary evaluation setting
         for most experiments conducted in this work.
       • Randomize values. Arguably, the model can overly generalize and even start deeming
         sentences that do not satisfy the type constraints to be valid. To assess this, in this evaluation,
         we ensure the sentence remains grammatically correct, but intentionally use entities and
         properties that yield a sentence that does not follow type constraints.
       • Randomize grammar. We simply sample a sentence and permute it to break the grammati-
         cal rules, while, technically speaking, preserving type constraints since tokens seen in the
         sentence are allowed to be in the same context.

Results are reported for varying number of properties, averaged over 3 seeds, and for the base setting
used in the main paper where number of classes is fixed to be 18000. For the latter setting, we
show the average run alongside individual runs. Broadly, our results show the following process is
underway as the model undergoes training.

      1. First the model learns the grammar. At this point, Seen, Uniform, and Randomize Values all
         see improved NLL. This is what we expect. Since a grammatically correct sentence does not
         have to satisfy type constraints, in this first phase, the model is bound to show improved
         NLL for sentences that respect vs. do not respect type constraints.
      2. Then, there is a sudden improvement in NLL for both Seen and Uniform evaluations. At
         precisely this point, the Randomize values evaluation hugely degrades. This implies that
         once the model learns type constraints, it does not deem likely sentences that do not respect
         them.
      3. For the most part, the model never deems grammatically incorrect sentences to be likely.
         However, there is a sudden, large degradation in NLLs for grammatically incorrect sentences
         later in training.


                                                    36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3.1             BASE SETTING WITH VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We report results under varying number of properties with the base experimental setting. See
Figs. 24, 25.
                    14800             18000                  21200             24400               27600           30800            34000                37200
                    16400             19600                  22800             26000               29200           32400            35600                38800
                             Seen                                     Uniform            6 × 101
                                                                                                       Randomize Values                 Randomize Grammar
      4.8 × 101                                 4.8 × 101
      4.6 × 101                                 4.6 × 101                                                                   4 × 102

      4.4 × 101                                 4.4 × 101                                                                   3 × 102

      4.2 × 101                                 4.2 × 101                                                                   2 × 102
NLL


                                                                                         5 × 101
        4 × 101                                  4 × 101
      3.8 × 101                                 3.8 × 101                                                                         102
      3.6 × 101                                 3.6 × 101
                       103          104          105             103       104         105                 103     104      105                 103       104      105
                           Iterations                                Iterations                             Iterations                           Iterations

Figure 24: NLL of sentences with different perturbations and varying number of properties
(base setting). See text in App. F.3 for a detailed discussion. Broadly, we see NLL of Seen evaluation
is very slightly better than Uniform.
                           Seen                                      Uniform                            Randomize Values                      Randomize Grammar
      4.6 × 101       seed 0                     4.6 × 101                                   6 × 101
      4.4 × 101       seed 1                     4.4 × 101
                      seed 2
      4.2 × 101       Average                    4.2 × 101
NLL


       4 × 101                                    4 × 101                                    5 × 101
                                                                                                                                        102
      3.8 × 101                                  3.8 × 101
      3.6 × 101                                  3.6 × 101
      3.4 × 101                                  3.4 × 101
                     103      104         105                   103      104       105                      103    104     105                    103       104    105
                      Iterations                                 Iterations                                  Iterations                               Iterations

Figure 25: NLL of sentences with different perturbations for setting with 18000 properties (base
setting). We report this plot to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some
minimal variance across runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3.2             C HANGING TO 1800 ENTITIES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of entities to 1800 (compared to base setting of 900) and report results under
varying number of properties. See Figs. 26, 27.
                   14800              18000               21200          24400               27600          30800           34000                37200
                   16400              19600               22800          26000               29200          32400           35600                38800
                            Seen                                  Uniform                         Randomize Values              Randomize Grammar
      5 × 101                                  5 × 101                            6 × 101                             4 × 102
                                                                                                                      3 × 102

                                                                                                                      2 × 102
NLL


                                                                                  5 × 101

      4 × 101                                  4 × 101                                                                    102


                      103        104          105             103       104       105                103    104     105                 103       104      105
                       Iterations                                 Iterations                          Iterations                         Iterations

Figure 26: NLL of sentences with different perturbations and varying number of properties
(1800 entities). See text in App. F.3 for a detailed discussion. Broadly, these plots show results with
fewer classes show similar behavior as the base setting.
                            Seen                5 × 101            Uniform                         Randomize Values                   Randomize Grammar
      4.8 × 101       seed 0                                                            6 × 101                           3 × 102
                      seed 1
      4.6 × 101       seed 2
      4.4 × 101       Average                                                                                             2 × 102
NLL


      4.2 × 101
                                                                                        5 × 101
       4 × 101                                  4 × 101
                                                                                                                                102
      3.8 × 101
      3.6 × 101
                     103        104      105                  103       104      105                  103    104    105                   103       104    105
                       Iterations                                 Iterations                           Iterations                             Iterations

Figure 27: NLL of sentences with different perturbations for setting with 18000 properties (1800
entities). We report this plot to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some
minimal variance across runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3.3             C HANGING TO 2 CLASSES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of classes to divide entities and properties over to 2 (compared to base setting
of 10) and report results under varying number of properties. See Figs. 28, 29.
                    14800             18000                  21200             27600               30800           34000            37200                38800
                    16400             19600                  24400             29200               32400           35600
                             Seen                                     Uniform                        Randomize Values                   Randomize Grammar
      4.4 × 101                                 4.4 × 101                                5 × 101                            4 × 102
      4.2 × 101                                 4.2 × 101                                                                   3 × 102

        4 × 101                                  4 × 101                                                                    2 × 102
NLL


      3.8 × 101                                 3.8 × 101
                                                                                                                                  102
      3.6 × 101                                 3.6 × 101
                                                                                        4 × 101
                       103          104          105             103       104         105                 103     104      105                 103       104      105
                           Iterations                                Iterations                             Iterations                           Iterations

Figure 28: NLL of sentences with different perturbations and varying number of properties (2
classes). See text in App. F.3 for a detailed discussion. Broadly, these plots show results with fewer
classes show similar behavior as the base setting.
                           Seen                                      Uniform                          Randomize Values                        Randomize Grammar
      4.2 × 101       seed 0                     4.2 × 101                                                                         4 × 102
                      seed 1                                                               5 × 101
       4 × 101        seed 2                      4 × 101                                                                          3 × 102
                      Average
                                                                                                                                   2 × 102
NLL


      3.8 × 101                                  3.8 × 101

      3.6 × 101                                  3.6 × 101
                                                                                                                                        102
      3.4 × 101                                  3.4 × 101                                 4 × 101
                                                                                                                                   6 × 101
                     103      104         105                   103      104       105                      103    104     105                    103       104    105
                      Iterations                                 Iterations                                  Iterations                               Iterations

Figure 29: NLL of sentences with different perturbations for setting with 18000 properties (2
classes). We report this plot to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some
minimal variance across runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.


                                                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.4     H OW WELL DOES THE MODEL FOLLOW THE GRAMMAR : DISTRIBUTION OF NLL S ,
        DEPTHS , AND LENGTHS

In this section, we analyze how well the model learns our language. Specifically, we let model
produce a sentence and then use the data-generating process (PCFG and our type constraints graph)
to analyze the max, min, and mean values of metrics listed below. Note that in the following, we
restrict evaluations to grammatically valid sentences only, i.e., only model generations that are
grammatically valid are used for this evaluation (else the NLL will be infinity). Since the model
produces grammatically sentences ≈90–95% of the time (see App. F.2), this conditioning leads to
filtering of only a very minimal number of generations.

        • NLL. We analyze how likely the sentences generated by the model are under the data-
          generating process.
            – Note that if sentences from the grammar were used itself for this evaluation, min, max,
              and mean values over a batch of 1000 sentences turn out to be 1.0, 7.63, and 68.2 for
              the base setting; evaluations of model’s generations are within these ranges as well.
        • Parse Tree Depth. We use the NLTK parser to compute the parse tree underlying our
          model’s generated sentences and the tree’s depth.
            – Note that if sentences from the grammar were used itself for this evaluation, min,
              max, and mean values over a batch of 1000 sentences turns out to be 3, 4.78, and 15;
              evaluations of model’s generations are within these ranges as well.
        • Lengths. We compute the number of tokens in model’s generated sentences.
            – Note that if sentences from the grammar were used itself for this evaluation, min,
              max, and mean values over a batch of 1000 sentences turns out to be 4, 10, and 107;
              evaluations of model’s generations are within these ranges as well.

F.4.1    BASE SETTING WITH VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We report results under varying number of properties with the base experimental setting. See Fig. 30.
        14800          18000        21200      24400          27600         30800   34000              37200
        16400          19600        22800      26000          29200         32400   35600              38800
                     NLL                       Parse Tree Depth                           Lengths
                                         101


                                                                             101
 101

                                 max
                                 mean    100                                 100
                                 min
            103            104     105          103          104      105           103          104           105
                  Iterations                          Iterations                          Iterations

Figure 30: Grammar characteristics of model generation as number of properties are varied
(base setting). See App. F.4 for a detailed discussion. Broadly, model generated sentences are in a
similar range as our language’s.


                                                       40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.4.2    C HANGING TO 1800 ENTITIES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of entities to 1800 (compared to base setting of 900) and report results under
varying number of properties. See Fig. 31.
        14800          18000        21200      24400          27600         30800   34000              37200
        16400          19600        22800      26000          29200         32400   35600              38800
                     NLL                       Parse Tree Depth                           Lengths
                                         101


                                                                             101
 101

                                 max
                                 mean                                        100
                                         100
                                 min
            103            104     105          103          104      105           103          104           105
                  Iterations                          Iterations                          Iterations


Figure 31: Grammar characteristics of model generation as number of properties are varied
(1800 entities). See App. F.4 for a detailed discussion. Broadly, model generated sentences are in a
similar range as our language’s.

F.4.3    C HANGING TO 2 CLASSES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of classes to divide entities and properties over to 2 (compared to base setting
of 10) and report results under varying number of properties. See Fig. 32.
        14800          18000        21200      27600          30800         34000   37200              38800
        16400          19600        24400      29200          32400         35600
                     NLL                       Parse Tree Depth                           Lengths
                                         101


                                                                             101

 101

                                 max
                                 mean                                        100
                                 min     100
            103            104     105          103          104      105           103          104           105
                  Iterations                          Iterations                          Iterations


Figure 32: Grammar characteristics of model generation as number of properties are varied (2
classes). See App. F.4 for a detailed discussion. Broadly, model generated sentences are in a similar
range as our language’s.


                                                       41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.5     E VOLUTION OF ATTENTION MAPS

As the model acquires the grammar, we expect it to attend to specific parts of the context to predict the
next token. Given the simplicity of our model, we can expect the attention maps to be semantically
meaningful, especially after the points of emergence. To assess this, every 1000 iterations of
training, we record model’s attention maps in the base experimental setting on 100 sentences that are
either descriptive or relative in nature. Specifically, we define a symbolic sentence that define the
grammatical configuration of the sentence, and then sample values for individual tokens according to
their roles a 100 times. The attention maps are then recorded and averaged.

F.5.1    D ESCRIPTIVE SENTENCES
Due to space constraints, we only report attention maps at iterations [0, 1000, 10000, 30000, 50000].
The primary motivation here is that around iteration 1000 is when the model first seems to learn
the grammar. Similarly, between 1000–10000, it starts to learn type constraints. Then, between
10000–50000, it starts to learn about descriptive properties.


          (a) Initialization               (b) 1000 iterations                (c) 5000 iterations


         (d) 10000 iterations              (e) 30000 iterations              (f) 50000 iterations

Figure 33: Evolution of attention maps for descriptive sentences. Since visualizing the evolution
across time is difficult, we pick a few salient points according to region identified as different phase
according to learning curves and visualize them. We find that indeed the first time the model sees
a sparse attention structure is around 1000 iterations of training, i.e., when it becomes accurate at
producing grammatically correct sentences. From 5–30000 iterations, the model learns to focus on
subject when producing next token, but the link verb and descriptive property do not pay substantial
attention to subject. However, there is a point after 30000 iterations post which the attention on
subject substantially increases; this is the range where other evaluation show a change in performance
as well.


                                                   42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.5.2 R ELATIVE S ENTENCES
Due to space constraints, we only report attention maps at iterations [0, 1000, 10000, 30000, 50000].
The primary motivation here is that around iteration 1000 is when the model first seems to learn the
grammar. Similarly, between 1000–10000, it starts to learn relative type constraints. We expect after
this range, the attention pattern to not change much—this is indeed what happens. We see the model
  is basically improving the sharpness of its attention map (pay more attention to tokens that were
                                         already being attended).


         (a) Initialization                (b) 1000 iterations               (c) 5000 iterations


        (d) 10000 iterations              (e) 30000 iterations              (f) 50000 iterations

Figure 34: Evolution of attention maps for relative sentences. Since visualizing the evolution
across time is difficult, we pick a few salient points according to region identified as different phase
according to learning curves and visualize them. We find that indeed the first time the model sees
a sparse attention structure is around 1000 iterations of training, i.e., when it becomes accurate at
producing grammatically correct sentences. Once the model learns relative type constraints (around
5000 iterations generally), we see the attention patterns essentially stabilizes and does not change
much; albeit, it does get sharper (more attention to the tokens that were already being attended).
Interestingly, we see object tokens paying large attention to verbs, i.e., objects are being selected by
analyzing which verbs came before them. We see some non-trivial dependence between verb and
the adverb preceding it, which itself solely attends to the subject token (i.e., it copies that token’s
representation); this could suffice to ensure the model gets verbs right for a subject.


                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.6   M ORE RESULTS ON U NSCRAMBLING

In this section, we report several more results evaluating our models’ performance on unscrambling
under varying number of properties for the base setting, setting with increased number of entities, and
with only 2 classes to divide entities and properties over. We report results for the following metrics.

       • Exact Match. Accuracy of the model for getting every token of the scrambled sentence into
         its right position in the unscrambled version.
       • Per Token Accuracy. This metric can be thought of as a smoother version of Exact Match,
         i.e., it provides partial credit to the model as it learns to solve the task.
       • Accuracy on Descriptive Sentences. In this evaluation, we compute the exact match
         accuracy for sentences that are descriptive in nature, i.e., sentences wherein claims are made
         about an entity possessing a property.
            – We note that the precise way this evaluation is done is by restricting the sentence length
              to the shortest sentences (≤ 6 tokens). This range is primarily constituted of sentences
              that are descriptive in nature (≈94%).
       • Accuracy on Relative Sentences. In this evaluation, we compute the exact match accuracy
         for sentences that are primarily relative in nature, i.e., sentences wherein claims are made
         about a subject relating to an object via a verb.
            – We note that the precise way this evaluation is done is by restricting the sentence length
              to the range of (7—9 tokens). This range is primarily constituted of sentences that are
              relative in nature (≈85%).
       • Grammaticality. Given the output generated by the model when it is fed in a scrambled
         input, we evaluate whether the output is grammatically correct or not.
       • Type Check. Given the output generated by the model when it is fed in a scrambled input,
         we evaluate whether the output follows type constraints or not. We measure accuracy over all
         constraints, i.e., we do not decompose this evaluation over descriptive / relative properties.


                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.6.1          BASE SETTING WITH VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We report results under varying number of properties with the base experimental setting. See
Figs. 35, 36.
                       14800              18000    21200        24400           27600         30800       34000             37200
                       16400              19600    22800        26000           29200         32400       35600             38800

                                Exact Match               0.7   Per Token Accuracy                    Descriptive Sentences
               0.25                                                                            0.40
                                                          0.6                                  0.35
               0.20
                                                          0.5                                  0.30
               0.15                                                                            0.25
                                                          0.4
                                                                                               0.20
               0.10                                       0.3                                  0.15
                                                          0.2                                  0.10
               0.05
                                                          0.1                                  0.05
               0.00                                                                            0.00
                               103          104   105             103          104      105              103          104           105
                         Relative Sentences                      Grammaticality                            Type Check
               0.35                                       0.9                                   0.7
               0.30                                       0.8
                                                                                                0.6
               0.25                                       0.7
                                                          0.6                                   0.5
               0.20
                                                          0.5                                   0.4
               0.15
                                                          0.4                                   0.3
               0.10
                                                          0.3                                   0.2
               0.05                                       0.2
               0.00                                                                             0.1
                                                          0.1
                               103          104   105             103          104      105              103          104           105
                                     Iterations                         Iterations                             Iterations

Figure 35: Results on unscrambling task as number of properties are varied (Base setting). See
App. F.4 for a detailed discussion on metrics used. Broadly, we see the results presented in the main
paper are consistent across varying number of properties: the model first witnesses improvement in
exact match because relative sentences start to improve, i.e., the grammar is learned, performance
then saturates, and then it finally starts improving again once descriptive sentences’ accuracy starts to
improve. We emphasize metrics assigning partial credit also show sudden changes, i.e., our results
are not sensitive to metrics used.
      0.30
                  Exact Match                   Per Token Accuracy   0.5
                                                                             Descriptive Sentences
                      seed 0                            0.7
        0.25          seed 1                            0.6
                      seed 2                                                                    0.4
        0.20          Average                           0.5
                                                                                                0.3
        0.15                                            0.4
                                                        0.3                                     0.2
        0.10
                                                        0.2                                     0.1
        0.05
                                                        0.1
        0.00                                                                                    0.0
                         103              104     105            103           104       105              103           104               105
                        Relative Sentences                        Grammaticality                0.8
                                                                                                                Type Check
        0.40
        0.35                                                                                    0.7
                                                        0.8
        0.30                                                                                    0.6
        0.25                                            0.6                                     0.5
        0.20                                                                                    0.4
        0.15                                            0.4                                     0.3
        0.10
                                                                                                0.2
        0.05                                            0.2
                                                                                                0.1
        0.00
                         103              104     105            103           104       105              103           104               105
                                Iterations                              Iterations                               Iterations

Figure 36: Results on the unscrambling task for setting with 18000 properties (base setting). We
report this plot to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some minimal variance
across runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.



                                                                         45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.6.2          C HANGING TO 1800 ENTITIES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of entities to 1800 (compared to base setting of 900) and report results under
varying number of properties. See Figs. 37, 38.
                       14800              18000    21200        24400           27600         30800       34000             37200
                       16400              19600    22800        26000           29200         32400       35600             38800

                                Exact Match                     Per Token Accuracy                    Descriptive Sentences
                                                                                               0.4
               0.20                                       0.6
                                                          0.5                                  0.3
               0.15
                                                          0.4
               0.10                                                                            0.2
                                                          0.3

               0.05                                       0.2                                  0.1
                                                          0.1
               0.00                                                                            0.0
                               103          104   105             103          104      105              103          104           105
                         Relative Sentences                      Grammaticality                            Type Check
               0.35                                       0.9
               0.30                                                                            0.7
                                                          0.8
               0.25                                       0.7                                  0.6
               0.20                                       0.6                                  0.5
                                                          0.5                                  0.4
               0.15
                                                          0.4                                  0.3
               0.10
                                                          0.3
               0.05                                                                            0.2
                                                          0.2
               0.00                                       0.1                                  0.1
                               103          104   105             103          104      105              103          104           105
                                     Iterations                         Iterations                             Iterations

Figure 37: Results on unscrambling task as number of properties are varied (1800 entities).
See App. F.4 for a detailed discussion on metrics used. Broadly, we see the results presented in
the main paper are consistent across varying number of properties and a larger number of entities
compared to the base setting: the model first witnesses improvement in exact match because relative
sentences start to improve, i.e., the grammar is learned, performance then saturates, and then it finally
starts improving again once descriptive sentences’ accuracy starts to improve. We emphasize metrics
assigning partial credit also show sudden changes, i.e., our results are not sensitive to metrics used.
                  Exact Match                 Per Token Accuracy    0.5
                                                                           Descriptive Sentences
                      seed 0                            0.7
        0.25          seed 1                            0.6                                    0.4
                      seed 2
        0.20          Average                           0.5
                                                                                               0.3
        0.15                                            0.4
                                                        0.3                                    0.2
        0.10
                                                        0.2                                    0.1
        0.05
                                                        0.1
        0.00                                                                                   0.0
                         103              104     105            103            104      105              103            104              105
                        Relative Sentences                        Grammaticality               0.8              Type Check
        0.40
        0.35                                                                                   0.7
                                                        0.8
        0.30                                                                                   0.6
        0.25                                            0.6                                    0.5
        0.20                                                                                   0.4
        0.15                                            0.4
                                                                                               0.3
        0.10
                                                                                               0.2
        0.05                                            0.2
                                                                                               0.1
        0.00
                         103              104     105            103            104      105              103            104              105
                                Iterations                              Iterations                               Iterations

Figure 38: Results on the unscrambling task for setting with 18000 properties (1800 entities).
We report this plot to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some minimal
variance across runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.



                                                                         46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.6.3          C HANGING TO 2 CLASSES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We report results under varying number of properties with the base experimental setting. See
Figs. 39, 40.
                       14800              18000    21200        27600           30800         34000       37200             38800
                       16400              19600    24400        29200           32400         35600

                                Exact Match               0.7
                                                                Per Token Accuracy             0.5
                                                                                                      Descriptive Sentences
               0.25
                                                          0.6                                  0.4
               0.20                                       0.5
                                                                                               0.3
               0.15                                       0.4
               0.10                                       0.3                                  0.2
                                                          0.2                                  0.1
               0.05
                                                          0.1
               0.00                                                                            0.0
                               103          104   105             103          104      105              103          104           105
                         Relative Sentences               1.0    Grammaticality                0.9
                                                                                                           Type Check
               0.40
               0.35                                       0.9
                                                          0.8                                  0.8
               0.30
               0.25                                       0.7
                                                          0.6                                  0.7
               0.20
                                                          0.5
               0.15                                                                            0.6
                                                          0.4
               0.10
                                                          0.3                                  0.5
               0.05
                                                          0.2
               0.00
                               103          104   105             103          104      105              103          104           105
                                     Iterations                         Iterations                             Iterations

Figure 39: Results on unscrambling task as number of properties are varied (Base setting). See
App. F.4 for a detailed discussion on metrics used. Broadly, we see the results presented in the main
paper are consistent across varying number of properties and fewer classes than the base setting: the
model first witnesses improvement in exact match because relative sentences start to improve, i.e.,
the grammar is learned, performance then saturates, and then it finally starts improving again once
descriptive sentences’ accuracy starts to improve. We emphasize metrics assigning partial credit also
show sudden changes, i.e., our results are not sensitive to metrics used.
      0.30
                  Exact Match                Per Token Accuracy           Descriptive Sentences
                      seed 0                            0.7                                    0.5
        0.25          seed 1
                      seed 2                            0.6                                    0.4
        0.20          Average                           0.5
                                                                                               0.3
        0.15                                            0.4
                                                        0.3                                    0.2
        0.10
                                                        0.2                                    0.1
        0.05
                                                        0.1
        0.00                                                                                   0.0
                         103              104     105            103           104       105              103           104               105
                        Relative Sentences              1.0
                                                                  Grammaticality               0.9
                                                                                                                Type Check
         0.4
                                                        0.8                                    0.8
         0.3
                                                        0.6                                    0.7
         0.2
                                                        0.4                                    0.6
         0.1
                                                        0.2                                    0.5
         0.0
                         103              104     105            103           104       105              103           104               105
                                Iterations                              Iterations                               Iterations

Figure 40: Results on the unscrambling task for setting with 18000 properties (2 classes). We
report this plot to zoom into a specific configuration. As can be seen, there is some minimal variance
across runs, but mostly points of transition are in a similar range.



                                                                         47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.7   A NOTHER SET OF RESULTS WITH C ONDITIONAL GENERATION

As mentioned before, Conditional generation evaluations turn out to be extremely time-expensive,
with a single run taking approximately 4 days to finish when conditional generation is evaluated
(compared to 12 hours without). This is likely a result of model generating extremely long sentences
to compose conditioning tokens that can involve multiple subjects, objects, and properties.
While we focus solely on free generation and unscrambling in the results reported in the sections
above, to demonstrate that our findings from the main paper (i.e., in the 18000 properties setting)
generalize to another setting, we provide results for similar to Fig. 5 in another setting with 27600
properties. Shown in Fig. 41, we can see our findings perfectly align with results from the main paper
and other results shown in the appendix: the model first learns the grammar, then type constraints,
and witnesses improvements on unscrambling and conditional generation tasks as these relevant
data-regularities are learned.

(a)       P1       P2     P3      (b)         P1        P2    P3    (c)           P1        P2    P3


Figure 41: Demonstration (27600 properties). We report this plot to zoom into a specific configura-
tion. As can be seen, there is some minimal variance across runs, but mostly points of transition are
in a similar range.


                                                   48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     S CALING OF P OINT OF E MERGENCE ( AKA T RANSITION P OINT )

In this section, we repeat experiments from the main paper for different settings to analyze how
the point of emergence (interchangeably called transition point or phase transition here) scales with
increase in number of properties in the language. We again report results for both unscrambling and
free generation tasks and also add several more metrics not reported in the main paper.
Before proceeding however, we further discuss our evaluation protocol wherein we rescale x-axis by
some power of number of properties in the language by connecting it back to the notion of phase
transitions and emergence in physics. We also clarify why we might at times need to rescale the
y-axis.

G.1   C OLLAPSED CURVES HELP DEMONSTRATE SCALING OF THE TRANSITION POINT

Assume S denotes a control variable (e.g., edge density in our bipartite graph). Assume change in S
induces a phase transition in our system (e.g., the bipartite graph), as measured by sudden change in
the value of some order parameter M (e.g., ratio of largest cluster size to graph size). Further, say
the transition point Sc depends on some other property of the system ν (e.g., number of nodes in the
bipartite graph) via a power law relationship. That is, we have

                                              Sc ∝ ν α .

Accordingly, if we tracked M as S is changed, we would find its value rapidly starts to change as
S/ν α → 1. As we change the value of ν, assume the value of M at the point of transition is some
constant value. Thus, if we plot M as a function of S/ν α , we would find the results “collapse” onto
each other at the point of transition. This is the intuition behind our experiments in the main paper:
as we expect a square-root
                         p dependence on the number of properties, if we divide the control variable
(training iterations) by |K|, we should see the curves corresponding to languages with different
number of properties collapse onto each other. This argument however assumes we are tracking
the perfect order parameter with respect to which theory is defined. This need not be the case, as
discussed in the next section.

G.2   W HAT M ETRICS M AKE SENSE ?

Note that the theory of percolation on a bipartite graph and its corresponding phase transition focuses
on the ratio of size of largest cluster in the graph to the overall graph size. That is, the theory of
gauging which nodes are member of the largest cluster and how do this metric increase with scaling
of edge density. By itself, however, standard metrics one would evaluate in tasks defined in this
work, e.g., accuracy, need not linearly correlate with the cluster size. This can affect the collapse
visualization discussed in App. G.1. To elaborate further, we build on the toy setup from above.
Say, the order parameter M is difficult to experimentally gauge—this is in fact the case for our
work, where describing and evaluating a notion of membership within largest cluster is difficult.
Accordingly, we must define alternative metrics that we expect to correlate with M. Denote this
alternative parameter as M′ and say M′ := M × ν β , i.e., another dependence on ν gets involved
in our experiments as we go from M to M′ . Accordingly, if we track M′ as the rescaled control
variable S/ν α is varied, we will find that instead of collapsing onto a constant value, systems with
different values of ν have a different value for M′ . However, importantly, we will see that the value
of M′ at this point itself follows a power law relationship M′ ∝ ν β . Accordingly, if we rescaled the
y-axis by dividing it by ν β , we would see the curves collapse onto each other again; that is, we will
see that
                                     S                      M′
                               as       →   1,   we have        → O(1).
                                    να                      νβ

Thus, when using alternative metrics that are meant to correlate with the gold-standard metric (e.g.,
M′ instead of M in the discussion above), a rescaling of the y-axis according to some property of
the system may be needed to help induce a collapse of different experimental curves. As discussed in
the next section, this subtlety turns out to be extremely crucial for our work.


                                                  49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.3    E VALUATION M ETRICS FOR E VALUATING E MERGENCE IN O UR W ORK

We find artifacts of the toy problem discussed in sections above in our experiments. Specifically,
the theory of percolation on bipartite graph focuses on largest cluster size as an order parameter.
However, it can be difficult to define a cheaply calculable metric that captures a notion of ‘largest
cluster’ and evaluates membership of properties and entities to the cluster in the context of a neural
network being trained on some data distribution. To circumvent this, we define several alternative
metrics that approximate the notion of largest cluster to an extent, but are not necessarily expected
to show perfect collapse of experimental curves when the x-axis is rescaled by some power of the
number of properties. However, if a mere rescaling of the y-axis by an independent variable (e.g., the
control in this experiment, i.e., number of properties) induces a collapse of experimental curves, then
we can be confident the transition point follows our expected scaling.
Evaluation Metrics. Having discussed the subtleties above, we now discuss the set of evaluation
metrics used in this paper to evaluate how the point of emergence (i.e., transition point) scales with
increase in number of properties. We analyze the following two tasks in this section: unscrambling
and free generation. We use some metrics which are specific to a given task and another batch that is
common to both, as discussed next.
 • Unscrambling. Following metrics are reported solely for unscrambling and gauge model’s accu-
   racy on the task. As the model learns which properties belong to which entities, we can expect it
   to exploit that knowledge to reduce the hypothesis space for next-token predictions and get more
   accurate on unscrambling. Hence, we expect accuracy to suddenly start increasing or at least for
   its rate of increase to change once the model undergoes a percolation transition.
      – Exact Match: Evaluate whether the model’s unscrambled sentence perfectly matches the
        ground-truth.
      – Per-Token Accuracy: Evaluate how many of the tokens from model’s unscrambled sentence
        match the ground-truth.
      – Descriptive Sentences Accuracy: Exact match accuracy for solely sentences that are
        descriptive in nature. Similar to prior experiments, we simply filter sentences for length and
        use ones with ≤ 6 tokens for this evaluation, since 94% such sentences are descriptive in
        nature and this allows for easier batching and fast evaluation.
 • Free Generation. Following metrics are reported solely for free generation. Similar to unscram-
   bling, these metrics evaluate a model’s performance on the task of free generation, wherein the goal
   is to produce a sentence that is grammatically valid and respect type constraints. We specifically
   focus on type constraints in this section. Specifically, as the model learns which properties belong
   to which entities, we can expect Type Check corresponding to descriptive sentences (see below)
   will start to improve substantially. In contrast, for Type Checks of relative properties (i.e., validity
   of verbs), we do not expect to see any effect of how many descriptive properties are there in the
   language.
      – Type Check (Descriptive): A type check evaluation, as discussed in main paper, that checks
        whether descriptive properties associated with an entity by the model are in fact valid. We
        expect the percolation phase change to affect this evaluation, yielding close to 0.5 scaling
        with number of properties.
      – Type Check (Relative): A type check evaluation, as discussed in main paper, that checks
        whether relative properties associated with an entity by the model are in fact valid. We
        expect the percolation phase change to not affect this evaluation, since it relies solely on the
        grammar, and hence there should be no clear effect of scaling number of properties on this
        metric.
      – Type Check (All): A type check evaluation, as discussed in main paper, that checks whether
        all properties and corresponding entities in a given sentence are allowed to be seen in each
        other’s context. We expect the percolation phase change to affect this evaluation, since, unless
        the model gets descriptive constraints right, this metric will be zero. However, there will be a
        non-trivial proportion of sentences that do not have any descriptor tokens within them; we
        expect improvement on these sentences to increase the overall metric, leading to a saturation
        phase until the percolation transition kicks in and the model starts inferring which properties
        are associated with which entity.


                                                   50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Common metrics. Following metrics are reported for both the unscrambling and free generation
  tasks. These metrics assess whether the model deems a given property and an entity belong to
  each other, regardless of whether it has seen them together as part of the same context. In this
  sense, these metrics test a minimal notion of cluster membership, where the cluster is defined by
  classes dividing the bipartite graph.
      – Average Probability of Valid Tokens. Used for evaluating descriptive type constraints in
        free generation and unscrambling. Specifically, we sample a sentence from L that remarks on
        an entity possessing a property, and then evaluate probability of this property being the next
        token when the sentence is inputted to the model. For example, let x = The fire was
        large, we evaluate Pr (1(f (x)1 , large)|x−1 ), where x− 1 denotes the sentence up to the
        last token and f (x)1 denotes the first token predicted by the model. The result is averaged
        over 1000 sentences.
      – Negative Log-Likelihood of Valid Sentences. For free generation, we sample a descriptive
        sentence from the language and evaluate how likely the model deems this sentence, reporting
        it as negative log-likelihood (NLL). Similarly, for unscrambling, we sample a random
        descriptive sentence, scramble it, and then evaluate how likely the model deems the ground-
        truth unscrambled version.
      – Normalized Rank of Valid Tokens. This evaluation is similar to the average probability
        evaluation above. However, we now compute the rank of randomly sampled descriptor token
        instead of the probability associated by the model to this token. If the model knows which
        properties go with an entity, the rank of tokens associated to said entity’s properties will
        be low, indicating they are highly likely to be sampled. This metric scales as a function
        of vocabulary size; hence, we divide it by the number of properties |K| and called that the
        normalized rank.
      – Percent Top-K. Similar to the rank metric above, this metric merely checks whether the rank
        is less than some threshold; if so, it returns True, indicating the model understands that the
        property being evaluated is valid for the given entity. We set the threshold to be equal to
        number of properties associated with a class, i.e., |K|/C .

G.4    E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS

We analyze the following settings, sweeping the number of properties in the range 14800—38800, in
increments of 1600.

       • Base setting: This is the setting used throughout the paper, i.e., with 10 classes and 900
         entities.
       • Different class setting: we change number of classes to 2 and repeat all evaluations in this
         setting.
       • Different entities setting: we change number of entities to 1800 and repeat all evaluations in
         this setting.


                                                  51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.5     S CALING IN THE U NSCRAMBLING TASK

G.5.1     BASE SETTING WITH VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We report results under varying number of properties with the base experimental setting first. See
Fig. 42 for metrics specific to unscrambling, Fig. 43 for the common metrics that more closely capture
a notion of cluster membership, and Fig. 44 for different x-axis rescalings for the average probability
curves that demonstrate validity of claimed scaling of the transition point.
                    14800                 18000               21200                  24400                27600                    30800                 34000               37200
                    16400                 19600               22800                  26000                29200                    32400                 35600               38800
                                Exact Match                                               Per Token Acc.                                   Descriptive Sentences Acc.
         0.25                                                                                                                      0.40
                                                                       0.6                                                         0.35
         0.20
                                                                                                                                   0.30
                                                                       0.5                                                         0.25
         0.15
                                                                       0.4                                                         0.20
         0.10                                                                                                                      0.15
                                                                       0.3                                                         0.10
         0.05
                                                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                       0.2
         0.00                                                                                                                      0.00
            10 4                10 3          10 2                          10 4            10 3             10 2                     10 4               10 3              10 2
                         Iterations / |K|1.5                                             Iterations / |K|1.5                                        Iterations / |K|1.5

Figure 42: Results on metrics specific to unscrambling (Base setting). We see a collapse of all
metrics under a 1.5 scaling exponent.
                            14800             18000                21200      24400                  27600             30800               34000            37200
                            16400             19600                22800      26000                  29200             32400               35600            38800
                    Avg. Probability                                NLL × |K| 0.06                           Norm. Rank × |K| 1                     Percent Top-K (All) × |K|0.2
                                                                                                        1e 5
         0.35                                                                                       9
                                                     1.7                                                                                           7
         0.30                                                                                       8
                                                     1.6                                            7
         0.25                                                                                                                                      6
                                                     1.5                                            6
         0.20
                                                                                                    5
         0.15                                        1.4                                                                                           5
                                                                                                    4
         0.10                                        1.3                                            3
                                                                                                                                                   4
         0.05                                                                                       2
                                                     1.2
         0.00                                                                                       1
            10 4         10 3          10 2                 10 6           10 5      10 4                    101             102            103           101              102           103
                    Iterations / |K|1.5                        Iterations / |K|2.0                             Iterations / |K|0.5                         Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 43: Results on metrics designed to approximate cluster membership (Base setting). We
see an approximate collapse of inflection points in the normalized rank and percent top-K metrics
under a 0.5 scaling exponent. Average probability is expected to follow accuracy curves, yielding a
1.5 scaling exponent. Interestingly, NLL has a scaling exponent of 2.0.
                            14800             18000                21200            24400            27600                 30800           34000                37200
                            16400             19600                22800            26000            29200                 32400           35600                38800
                     Avg. Probability                              Avg. Probability                             Avg. Probability                                Avg. Probability
         0.35                                        0.35                                          0.35                                           0.35
         0.30                                        0.30                                          0.30                                           0.30
         0.25                                        0.25                                          0.25                                           0.25
         0.20                                        0.20                                          0.20                                           0.20
         0.15                                        0.15                                          0.15                                           0.15
         0.10                                        0.10                                          0.10                                           0.10
         0.05                                        0.05                                          0.05                                           0.05
         0.00                                        0.00                                          0.00                                           0.00
                   101            102          103                  10 1           100                10 4          10 3           10 2                  10 6       10 5          10 4
                    Iterations / |K|0.5                            Iterations / |K|1.0                         Iterations / |K|1.5                          Iterations / |K|2.0

Figure 44: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (Base setting). An exponent
of 1.5 induces the best collapse of experimental curves. Inset plots zoom in near transition point.


                                                                                              52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.5.2    C HANGING TO 1800 ENTITIES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of entities to 1800 (compared to base setting of 900) and report results under
varying number of properties. See Fig. 45 for metrics specific to unscrambling, Fig. 46 for the
common metrics that more closely capture a notion of cluster membership, and Fig. 47 for different
x-axis rescalings for the average probability curves that demonstrate validity of claimed scaling of
the transition point.
                      14800               18000                21200                      24400              27600                  30800                34000               37200
                      16400               19600                22800                      26000              29200                  32400                35600               38800
                              Exact Match                                                    Per Token Acc.                                 Descriptive Sentences Acc.
                                                                                                                                      0.4
        0.20                                                            0.6

        0.15                                                            0.5                                                           0.3

        0.10                                                            0.4                                                           0.2

                                                                        0.3                                                           0.1
        0.05
                                                                        0.2
        0.00                                                                                                                          0.0
                10 6              10 5           10 4                              10 6           10 5           10 4                        10 6           10 5             10 4
                          Iterations / |K|2.0                                              Iterations / |K|2.0                                      Iterations / |K|2.0

Figure 45: Results on unscrambling task as number of properties are varied (1800 entities). We
see a collapse of all metrics under a 2.0 scaling exponent, indicating an effect of number of entities
possibly on the transition point. Arguably, this is expected since unscrambling is affected by both
number of entities and properties involved in the language.
                              14800            18000                21200      24400                     27600          30800   34000        37200
                              16400            19600                22800      26000                     29200          32400   35600        38800
                      Avg. Probability                               NLL × |K| 0.06                           Norm. Rank × |K| 1
                                                                                                                                        Percent Top-K (All) × |K|0.2
                                                                                                         9 1e 5
        0.40                                                                                                                         7.0
                                                      1.8                                                8
        0.35                                                                                                                         6.5
        0.30                                          1.7                                                7
                                                                                                                                     6.0
        0.25                                          1.6                                                6
        0.20                                                                                             5                           5.5
                                                      1.5
        0.15                                                                                             4                                        5.0
                                                      1.4
        0.10                                                                                             3                                        4.5
                                                      1.3
        0.05                                                                                             2                                        4.0
        0.00                                          1.2                                                1
               10 6        10 5         10 4                 10 6           10 5          10 4                101             102           103           101              102          103
                  Iterations / |K|2.0                           Iterations / |K|2.0                              Iterations / |K|0.5                       Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 46: Results on unscrambling task as number of properties are varied (1800 entities). We
see an approximate collapse of inflection points in the normalized rank and percent top-K metrics
with a 0.5 scaling exponent. Average probability is expected to follow accuracy curves, yielding a 2.0
scaling exponent. NLL again shows a scaling exponent of 2.0, similar to base setting.
                              14800            18000                21200             24400              27600              30800           34000               37200
                              16400            19600                22800             26000              29200              32400           35600               38800
                      Avg. Probability                              Avg. Probability                              Avg. Probability                              Avg. Probability
        0.40                                          0.40                                          0.40                                          0.40
        0.35                                          0.35                                          0.35                                          0.35
        0.30                                          0.30                                          0.30                                          0.30
        0.25                                          0.25                                          0.25                                          0.25
        0.20                                          0.20                                          0.20                                          0.20
        0.15                                          0.15                                          0.15                                          0.15
        0.10                                          0.10                                          0.10                                          0.10
        0.05                                          0.05                                          0.05                                          0.05
        0.00                                          0.00                                          0.00                                          0.00
                 101              102           103                  10 1            100               10 4          10 3           10 2                 10 6       10 5         10 4
                      Iterations / |K|0.5                           Iterations / |K|1.0                          Iterations / |K|1.5                        Iterations / |K|2.0

Figure 47: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (1800 entities). An exponent
between 1.5–2.0 induces the best collapse of experimental curves, similar to base setting. Inset plots
zoom in near transition point.


                                                                                                  53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.5.3    C HANGING TO 2 CLASSES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES


We change the number of classes to 2 (compared to base setting of 10) and report results under
varying number of properties. See Fig. 45 for metrics specific to unscrambling, Fig. 46 for the
common metrics that more closely capture a notion of cluster membership, and Fig. 47 for different
x-axis rescalings for the average probability curves that demonstrate validity of claimed scaling of
the transition point.
                   14800                    18000              21200                     27600              30800                  34000                37200                38800
                   16400                    19600              24400                     29200              32400                  35600
                              Exact Match                              0.7
                                                                                          Per Token Acc.                                   Descriptive Sentences Acc.
                                                                                                                                    0.5
        0.25
                                                                       0.6                                                          0.4
        0.20
                                                                       0.5                                                          0.3
        0.15
                                                                       0.4                                                          0.2
        0.10

        0.05                                                           0.3                                                          0.1

        0.00                                                           0.2                                                          0.0
           10 4               10 3             10 2                         10 4            10 3             10 2                     10 4               10 3              10 2
                        Iterations / |K|1.5                                              Iterations / |K|1.5                                           Iterations / |K|1.5

Figure 48: Results on unscrambling task as number of properties are varied (2 classes). We see
a collapse of all metrics under a 1.5 scaling exponent.
                          14800               18000                21200      27600                 30800              34000              37200             38800
                          16400               19600                24400      29200                 32400              35600
                  Avg. Probability                                  NLL × |K| 0.06                          Norm. Rank × |K| 1                     Percent Top-K (All) × |K|0.2
                                                                                                         1e 5
                                                                                                   6                                             7.5
                                                     1.6
        0.4                                                                                                                                      7.0
                                                                                                   5
                                                     1.5
        0.3                                                                                                                                      6.5
                                                                                                   4
                                                     1.4                                                                                         6.0
        0.2                                                                                        3
                                                     1.3                                                                                         5.5
        0.1                                                                                        2                                             5.0
                                                     1.2
                                                                                                   1                                             4.5
        0.0                                          1.1
          10 4         10 3          10 2                   10 6           10 5      10 4                   101              102           103            101              102           103
                  Iterations / |K|1.5                          Iterations / |K|2.0                            Iterations / |K|0.5                          Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 49: Results on unscrambling task as number of properties are varied (2 classes). We see
an approximate collapse of inflection points in the normalized rank and percent top-K metrics with
a 0.5 scaling exponent. Average probability is expected to follow accuracy curves, yielding a 1.5
scaling exponent. NLL again shows a scaling exponent of 2.0, similar to other settings.
                          14800               18000                21200            27600             30800                34000           37200                38800
                          16400               19600                24400            29200             32400                35600
                   Avg. Probability                                Avg. Probability                            Avg. Probability                                 Avg. Probability
        0.4                                           0.4                                          0.4                                            0.4

        0.3                                           0.3                                          0.3                                            0.3

        0.2                                           0.2                                          0.2                                            0.2

        0.1                                           0.1                                          0.1                                            0.1

        0.0                                           0.0                                          0.0                                            0.0
                 101           102             103                  10 1           100               10 4           10 3   10 2                          10 6       10 5          10 4
                  Iterations / |K|0.5                              Iterations / |K|1.0                        Iterations / |K|1.5                           Iterations / |K|2.0

Figure 50: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (2 classes). An exponent of
1.5 induces a perfect collapse of experimental curves, similar to base setting. Inset plots zoom in near
transition point.


                                                                                                 54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.6     S CALING IN THE F REE G ENERATION TASK


G.6.1    BASE SETTING WITH VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES

We report results under varying number of properties with the base experimental setting first. See
Fig. 51 for metrics specific to free generation, Fig. 52 for the common metrics that more closely
capture a notion of cluster membership, Fig. 53 for different x-axis rescalings for the average proba-
bility curves that demonstrate validity of claimed scaling of the transition point and its corresponding
variant in Fig. 54 where the y-axis is not rescaled to demonstrate the transition points align better
with our claimed scaling exponent.
                     14800                18000                  21200                    24400                27600                    30800                34000                 37200
                     16400                19600                  22800                    26000                29200                    32400                35600                 38800
                     Type Check (Desc.) × |K|0.5                                    Type Check (Rel.) × |K|0.0                                       Type Check (All) × |K|0.5
                                                                            1.0                                                           40
         40                                                                                                                               35
         35                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                          30
         30                                                                 0.6                                                           25
         25                                                                                                                               20
                                                                            0.4                                                           15
         20
         15                                                                                                                               10
                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                           5
         10
                                                                            0.0                                                            0
               100              101           102                103                 103                 104                    105            100             101               102           103
                         Iterations / |K|0.5                                              Iterations / |K|0.0                                           Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 51: Results on metrics specific to unscrambling (Base setting). We see a collapse of
descriptive and all constraints metrics under a 0.5 scaling exponent; relative constraints are clearly
invariant to number of properties.
                                14800          18000                   21200              24400          27600                  30800           34000                 37200
                                16400          19600                   22800              26000          29200                  32400           35600                 38800
                 Avg. Probability × |K|1.5                                  NLL × |K| 0.05                          Norm. Rank × |K| 0.5                            Percent Top-K × |K|0.5
                                                                                                                                                        80
         400                                            1.44
                                                                                                    0.040                                               70
         350                                            1.42
                                                                                                    0.035                                               60
         300                                            1.40
                                                        1.38                                        0.030                                               50
         250
                                                        1.36                                        0.025                                               40
         200
                                                        1.34                                        0.020                                               30
         150
                                                        1.32                                                                                            20
         100                                                                                        0.015
               100        101           102       103          100           101      102         103         100         101           102      103         100         101           102     103
                      Iterations / |K|0.5                              Iterations / |K|0.5                           Iterations / |K|0.5                             Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 52: Results on metrics designed to approximate cluster membership (Base setting).
We see all metrics show an approximate collapse under a 0.5 scaling exponent. Collapse is in the
inflection points for the normalized rank and percent top-K metrics.
                                14800          18000                   21200              24400           27600                 30800            34000                37200
                                16400          19600                   22800              26000           29200                 32400            35600                38800
                 Avg. Probability × |K|1.5                           Avg. Probability × |K|1.5                      Avg. Probability × |K|1.5                       Avg. Probability × |K|1.5
         700                                            700                                             700                                            700

         600                                            600                                             600                                            600

         500                                            500                                             500                                            500

         400                                            400                                             400                                            400

         300                                            300                                             300                                            300

               103               104            105                   101           102           103                  10 1             100                  10 4         10 3          10 2
                      Iterations / |K|0.0                              Iterations / |K|0.5                            Iterations / |K|1.0                             Iterations / |K|1.5

Figure 53: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (Base setting). An exponent
between 0.5–1.0 can be expected to induce the best collapse for the metric of average probability;
results in Fig. 54 show the exponent is closer to 0.5.


                                                                                                   55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                14800          18000                   21200             24400            27600              30800               34000               37200
                                16400          19600                   22800             26000            29200              32400               35600               38800
               1e 4 Avg. Probability                            1e 4 Avg. Probability                          1e 4 Avg. Probability                        1e 4 Avg. Probability
        2.25                                            2.25                                            2.25                                           2.25
        2.00                                            2.00                                            2.00                                           2.00
        1.75                                            1.75                                            1.75                                           1.75
        1.50                                            1.50                                            1.50                                           1.50
        1.25                                            1.25                                            1.25                                           1.25
        1.00                                            1.00                                            1.00                                           1.00
        0.75                                            0.75                                            0.75                                           0.75
        0.50                                            0.50                                            0.50                                           0.50
        0.25                                            0.25                                            0.25                                           0.25
               103               104            105                  101           102            103               10 1             100                  10 4     10 3    10 2
                       Iterations / |K|0.0                             Iterations / |K|0.5                         Iterations / |K|1.0                               Iterations / |K|1.5

Figure 54: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (Base setting). An exponent
of 0.5 better aligns the transition points.


G.6.2    C HANGING TO 1800 ENTITIES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES

We change the number of entities to 1800 (compared to base setting of 900) and report results under
varying number of properties. See Fig. 55 for metrics specific to free generation, Fig. 56 for the
common metrics that more closely capture a notion of cluster membership, Fig. 57 for different
x-axis rescalings for the average probability curves that demonstrate validity of claimed scaling
of the transition point and its corresponding variant in Fig. 58 where the y-axis is not rescaled to
demonstrate the transition points align better with our claimed scaling exponent.
                     14800                18000                  21200                   24400                 27600                 30800                   34000              37200
                     16400                19600                  22800                   26000                 29200                 32400                   35600              38800
                     Type Check (Desc.) × |K|0.5                                   Type Check (Rel.) × |K|0.0                                        Type Check (All) × |K|0.5
                                                                                                                                       35
        35                                                                 0.8                                                         30
        30                                                                                                                             25
                                                                           0.6                                                         20
        25
        20                                                                 0.4                                                         15

        15                                                                                                                             10
                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                           5
        10
                                                                           0.0                                                             0
               100              101           102                103                103                  104                 105               100             101            102           103
                         Iterations / |K|0.5                                             Iterations / |K|0.0                                            Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 55: Results on metrics specific to unscrambling (1800 entities). We see a collapse of
descriptive and all constraints metrics under a 0.5 scaling exponent; relative constraints are clearly
invariant to number of properties.
                                14800          18000                 21200               24400            27600              30800              34000                37200
                                16400          19600                 22800               26000            29200              32400              35600                38800
                 Avg. Probability × |K|1.5                                 NLL × |K| 0.05                         Norm. Rank × |K| 0.5                             Percent Top-K × |K|0.5
                                                                                                   0.045                                                80
        400                                             1.48
                                                                                                   0.040                                                70
        350                                             1.46
                                                                                                   0.035                                                60
        300                                             1.44
                                                                                                   0.030                                                50
        250                                             1.42
                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                        1.40                                       0.025
        200
                                                        1.38                                                                                            30
        150                                                                                        0.020
                                                        1.36                                                                                            20
        100                                                                                        0.015
               100        101           102       103          100          101      102         103     100           101           102         103         100        101         102     103
                      Iterations / |K|0.5                            Iterations / |K|0.5                          Iterations / |K|0.5                               Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 56: Results on metrics designed to approximate cluster membership (1800 entities).
We see all metrics show an approximate collapse under a 0.5 scaling exponent. Collapse is in the
inflection points for the normalized rank and percent top-K metrics.


                                                                                                  56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             14800          18000            21200            24400            27600              30800           34000             37200
                             16400          19600            22800            26000            29200              32400           35600             38800
                 Avg. Probability × |K|1.5                 Avg. Probability × |K|1.5                  Avg. Probability × |K|1.5                  Avg. Probability × |K|1.5
        700                                        700                                       700                                       700

        600                                        600                                       600                                       600

        500                                        500                                       500                                       500

        400                                        400                                       400                                       400

        300                                        300                                       300                                       300

               103            104            105            101         102            103                 10 1         100               10 4         10 3         10 2
                      Iterations / |K|0.0                    Iterations / |K|0.5                          Iterations / |K|1.0                       Iterations / |K|1.5

Figure 57: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (1800 entities). An exponent
between 0.5–1.0 can be expected to induce the best collapse for the metric of average probability;
results in Fig. 58 show the exponent is closer to 0.5.

                             14800           18000            21200           24400            27600              30800           34000             37200
                             16400           19600            22800           26000            29200              32400           35600             38800
               1e 4 Avg. Probability                      1e 4 Avg. Probability                     1e 4 Avg. Probability                   1e 4 Avg. Probability
        2.25                                       2.25                                      2.25                                      2.25
        2.00                                       2.00                                      2.00                                      2.00
        1.75                                       1.75                                      1.75                                      1.75
        1.50                                       1.50                                      1.50                                      1.50
        1.25                                       1.25                                      1.25                                      1.25
        1.00                                       1.00                                      1.00                                      1.00
        0.75                                       0.75                                      0.75                                      0.75
        0.50                                       0.50                                      0.50                                      0.50
        0.25                                       0.25                                      0.25                                      0.25
               103            104            105            101         102            103                 10 1         100               10 4     10 3    10 2
                      Iterations / |K|0.0                     Iterations / |K|0.5                         Iterations / |K|1.0                       Iterations / |K|1.5

Figure 58: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (1800 entities). An exponent
of 0.5 better aligns the transition points.


G.6.3    C HANGING TO 1800 ENTITIES AND VARYING NUMBER OF PROPERTIES
We change the number of classes to 2 (compared to base setting of 10) and report results under
varying number of properties. See Fig. 59 for metrics specific to free generation, Fig. 60 for the
common metrics that more closely capture a notion of cluster membership, Fig. 61 for different
x-axis rescalings for the average probability curves that demonstrate validity of claimed scaling
of the transition point and its corresponding variant in Fig. 62 where the y-axis is not rescaled to
demonstrate the transition points align better with our claimed scaling exponent.
                     14800           18000                 21200              27600                  30800              34000                37200              38800
                     16400           19600                 24400              29200                  32400              35600
                     Type Check (Desc.) × |K|0.1                        Type Check (Rel.) × |K|0.0                                    Type Check (All) × |K|0.1
                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                          1.6
        1.6                                                       0.9
                                                                                                                          1.4
                                                                  0.8                                                     1.2
        1.4
                                                                  0.7                                                     1.0
        1.2                                                       0.6                                                     0.8
                                                                  0.5                                                     0.6
        1.0
                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                  0.4
               100           101            102            103                  103                 104           105           100           101             102          103
                         Iterations / |K|0.5                                  Iterations / |K|0.0                                       Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 59: Results on metrics specific to unscrambling (2 classes). We see a collapse of descriptive
and all constraints metrics under a 0.5 scaling exponent; relative constraints are clearly invariant to
number of properties.



                                                                                       57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     14800          18000                  21200             27600             30800                34000         37200                38800
                                     16400          19600                  24400             29200             32400                35600
                   Avg. Probability × |K|1.1                                 NLL × |K| 0.04                            Norm. Rank × |K| 0.2                       Percent Top-K × |K|0.1
                                                            1.45                                              0.8                                        0.8
                                                            1.44                                                                                         0.7
        3.0                                                                                                   0.7
                                                            1.43
                                                                                                                                                         0.6
        2.5                                                 1.42                                              0.6
                                                            1.41                                                                                         0.5
        2.0                                                 1.40                                              0.5                                        0.4
                                                            1.39                                                                                         0.3
        1.5                                                                                                   0.4
                                                            1.38
                                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                            1.37                                              0.3
                  10 1         100  102101            103          100         101          102         103          10 1     100     101
                                                                                                                                       102        103           10 1     100   101   102   103
                     Iterations / |K|0.5                                   Iterations / |K|0.5                          Iterations / |K|0.5                        Iterations / |K|0.5

Figure 60: Results on metrics designed to approximate cluster membership (2 classes). We see
all metrics show an approximate collapse under a 0.5 scaling exponent. Collapse is in the inflection
points for the normalized rank and percent top-K metrics.


                                     14800           18000                 21200             27600              30800               34000         37200                38800
                                     16400           19600                 24400             29200              32400               35600
                   Avg. Probability × |K|1.1                             Avg. Probability × |K|1.1                    Avg. Probability × |K|1.1                   Avg. Probability × |K|1.1

        3.0                                                  3.0                                              3.0                                         3.0

        2.5                                                  2.5                                              2.5                                         2.5

        2.0                                                  2.0                                              2.0                                         2.0

        1.5                                                  1.5                                              1.5                                         1.5

              101         102         103     104    105             10 1     100     101         102   103            10 3 10 2 10 1       100    101         10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2
                     Iterations / |K|0.0                                   Iterations / |K|0.5                              Iterations / |K|1.0                     Iterations / |K|1.5

Figure 61: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (2 classes). An exponent
between 0.5–1.0 can be expected to induce the best collapse for the metric of average probability;
results in Fig. 62 show the exponent is closer to 0.5.


                                 14800              18000                 21200             27600              30800                34000         37200                38800
                                 16400              19600                 24400             29200              32400                35600
            1e 5 Avg. Probability                                  1e 5 Avg. Probability                            1e 5 Avg. Probability                       1e 5 Avg. Probability
        8                                                    8                                                 8                                           8
        7                                                    7                                                 7                                           7
        6                                                    6                                                 6                                           6
        5                                                    5                                                 5                                           5
        4                                                    4                                                 4                                           4
        3                                                    3                                                 3                                           3
        2                                                    2                                                 2                                           2
        1                                                    1                                                 1                                           1
            101          102         103     104    105             10 1     100     101      102       103           10 3 10 2 10 1        100    101      10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2
                    Iterations / |K|0.0                                   Iterations / |K|0.5                           Iterations / |K|1.0                         Iterations / |K|1.5

Figure 62: Average probability curves for different x-axis rescalings (2 classes). An exponent of
0.5 better aligns the transition points.


                                                                                                          58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                           Number of properties: 14800                                    Number of properties: 18000                                                            Number of properties: 21200
            0.4        Data                                               0.30        Data                                                                                   Data
                       Fit                                                            Fit                                                                        0.20        Fit
                       12843.47                                           0.25        18294.00                                                                               27843.71
            0.3
                                                                          0.20                                                                                   0.15

 Accuracy


                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy
            0.2                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                                                                 0.10
                                                                          0.10
            0.1                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                          0.05

            0.0                                                           0.00                                                                                   0.00
               103                     104               105                  103                     104                                  105                       103                     104                   105
                                    Iterations                                                     Iterations                                                                             Iterations

                          Number of properties:
                      (a) 14800      properties 27600                                   Number of properties:
                                                                                    (b) 18000      properties 32400                                                            Number of properties:
                                                                                                                                                                           (c) 21200      properties 38800
                        Data                                                          Data                                                                       0.06
                                                                                                                                                                             Data
            0.14        Fit                                               0.10        Fit                                                                                    Fit
            0.12
                        34300.40                                                      43982.51                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                                                                                             47085.87
                                                                          0.08
            0.10                                                                                                                                                 0.04
 Accuracy


                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy
            0.08                                                          0.06
                                                                                                                                                                 0.03
            0.06                                                          0.04
                                                                                                                                                                 0.02
            0.04
                                                                          0.02                                                                                   0.01
            0.02
            0.00                                                          0.00                                                                                   0.00
                103                     104              105                  103                     104                                  105                       103                     104                   105
                                    Iterations                                                     Iterations                                                                             Iterations

                      (d) 27600 properties                                          (e) 32400 properties                                                                   (f) 38800 properties

Figure 63: Bilinear Spline Fits. Working with the hypothesis that the model’s accuracy on unscram-
bling descriptive sentences undergoes first a saturation regime at low performance, before suddenly
changing slope and rapidly improving in performance, we fit bilinear splines to maximally explain
these results. The breakpoint identified using these fits is used to define the transition point scaling
curve in Fig. 64. One can easily see in these curves that the breakpoint is moving rightwards as the
number of properties are increased.


H                  A LTERNATIVE A NALYSIS OF S CALING OF T RANSITION P OINT
A more conventional analysis of how the transition points                                                                                            Transition Point Scaling (averaged across 3 runs)
scales involves simply identifying the transition point for                                                                                                         Slope: 1.40
different experiments, collating the results, and fitting a
                                                                                                                                           4 × 104
curve to the identified transition points. We chose the
collapse of experimental curves protocol over this method-
                                                                                                                        Transition point


                                                                                                                                           3 × 104
ology since, except for unscrambling, defining an algo-
rithmic objective for curve fitting is difficult. However,
at least for unscrambling, we can follow the more usual
                                                                                                                                           2 × 104
pipeline and get the curve fits to see if they align with our
alternative protocol of collapse of experimental curves.
Setup. One can easily see that when the x-axis is log-
scaled, both average probability and descriptive sentences                                                                                                                   2 × 104                   3 × 104   4 × 104
                                                                                                                                                                             Number of properties
accuracy show a scaling curve wherein there is first a
saturation at low performance, and then sudden (approx-
                                                                                                                        Figure 64: Transition point scaling.
imately) linear growth. Exploiting this pattern, we can
                                                                                                                        Working with the hypothesis that the
simply fit a bilinear spline to minimize the mean square
                                                                                                                        model’s accuracy on unscrambling de-
error from the data and use the breakpoint of this spline
                                                                                                                        scriptive sentences undergoes first a satu-
as an approximation to the transition point.
                                                                                                                        ration regime at low performance, before
Results. We find a power law with an exponent of 1.4                                                                    suddenly changing slope and rapidly im-
explains the data fairly well (see Fig. 64). That is, the tran-                                                         proving in performance, we fit bilinear
sition point, according to this method, scales as a power                                                               splines to maximally explain these re-
law in number of properties with an exponent of 1.4. This                                                               sults. The breakpoint identified using
exponent is fairly close to the one identified using the                                                                these fits is used to define the transition
collapse protocol, i.e., 1.5.                                                                                           point scaling curve.
For completeness, we also show a few of the Bilinear
spline fits for descriptive sentences’ accuracy as a function of data scaling in Fig. 63.


                                                                                                  59
