Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6D O BJECT P OSE T RACKING IN I NTERNET V IDEOS
FOR ROBOTIC M ANIPULATION

       Georgy Ponimatkin1,2∗          Martin Cı́fka1,2∗     Tomáš Souček1     Médéric Fourmy1
                           Yann Labbé3      Vladimı́r Petrı́k1     Josef Sivic1
    1
      Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague
                2
                  Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
                                               3
                                                 H Company



                                                  A BSTRACT

             We seek to extract a temporally consistent 6D pose trajectory of a manipulated ob-
             ject from an Internet instructional video. This is a challenging set-up for current
             6D pose estimation methods due to uncontrolled capturing conditions, subtle but
             dynamic object motions, and the fact that the exact mesh of the manipulated object
             is not known. To address these challenges, we present the following contributions.
             First, we develop a new method that estimates the 6D pose of any object in the
             input image without prior knowledge of the object itself. The method proceeds
             by (i) retrieving a CAD model similar to the depicted object from a large-scale
             model database, (ii) 6D aligning the retrieved CAD model with the input image,
             and (iii) grounding the absolute scale of the object with respect to the scene. Sec-
             ond, we extract smooth 6D object trajectories from Internet videos by carefully
             tracking the detected objects across video frames. The extracted object trajecto-
             ries are then retargeted via trajectory optimization into the configuration space of
             a robotic manipulator. Third, we thoroughly evaluate and ablate our 6D pose esti-
             mation method on YCB-V and HOPE-Video datasets as well as a new dataset of
             instructional videos manually annotated with approximate 6D object trajectories.
             We demonstrate significant improvements over existing state-of-the-art RGB 6D
             pose estimation methods. Finally, we show that the 6D object motion estimated
             from Internet videos can be transferred to a 7-axis robotic manipulator both in a
             virtual simulator as well as in a real world set-up. We also successfully apply our
             method to egocentric videos taken from the EPIC-KITCHENS dataset, demon-
             strating potential for Embodied AI applications.


           (a) input video        (b) retrieved mesh       (c) 6D pose trajectory    (d) robot trajectory
Figure 1: Robotic manipulation guided by an instructional video. (a) Given an instructional
video from the Internet, our approach: (b) retrieves a visually similar mesh for the manipulated
object from a large mesh database, (c) estimates the approximate 6D pose trajectory of the object
across video frames, and (d) transfers the object trajectory onto a 7-axis robotic manipulator.

1       I NTRODUCTION
In this work, we make a step towards learning robotic object manipulation skills from Internet in-
structional videos, as illustrated in Figure 1. This is a challenging problem as Internet instructional
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


videos present uncontrolled capturing conditions where people manipulate a large variety of objects
often in a dynamic fashion. While humans can easily learn even complex manipulation tasks from
one or more instructional videos, building machines with similar cognitive and sensory-motor capa-
bilities remains a major open challenge. Yet, such capabilities would enable tapping into millions of
instructional videos available online (Miech et al., 2019).
Current methods for learning object manipulation skills from instructional videos have focused on
learning manipulation for stick-like objects (e.g., hammer, scythe, or spade) (Li et al., 2022; Zo-
rina et al., 2021), require tens or even hundreds of training examples captured from multiple view-
points (Sermanet et al., 2018) or focus on recovering a static pose of the manipulated object (Patel
et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024). In contrast, we leverage the recent progress in 6D object pose esti-
mation and object tracking, and develop a novel method for 6D object pose estimation that allows
for extracting temporally consistent 6D object trajectories from uncontrolled Internet videos without
any prior knowledge about the object itself. Despite being simple and training-free, the method can
extract object trajectories that can be transferred to a robotic manipulator, making a significant step
towards large-scale learning of robotic manipulation skills from Internet’s instructional videos.
In detail, we make the following contributions:
 • First, we develop a method that estimates the 6D pose of any object in an image without prior
   knowledge of the object itself. The method works by (i) retrieving a CAD model similar to the
   object in the image from a large-scale database, (ii) aligning the retrieved CAD model with the
   object, and (iii) grounding the object scale with respect to the scene.
 • Second, we extract smooth 6D object trajectories from Internet videos by carefully tracking the
   detected objects across video frames. The extracted 6D object trajectories are then retargeted via
   trajectory optimization into the configuration space of a robotic manipulator.
 • Third, we thoroughly evaluate and ablate our 6D pose estimation method on YCB-V and HOPE-
   Video datasets as well as a new dataset of instructional videos manually annotated with approx-
   imate 6D object trajectories. We demonstrate significant improvements over existing state-of-
   the-art RGB 6D pose estimation methods.
 • Finally, we show that the 6D object motion estimated from Internet videos can be transferred
   to a 7-axis robotic manipulator both in a virtual simulator as well as in a real world robotic set-
   up. Additionally, we apply our method to egocentric videos taken from the EPIC-KITCHENS
   dataset, showing our method can be useful in various Embodied AI applications.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Object instance detection and mesh retrieval. Image based pose estimation methods are usually
decomposed into successive steps: object instance detection, often paired with mesh identification,
followed by pose estimation. When the depicted objects all belong to a relatively small dataset (Xi-
ang et al., 2018; Hodan et al., 2017; Tyree et al., 2022), most methods train an off-the-shelf 2D
object detector, such as FasterRCNN Ren et al. (2016); Li et al. (2020), MaskRCNN (He et al.,
2017; Labbé et al., 2020) or YOLOV8 (Jocher et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021), using synthetic train-
ing data (Denninger et al., 2023). These supervised detectors achieve very high performance on
standard benchmarks (Hodan et al., 2024) but are limited by the need of retraining for each new
object instance. More recently, open-ended object detectors have appeared thanks to the advent of
powerful foundation models (Ke et al., 2023; Oquab et al., 2024). For a given set of textured meshes,
CNOS (Nguyen et al., 2023) proposes an onboarding phase where the known meshes are rendered
across a set of viewpoints that are encoded with powerful image features such as (Oquab et al., 2024).
At run time, candidate objects are segmented in the input RGB image using an object segmenter,
such as SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023), and encoded using the same image features.
The depicted object instance is then matched to one of the known meshes whose image encoding is
the most similar with the instance features across views. Recent advancements include reducing the
number of false detections (Lu et al., 2024) by improving the instance segmentation (Nguyen et al.,
2023) using (Liu et al., 2024b), or developing better view-level feature aggregation techniques such
as Foreground Feature Averaging (Kotar et al., 2023).
Model-based 6D pose estimation. Recent progress in deep-learning based 6D pose estimation has
been focused on increasing precision of alignment-based methods (Wang et al., 2021; Labbé et al.,


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2020). This progress was made possible by the availability of large scale object databases (Downs
et al., 2022; Deitke et al., 2023), procedural rendering software to produce synthetic training
data (Denninger et al., 2023), and well-maintained public test datasets and benchmarks (Hodan
et al., 2020). The recent results of the BOP challenge indicate that the metrics on 6D localization
of objects known during training are starting to saturate (Hodan et al., 2024). The community effort
has now shifted toward the development of models able to generalize to objects unseen during train-
ing (Zhao et al., 2022; Labbé et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2024; Örnek et al., 2024) which are often
decomposed in coarse template matching (Nguyen et al., 2022) followed by iterative refinement (Hai
et al., 2023). However, these model-based methods tend to lack robustness when the retrieved mesh
differs too much from the object depicted in the input image, which limits their application in less
controlled, “in the wild” settings. In this work, we aim to overcome this key limitation.
6D pose estimation in the wild. For uncontrolled setups, such as in Internet videos, one typically
does not have access to exact models of the depicted objects. Category-level pose estimation meth-
ods drop the requirement for exact models by assuming the existence of a canonical reference frame
among a class of objects (e.g., mugs or cars). Some of the works make simplifying assumptions
by constraining the object rotation along the gravity direction, which is reasonable for large items
such as furniture or vehicles (Papon & Schoeler, 2015; Braun et al., 2016). For 6D category pose
estimation, the normalized object coordinate space representation is a popular choice (Brachmann
et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2022). In contrast, model-free pose estimation methods
make no assumption on the type of objects present in the scene but rely either on a onboarding
procedure where several reference images of the target object are captured together with the cor-
responding metric camera poses (Sun et al., 2022; He et al., 2022a) (e.g., using ARKit) or require
the use of RGBD images as input at run-time (Wen & Bekris, 2021; He et al., 2022b). While the
model-free methods are versatile, the absence of a metric mesh or a volumetric model limits their
use for applications in simulation or robotics. Finally, another approach is to jointly reconstruct the
object shape and solve for the camera pose(s) (Irshad et al., 2022). Object reconstruction may be
done during an onboarding phase using one image (Long et al., 2024; Nguyen et al., 2024) or multi-
view reconstruction (Yariv et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2024). However, the onboarding images are often
required to display the object in a static pose and from several different views (> 20), which makes
these methods unsuitable for directly estimating object poses from in-the-wild Internet videos. An
alternative to onboarding can be test-time adaptation (Shi et al., 2024) to address the novel shapes at
test time. Some works (Hasson et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2021; Wen et al., 2023)
have considered jointly reconstructing and tracking of objects interacting with hands, but none of
these have demonstrated transferring object motion from in-the-wild Internet videos to a robotic ma-
nipulator. In contrast, we propose to tackle uncontrolled Internet videos via an approach combining
mesh retrieval, 6D pose alignment, object tracking and trajectory optimization to go from the input
unconstrained Internet video to a motion imitating the fine-grained human manipulation on a robot.
Learning robotic manipulation from video. One strategy for learning robot manipulation skills
from human demonstrations consists of extracting reward signals from the videos and using the
reward to train a robotic policy using reinforcement learning (a good survey of different meth-
ods is in (McCarthy et al., 2024)). Examples include (Sermanet et al., 2018), which defines the
reward using image features extracted with an embedding model trained with time-contrastive self-
supervision. The model requires a relatively large number of real demonstrations (around 100).
Other works operate from a single demonstration and leverage explicit 3D object representations
and estimated object poses to define the rewards. For example, (Petrı́k et al., 2021) uses a differ-
entiable renderer to estimate the pose of geometric primitives approximating the objects shapes,
and (Zorina et al., 2021) estimates the pose of stick-like objects (hammer, scythe) using the method
of Li et al. (2022) and physics-based temporal smoothing. Closest to ours is Patel et al. (2022) which
considers any type of object with a known 3D model. They demonstrate results for positioning ob-
jects into a static pose given by a video. In contrast, we do not assume the exact 3D model to be
known and we show results for a complete task (e.g., pouring).


3   A PPROACH

We first in Section 3.1 present our method for computing 6D poses for objects without knowing their
exact 3D models. Then, in Section 3.2, we describe how we extract smooth 6D object trajectories
from Internet videos and transfer them to a real robotic manipulator.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) Object detection             (b) CAD model retrieval                   (d) 6D pose estimation

             Input image                                                                    Enc.
                                                   Patch-based
                                       Encoder
                                                     retrieval


                                                        Mesh
                                                         DB                                 Enc.


                                    (c) Object scale estimation

 “objects”          Detector       CLIP     “A bottle” = 20 cm
                                    +
                                   LLM      “A glass”    = 10 cm


                                                                    Global
                                                                   rescaling

                                   Depth
                                    est.                         Relative
                                                                  scales



Figure 2: Overview of our 6D object pose estimation without a known 3D mesh (Sec. 3.1).
Given an input RGB image, our method: (a) detects and segments objects present in the image, (b)
retrieves similar meshes from a large-scale object database via patch-based retrieval, (c) estimates
the absolute scale of depicted objects in the scene via LLM-based re-scaling, and (d) estimates the
camera-to-object rotation R and translation t via alignment of the retrieved (approximate) mesh.


3.1     6D O BJECT P OSE E STIMATION WITHOUT A K NOWN 3D M ESH

Given an image or a video frame, our goal is to detect and estimate the 6D pose of objects in the
image. We wish to predict the object poses for in-the-wild images and videos without any prior
knowledge of the objects themselves. Therefore, in contrast to the standard 6D pose estimation
methods, our main challenge is the lack of a known CAD model of the object. Further, as the CAD
model is unknown, the size of the object in the image is also unknown. The object can appear small
in the image because it is small, or it is large but far from the camera.
To tackle these challenges, we present a novel method that (a) after detection and segmentation of
the object in the image using an open-set detector, (b) retrieves a CAD model semantically and
geometrically similar to the object in the image from a large database, (c) computes the object scale
by estimating the monocular depth and grounding it to the real world using a large language model,
and (d) estimates the 6D pose of the object in the image by aligning it with the retrieved CAD model.
The overview of our approach is shown in Figure 2, and each of the steps is described below.
Object detection and segmentation. We use an open-set object detector with an image segmenter to
generate high-quality object proposals and masks for objects present in the input image. Additional
details can be found in Appendix A.1.
CAD model retrieval. Given an image or a video frame, our goal is to obtain CAD models of salient
objects present in the image. While single-view 3D reconstruction methods (Wang et al., 2024;
Szymanowicz et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023) offer possible solution, we found them unsatisfiable for
our task of 6D pose detection and tracking in the wild. Instead, for each object in the image, we
retrieve the most similar CAD model from a large-scale reference database composed of Objaverse-
LVIS (Deitke et al., 2023) and Google Scanned Objects (Downs et al., 2022).
The key question is how to perform retrieval of the most similar CAD model for an object in the
input RGB image. This is hard as the database typically does not contain the exact CAD model for
the depicted object. Hence, the goal is to retrieve another model instance from the same category
(e.g., another similarly-looking mug). To perform such “category-level” retrieval, we use pre-trained
foundation image features, as they are invariant to appearance differences between real images and
CAD model renders. In detail, we represent each CAD model in the database as a single feature
descriptor obtained by foreground feature averaging (FFA) (Kotar et al., 2023) of patch-level feature
maps (Oquab et al., 2024) obtained from multiple rendered views of the given CAD model. For
each proposal generated by the object detector and segmenter, we then extract the same FFA feature
descriptor and retrieve the most similar CAD model from the database.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6D object pose estimation via category-level view alignment. Given the retrieved CAD model
with its associated object mask in the input image, the goal is to estimate rotation R ∈ SO(3) and
translation t ∈ R3 of the object in camera coordinate space. We assume a pinhole camera model
with focal length f , principal point c, and an approximate scale of the model. In Appendix A.2, we
discuss how these assumptions can be relaxed.
First, we estimate the object’s rotation via view alignment. In particular, we proceed as follows:
we crop, mask, and rescale the image according to the object’s mask and compute its patch fea-
tures (Oquab et al., 2024), here denoted as {pquery
                                               k    }k where k is the patch index. Then, we compute
the dot product with the patch features {pCAD
                                            k   (R)}  k of a view of the CAD model rendered in ro-
tation R and select the best rotation R∗ maximizing the dot product averaged across all the N
patches:
                                                  N
                                              1 X query CAD
                             R∗ = arg max        ⟨pk , pk (R)⟩.                                    (1)
                                        R     N
                                                 k=1

We use views rendered with rotations sampled using the viewpoint sampler of Alexa (2022).
The translation t is computed in two steps. First, the z (depth) coordinate is computed by rescaling
the CAD model’s width, height, and depth [ow , oh , od ] in the rendered coordinate space [R∗ |0] by
the object’s bounding box width bw and height bh as :

                                           1     ow       oh
                                     tz =      f      +f       .                                 (2)
                                           2     bw       bh

Then, the x and y coordinates are computed using the bounding box center [bx , by ] and the camera
intrinsics as: tx = (bx − cx )tz /f and ty = (by − cy )tz /f . If the intrinsics of the camera are
unknown, we observed that using common intrinsic values (equal to the field of view of 53 degrees)
yields good results up to the absolute scale of the scene. The detailed discussion of this topic is in
Appendix A.2. Determining the absolute scale is discussed next.
Object scale estimation via monocular depth prediction and LLM. Obtaining correct 6D pose of
an object requires knowledge of its absolute scale. However, we cannot rely on the arbitrary scales
of the CAD models found in our database. For example, the database models can have significantly
different scales (metric or imperial, millimeters or meters), which makes it impossible to automati-
cally use them for pose estimation tasks. Although one can roughly estimate the object scales from
point clouds obtained by back-projection using a depth map, for in-the-wild scenarios, such as in
Internet videos, the depth map is often not available. Instead, we develop a scale estimation method
requiring only single-view RGB input, that takes advantage of a depth map estimated using a neural
network and information about common object scales obtained from a large language model (LLM).
While it is impossible to predict a metrically accurate depth map from a single image, especially
if the camera intrinsic parameters are not known, we observe that monocular depth predictors can
be used to obtain relative scales of the objects even with unknown intrinsic parameters. We assign
relative scale ri to every object i as the distance between the furthest object point and object center
along object’s principal axis as computed from the point cloud obtained from the monocular depth
predictor (Bhat et al., 2023), while using the common intrinsic priors (see the second paragraph in
Appendix A.2). To obtain the metric scales mi , we first ask GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024) to generate a list
of common object text descriptions with their typical size in meters. Then, we classify the depicted
object using the dot product between CLIP (Cherti et al., 2023) features of the object’s image and
the text descriptions generated by GPT-4. We retrieve the corresponding scale as the scale of the
best matching text descriptions as measured by the dot product. Note, that our set of generated text
descriptions is not tailored to any specific scene type. Instead, it is designed to encompass a wide
range of everyday objects, therefore it can be generated offline. Moreover, the set can be easily
adapted to specific use cases by generating new descriptions using a modified prompt, if needed.
Finally, we use the metric scales mi to globally rescale the relative scales ri obtained from the depth
map. In this way, we keep the estimated ratios between the object scales, but employ the metric
information obtained using the LLM. More details about the scale estimation method, including the
outlier rejection procedure, can be found in Appendix A.3. Note that our approach aggregates scale
estimates from multiple objects in the scene in a robust manner, which makes our method tolerant
to incorrect scale estimates of some of the objects within the scene.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   ROBOTIC O BJECT M ANIPULATION FROM I NTERNET V IDEOS

In this section we describe how we obtain temporally consistent 6D pose trajectories from Internet
videos and how we use those trajectories to drive a robotic manipulator. This problem is challenging
as the input videos often depict fine-grained dynamic object motions (think person trying to empty a
ketchup bottle). To address this issue we design an approach that outputs a smooth 6D motion in the
configuration space of the robot by leveraging (i) approximate 6D object pose estimates obtained by
the approach described in Section 3.1 with (ii) recent advances in accurate 2D feature point tracking
in video (Karaev et al., 2024) and (iii) trajectory optimization techniques in robotics.
Pose tracking for recovering object trajectories from Internet videos. The category-level align-
ment approach described in Section 3.1 predicts a discrete set of rotations. Also, the alignment can-
not recover the relative inter-frame rotation of cylindrically symmetric objects such as cups, bottles,
or bowls due to the different textures of the real and the retrieved 3D objects. To produce smooth
trajectories with correct inter-frame rotations that can be transferred to a robotic manipulator, we
track the object across video frames using a dense point video tracker (Karaev et al., 2024). The
tracking is initialized by sampling 3D points pC ∈ R3 on the retrieved object and projecting them
into a video frame using the object pose estimate obtained using our 6D pose estimation approach,
resulting in a set of 2D image points pI ∈ R2 . The points pI are tracked across video frames to
produce a set of correspondences {(pC , pjI )}p where j is the index of a video frame. Assuming a
static camera, the temporally refined 6D pose of the object is computed for each frame j using the
PnP algorithm (Lepetit et al., 2009) on the set of 3D-2D correspondences {(pC , pjI )}p . The tempo-
rally refined poses obtained from this procedure result in smoother trajectories with fewer errors for
video frames with partial occlusions. Note that for moving cameras, camera movement correction
can be made by estimating the relative camera poses from the static video background using readily
available software such as COLMAP (Schönberger & Frahm, 2016). In this paper, we focus on
object motion relative to the camera and thus do not explicitly estimate the camera’s relative poses
in the video.
Retargeting trajectories to a robotic manipulator. The temporally refined sequence of poses of
the manipulated object is then used as a target to compute a trajectory in the configuration space
of the robot imitating the object 6D trajectory extracted from the video. We address this problem
using trajectory optimization as described next. To express the sequence of estimated object poses
in the robot frame of reference, we manually locate the camera in the robot space and recompute
the object poses estimated in the camera frame into the robot frame. We express the pose of the
object with respect to the robot at time t using transformation Tt that captures both the rotation and
translation of the object in a homogeneous representation, as explained in (Sola et al., 2018). To
obtain the robot trajectory, we use trajectory optimization (Jallet et al., 2023) to solve the following
optimization problem:
                                           N
                                           X −1
                                                                           2           2
                τ0 , . . . τN = arg min           wd log(Tt−1 T̃t ) + wq̇ ∥q̇∥ + wτ ∥τ ∥ ,          (3)
                               τ0 ,...τN
                                           t=0

where τ is the torque that controls the robot joints; the first cost term weighted by wd penalizes
SE(3) distance via SE(3) log function (Sola et al., 2018) between Tt , pose of the object at time t
held by the robot, and T̃t , the pose of the object estimated from the video; the second and third
terms of the cost regularize the velocity q̇ and torque τ of the robot to prevent redundant motion of
the robot. Optimization is solved using torque control actions to achieve a smooth trajectory in the
robot configuration space. See Appendix A.6 for more details.


4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we first describe the datasets and metrics used. Then we present a comparison of our
method with state-of-the-art 6D pose estimation methods on the YCB-V and HOPE-Video datasets
and we ablate the key components of our approach. Finally, we evaluate the proposed method on
challenging Internet videos and demonstrate that the estimated 6D object trajectories can be imitated
by a robotic manipulator. Additionally, in Appendix C.5 we provide quantitative results on DTTD2
(Huang et al., 2023) dataset.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison with the state-of-the-art on the YCB-V and HOPE-Video datasets. The
6D pose estimation results of our approach compared to MegaPose (Labbé et al., 2022), Giga-
Pose (Nguyen et al., 2024), and FoundPose (Örnek et al., 2024). Our method outperforms all other
methods in all the metrics.
                                    YCB-V                                   HOPE-Video
 Method                AR↑     ARCoU ↑ ARCH ↑ ARpCH ↑          AR↑        ARCoU ↑ ARCH ↑ ARpCH ↑
 MegaPose (coarse)    23.75     10.08     10.65        50.53   31.77       9.96            6.87         78.50
 MegaPose             25.76     14.01     11.91        51.37   33.03       13.07           6.38         79.64
 GigaPose             29.18     11.90      9.20        66.45   23.12       4.15            4.90         60.30
 FoundPose            42.95     35.40     15.69        77.75   42.30       31.18           9.58         86.13
 Ours                 49.86     45.20     18.53        85.83   45.98       39.21          10.72         88.01

Table 2: Influence of different model retrieval                Table 3: Effects of scale estimation
methods on 6D pose estimation.                                 method on the 6D pose estimation.
 Retrieval          AR↑      ARCoU ↑    ARCH ↑    ARpCH ↑          Scale Estimator             ARCH † ↑
 (a) OpenShape     34.51      20.25     10.59         72.69        Constant                      11.89
 (b) Ours (CLS)    45.05      40.93     16.16         78.06        Ours                          18.53
 (c) Ours          49.86      45.20     18.53         85.83        Oracle                        45.95
 (d) Oracle        62.93      51.99     45.95         90.85        †
                                                                       Other metrics are scale-independent.


4.1     E VALUATION OF 6D P OSE E STIMATION ON S TANDARD DATASETS

Datasets and metrics. We evaluate our method on YCB-V (Xiang et al., 2018) and HOPE-
Video (Lin et al., 2021). The datasets feature cluttered scenes with partially occluded objects, re-
sembling our target Internet videos. Both datasets contain full 6D pose annotation with the known
object meshes available, yet, in our experiments, we utilize the meshes retrieved from Objaverse-
LVIS (Deitke et al., 2023) and Google Scanned Objects (Downs et al., 2022) datasets instead. This
simulates the in-the-wild scenario where no ground-truth meshes are available.
For evaluation, we follow the BOP-inspired protocol, where average recall (AR) is estimated for
every metric. We report the standard Chamfer distance (CH) metric. However, because this metric
is highly dependent on the correct CAD model scale which is unavailable in our scenario, we also
report projection-based metrics, i.e., projected Chamfer distance (pCH) and complement over union
(CoU). We also report mean AR across all metrics. For comparison of proposal generation methods,
we also report average precision. See details of the metrics in Appendix B.
Comparison with the state of the art. We compared our RGB-only approach against state-of-the-
art RGB-only methods from the BOP challenge’s “unseen-objects” category, as our target YouTube
videos lack depth information. The top open-source methods compared were GigaPose (Nguyen
et al., 2024), FoundPose (Örnek et al., 2024), and MegaPose (Labbé et al., 2022). We always use
retrieved meshes and scales estimates instead of the ground truth meshes for a fair comparison.
The results of the methods on the YCB-V and HOPE-Video datasets are shown in Table 1. The
table shows our method significantly outperforms all three methods, and impressively, our method
achieves that without any in-domain training or fine-tuning. This indicates that MegaPose, GigaPose
and FoundPose, designed for 6D pose estimation with precise and known meshes, do not generalize
well to scenarios with unknown or imprecise meshes and are unsuitable for the in-the-wild task.

4.1.1    A BLATIONS OF K EY C OMPONENTS
CAD model retrieval. We compare our method for CAD model retrieval to the OpenShape (Liu
et al., 2024a) baseline on the YCB-V dataset in Table 2. OpenShape is a multi-modal model that
aligns point clouds into CLIP space using PointBERT (Yu et al., 2022). While OpenShape works
well when the ground truth models are present in the database, in our scenario, when the exact
models are unavailable, our method (c) outperforms OpenShape (a) by roughly 44% as measured
by final pose estimation quality. As the upper bound for CAD model retrieval, we also show our
method in the scenario when the exact meshes of the objects depicted in the image and their scales
are known (d). Additionally, we compare our choice of using the FFA descriptor with the per-view


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Input         Predictions       Overlay               Input         Predictions       Overlay


A                                                      B



C                                                      D



E                                                      F
Figure 3: Qualitative results of our method on the YCB-V dataset. On the YCB-V dataset our
method is able to detect objects that are not part of the dataset (such as keyboard in image F and
chair in image C), which highlights the benefit of our method of not being restricted to the ground
truth meshes.

     Input         Predictions       Overlay               Input         Predictions       Overlay


A                                                      B



C                                                      D



E                                                      F



G                                                      H
Figure 4: Qualitative results of our method on the HOPE-Video dataset. On the HOPE-Video
dataset our method reconstructs complex scenes with multiple objects while respecting partial oc-
clusions.


averaged CLS token descriptor. We show that foreground feature averaging (c) outperforms the CLS
token (b) substantially. We provide further ablations on the descriptor choice in Appendix C.1.
Scale estimation. We compare our object scale estimation method to the constant scale baseline of
10cm on the YCB-V dataset in Table 3. Even though estimating scale from a single image is an ill-
posed problem, our method that uses a scale prior obtained from a large language model improves
the average Chamfer distance recall by 55% over the constant model scaling. This shows the LLM
brings insightful information about the object sizes.

4.1.2   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS OF 6D P OSE E STIMATION
The qualitative results on YCB-V images are shown in Figure 3 and qualitative results on HOPE-
Video are shown in Figure 4. The successful examples in the figure demonstrate the capability of the
proposed method, that is, being able to retrieve an object in the same category and to align its pose
despite visual differences. For example, consider the drill in the Figure 3-A: our method retrieves
another type of drill whose texture differs from the texture in the query image, but the retrieved CAD
model is still aligned with the input query image. A similar example is shown in Figure 4-A, where
our method aligns meshes with textures different from the objects depicted in the input image. An
added benefit of our method is it’s capability to align objects that are outside of the training dataset.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Qualitative results of our method on the EPIC-Kitchens dataset. Our method is able
to detect and align objects from an egocentric point of view. See Figures 8 and 9 for additional
examples.


In Figure 3-C our method retrieves a chair and in Figure 3-F a computer keyboard, both of which
are not in the set of ground truth objects of the YCB-V dataset.
Failure modes. Our method has two main failure modes: (i) failure to retrieve a similar mesh and
(ii) failure to estimate the correct scale. The example of the first failure mode is shown in Figure 4-
C, where instead of the box (top left) a red and white checkerboard object is retrieved and as a
consequence the pose estimation fails. Another failure mode is shown in Figure 4-E where improper
scale estimation leads to incorrect scene occlusions.

4.2   V IDEO R ESULTS AND A PPLICATIONS

We show quantitative and qualitative results of our full 6D pose detection and tracking method on
Internet videos as well as on egocentric videos from the EPIC-KITCHENS dataset (Damen et al.,
2022). We also show an application of the extracted object manipulation trajectories on a real robot.
More results are available in the appendix and the supplementary video.
Quantitative evaluation. For the quantitative evaluation of object tracking in-the-wild, we man-
ually annotated an approximate 6D pose of human interacted objects in 32 “in-the-wild” videos
containing a total of 6947 frames. To annotate the ground truth poses, the annotator selected an
object from the top Objaverse retrievals and then manually aligned it to visually match each frame
of the video. The results of our approach are compared to several state-of-the-art methods are shown
in Table 4. Our method consistently improves upon the previous state-of-the-art. More details on
the evaluation metrics are in Appendix B.2.
Qualitative results on Internet and egocentric videos. For a qualitative evaluation of the pro-
posed method in the wild, we consider instructional videos, e.g., cooking videos from the Internet
and EPIC-KITCHENS (Damen et al., 2022) dataset. The resulting 6D object trajectories obtained
from videos from the EPIC-KITCHENS dataset are shown in Figure 5 and Figures 8 and 9 in the



Table 4: Comparison with state-of-the-art 6D object estimation methods on “in the wild”
videos. The 6D object tracking results of our approach are compared to MegaPose (Labbé et al.,
2022), GigaPose (Nguyen et al., 2024), and FoundPose (Örnek et al., 2024). Our method outper-
forms these baselines in all metrics.
                                      MegaPose MegaPose FoundPose Ours              Ours
                                       (coarse)                                   (refined)
   Relative rotation ↓                   6.866         6.822         7.736       1.719     1.205
   Relative projected translation ↓      0.107         0.161         0.405       0.091     0.086


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Input video
Prediction
Simulation
Real robot


Figure 6: The proposed approach applied on an Internet video. Top row: several input frames.
Second row: alignment obtained by our method together with tracked 2D-3D correspondences
shown as colored tracks. Third row: Temporally smooth poses are used to compute robot mo-
tion via trajectory optimization. Bottom row: video of a real robot execution. Please see additional
results in the Appendix D and the supplementary video.


appendix. Please note, our method can detect and track multiple objects. We use the same approach
for the Internet instructional videos and then perform experiments on a real robot, as described in
the following paragraph.
Application: Imitating object motion from Internet videos. The temporally smooth 6D poses are
used to optimize the trajectory of the Franka Emika Panda robot. The optimized trajectory can then
be executed in simulation or on a real robot. The proposed approach successfully replicates actions
shown in instructional videos, as shown in Figure 6. Additional results are shown in Figure 10
and Figure 11 in Appendix D. For full videos of the real-world robot manipulation, please see the
supplementary video. Please note how in the video the robot imitates the extracted subtle human
motions that would be otherwise hard to program, e.g., shaking the jug before pouring.
Limitations. Two main limitations persist: (i) if the quality of object segmentation is low or the
object is significantly occluded, the retrieval and scale estimation may not be successful; and (ii) the
mesh retrieval sometimes selects the most semantically similar object, which however, is not always
geometrically similar to the object in the video, which can lead to inaccuracies in pose estimation.

5             C ONCLUSION
We present an approach for category-level 6D object alignment for in-the-wild images and videos.
We show that a similar mesh can be retrieved from a large-scale database of CAD meshes given
the input query image, and can be then aligned to the query image despite the visual dissimilarities.
We demonstrate quantitatively on two BOP datasets and a new dataset of “in-the-wild” instructional
videos that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art 6D pose estimation baselines. Qualitatively,
we show an application of the proposed method to guiding robotic manipulation using an instruc-
tional video, making a step towards large-scale learning of object manipulation skills from Internet’s
instructional videos.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partly supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Re-
public through the e-INFRA CZ (ID:90254), and by the European Union’s Horizon Europe projects
AGIMUS (No. 101070165), euROBIN (No. 101070596), and ERC FRONTIER (No. 101097822).
Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily re-
flect those of the European Union or the European Commission. Neither the European Union nor
the European Commission can be held responsible for them. Georgy Ponimatkin and Martin Cı́fka
were also partly supported by Grant Agency of the Czech Technical University in Prague under
allocations SGS25/156/OHK3/3T/13 (GP) and SGS25/152/OHK3/3T/13 (MC).

R EFERENCES
Marc Alexa. Super-Fibonacci Spirals: Fast, Low-Discrepancy Sampling of SO(3). CVPR, 2022.
Shir Amir, Yossi Gandelsman, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Deep ViT Features as Dense Visual
  Descriptors. ECCVW, 2022.
Shariq Farooq Bhat, Reiner Birkl, Diana Wofk, Peter Wonka, and Matthias Müller. ZoeDepth:
  Zero-shot Transfer by Combining Relative and Metric Depth. arXiv:2302.12288, 2023.
Eric Brachmann, Alexander Krull, Frank Michel, Stefan Gumhold, Jamie Shotton, and Carsten
  Rother. Learning 6D Object Pose Estimation using 3D Object Coordinates. ECCV, 2014.
Markus Braun, Qing Rao, Yikang Wang, and Fabian Flohr. Pose-RCNN: Joint Object Detection and
 Pose Estimation Using 3D Object Proposals. ITSC, 2016.
Zhe Cao, Ilija Radosavovic, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Jitendra Malik. Reconstructing Hand-Object
  Interactions in the Wild. ICCV, 2021.
Justin Carpentier, Guilhem Saurel, Gabriele Buondonno, Joseph Mirabel, Florent Lamiraux, Olivier
  Stasse, and Nicolas Mansard. The Pinocchio C++ library – A fast and flexible implementation of
  rigid body dynamics algorithms and their analytical derivatives. IEEE SII, 2019.
Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gor-
 don, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for
 contrastive language-image learning. CVPR, 2023.
Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Antonino Furnari, Jian Ma, Evange-
  los Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray.
  Rescaling Egocentric Vision: Collection, Pipeline and Challenges for EPIC-KITCHENS-100.
  IJCV, 2022.
Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig
 Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A Universe of Anno-
 tated 3D Objects. CVPR, 2023.
Maximilian Denninger, Dominik Winkelbauer, Martin Sundermeyer, Wout Boerdijk, Markus
 Knauer, Klaus H. Strobl, Matthias Humt, and Rudolph Triebel. BlenderProc2: A Procedural
 Pipeline for Photorealistic Rendering. Journal of Open Source Software, 2023.
Laura Downs, Anthony Francis, Nate Koenig, Brandon Kinman, Ryan Hickman, Krista Reymann,
  Thomas B McHugh, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Google Scanned Objects: A High-Quality Dataset
  of 3D Scanned Household Items. ICRA, 2022.
Hao-Shu Fang, Chenxi Wang, Minghao Gou, and Cewu Lu. GraspNet-1Billion: A Large-Scale
  Benchmark for General Object Grasping. CVPR, 2020.
Gemma Team. Gemma 2: Improving Open Language Models at a Practical Size. arXiv:2408.00118,
  2024.
Yang Hai, Rui Song, Jiaojiao Li, and Yinlin Hu. Shape-Constraint Recurrent Flow for 6D Object
  Pose Estimation. CVPR, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yana Hasson, Gul Varol, Dimitrios Tzionas, Igor Kalevatykh, Michael J Black, Ivan Laptev, and
  Cordelia Schmid. Learning joint reconstruction of hands and manipulated objects. CVPR, 2019.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Mask R-CNN. ICCV, 2017.
Xingyi He, Jiaming Sun, Yuang Wang, Di Huang, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. OnePose++:
  Keypoint-Free One-Shot Object Pose Estimation without CAD Models. NeurIPS, 2022a.
Yisheng He, Yao Wang, Haoqiang Fan, Jian Sun, and Qifeng Chen. FS6D: Few-Shot 6D Pose
  Estimation of Novel Objects. CVPR, 2022b.

Tomáš Hodan, Pavel Haluza, Štepán Obdržálek, Jiri Matas, Manolis Lourakis, and Xenophon Zab-
  ulis. T-LESS: An RGB-D Dataset for 6D Pose Estimation of Texture-less Objects. WACV, 2017.
Tomas Hodan, Martin Sundermeyer, Bertram Drost, Yann Labbé, Eric Brachmann, Frank Michel,
  Carsten Rother, and Jiri Matas. BOP Challenge 2020 on 6D Object Localization. ECCVW, 2020.
Tomas Hodan, Martin Sundermeyer, Yann Labbe, Van Nguyen Nguyen, Gu Wang, Eric Brachmann,
  Bertram Drost, Vincent Lepetit, Carsten Rother, and Jiri Matas. BOP Challenge 2023 on Detec-
  tion, Segmentation and Pose Estimation of Seen and Unseen Rigid Objects. CVPRW, 2024.
Zixun Huang, Keling Yao, Seth Z. Zhao, Chuanyu Pan, Tianjian Xu, Weiyu Feng, and Allen Y.
  Yang. Robust Digital-Twin Localization via An RGBD-based Transformer Network and A Com-
  prehensive Evaluation on a Mobile Dataset. ICMLW, 2023.
Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Sergey Zakharov, Rares Ambrus, Thomas Kollar, Zsolt Kira, and Adrien
 Gaidon. ShAPO: Implicit Representations for Multi-Object Shape, Appearance, and Pose Opti-
 mization. ECCV, 2022.
Wilson Jallet, Antoine Bambade, Etienne Arlaud, Sarah El-Kazdadi, Nicolas Mansard, and Justin
 Carpentier. PROXDDP: Proximal Constrained Trajectory Optimization. hal-04332348, 2023.
Glenn Jocher, Jing Qiu, and Ayush Chaurasia. Ultralytics YOLO, 2023. URL https://github.
  com/ultralytics/ultralytics.
Nikita Karaev, Ignacio Rocco, Benjamin Graham, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian
  Rupprecht. CoTracker: It is Better to Track Together. ECCV, 2024.
Lei Ke, Mingqiao Ye, Martin Danelljan, Yifan Liu, Yu-Wing Tai, Chi-Keung Tang, and Fisher Yu.
  Segment Anything in High Quality. NeurIPS, 2023.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment Anything. ICCV, 2023.
Klemen Kotar, Stephen Tian, Hong-Xing Yu, Daniel L.K. Yamins, and Jiajun Wu. Are These the
  Same Apple? Comparing Images Based on Object Intrinsics. NeurIPS, 2023.
Yann Labbé, Justin Carpentier, Mathieu Aubry, and Josef Sivic. CosyPose: Consistent multi-view
  multi-object 6d pose estimation. ECCV, 2020.
Yann Labbé, Lucas Manuelli, Arsalan Mousavian, Stephen Tyree, Stan Birchfield, Jonathan Trem-
  blay, Justin Carpentier, Mathieu Aubry, Dieter Fox, and Josef Sivic. MegaPose: 6D Pose Estima-
  tion of Novel Objects via Render & Compare. CoRL, 2022.
Vincent Lepetit, Francesc Moreno-Noguer, and Pascal Fua. EPnP: An Accurate O(n) Solution to
  the PnP Problem. IJCV, 2009.
Yi Li, Gu Wang, Xiangyang Ji, Yu Xiang, and Dieter Fox. DeepIM: Deep Iterative Matching for 6D
  Pose Estimation. IJCV, 2020.
Zongmian Li, Jiri Sedlar, Justin Carpentier, Ivan Laptev, Nicolas Mansard, and Josef Sivic. Estimat-
  ing 3D Motion and Forces of Human-Object Interactions from Internet Videos. IJCV, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yunzhi Lin, Jonathan Tremblay, Stephen Tyree, Patricio A. Vela, and Stan Birchfield. Multi-view
  Fusion for Multi-level Robotic Scene Understanding. IROS, 2021.
Minghua Liu, Ruoxi Shi, Kaiming Kuang, Yinhao Zhu, Xuanlin Li, Shizhong Han, Hong Cai, Fatih
 Porikli, and Hao Su. OpenShape: Scaling Up 3D Shape Representation Towards Open-World
 Understanding. NeurIPS, 2024a.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot One Image to 3D Object. ICCV, 2023.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with Grounded Pre-Training
  for Open-Set Object Detection. ECCV, 2024b.
Llama Team. The Llama 3 Herd of Models. arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie Liu, Yuexin Ma,
  Song-Hai Zhang, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, and Wenping Wang. Wonder3D: Single
  Image to 3D using Cross-Domain Diffusion. In CVPR, 2024.
Yangxiao Lu, Yunhui Guo, Nicholas Ruozzi, Yu Xiang, et al. Adapting Pre-Trained Vision Models
  for Novel Instance Detection and Segmentation. arXiv:2405.17859, 2024.
Robert McCarthy, Daniel C.H. Tan, Dominik Schmidt, Fernando Acero, Nathan Herr, Yilun Du,
  Thomas G Thuruthel, and Zhibin Li. Towards Generalist Robot Learning from Internet Video: A
  Survey. arXiv:2404.19664, 2024.
Antoine Miech, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and Josef
  Sivic. HowTo100M: Learning a Text-Video Embedding by Watching Hundred Million Narrated
  Video Clips. ICCV, 2019.
Andrew T Miller and Peter K Allen. Graspit!: A Versatile Simulator for Robotic Grasping. RAM,
  2004.
Van Nguyen Nguyen, Yinlin Hu, Yang Xiao, Mathieu Salzmann, and Vincent Lepetit. Templates
  for 3D Object Pose Estimation Revisited: Generalization to New Objects and Robustness to Oc-
  clusions. CVPR, 2022.
Van Nguyen Nguyen, Thibault Groueix, Georgy Ponimatkin, Vincent Lepetit, and Tomas Hodan.
  CNOS: A Strong Baseline for CAD-based Novel Object Segmentation. ICCVW, 2023.
Van Nguyen Nguyen, Thibault Groueix, Mathieu Salzmann, and Vincent Lepetit. GigaPose: Fast
  and Robust Novel Object Pose Estimation via One Correspondence. CVPR, 2024.
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report, 2024.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mido Assran, Nicolas
 Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael
 Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut,
 Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without super-
 vision. TMLR, 2024.
Evin Pınar Örnek, Yann Labbé, Bugra Tekin, Lingni Ma, Cem Keskin, Christian Forster, and Tomas
  Hodan. FoundPose: Unseen Object Pose Estimation with Foundation Features. ECCV, 2024.
Jeremie Papon and Markus Schoeler. Semantic Pose using Deep Networks Trained on Synthetic
   RGB-D. ICCV, 2015.
Austin Patel, Andrew Wang, Ilija Radosavovic, and Jitendra Malik. Learning to Imitate Object
  Interactions from Internet Videos. arXiv:2211.13225, 2022.
Vladimı́r Petrı́k, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and Josef Sivic. Learning Object Manipulation
  Skills via Approximate State Estimation from Real Videos. CoRL, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham
  Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junting Pan, Kalyan Va-
  sudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, and Christoph Fe-
  ichtenhofer. SAM 2: Segment Anything in Images and Videos. arXiv:2408.00714, 2024.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object
  Detection with Region Proposal Networks. TPAMI, 2016.
Johannes Lutz Schönberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. Structure-from-Motion Revisited. CVPR,
  2016.
Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal, Sergey
  Levine, and Google Brain. Time-Contrastive Networks: Self-Supervised Learning from Video.
  In ICRA, 2018.
Jingnan Shi, Rajat Talak, Harry Zhang, David Jin, and Luca Carlone. CRISP: Object Pose and Shape
   Estimation with Test-Time Adaptation. arXiv:2412.01052, 2024.
Joan Sola, Jeremie Deray, and Dinesh Atchuthan. A micro Lie theory for state estimation in robotics.
  arXiv:1812.01537, 2018.
Jiaming Sun, Zihao Wang, Siyu Zhang, Xingyi He, Hongcheng Zhao, Guofeng Zhang, and Xiaowei
   Zhou. OnePose: One-Shot Object Pose Estimation without CAD Models. CVPR, 2022.
Stanislaw Szymanowicz, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi. Splatter Image: Ultra-Fast
  Single-View 3D Reconstruction. CVPR, 2024.
Stephen Tyree, Jonathan Tremblay, Thang To, Jia Cheng, Terry Mosier, Jeffrey Smith, and Stan
  Birchfield. 6-DoF Pose Estimation of Household Objects for Robotic Manipulation: An Accessi-
  ble Dataset and Benchmark. IROS, 2022.
Gu Wang, Fabian Manhardt, Federico Tombari, and Xiangyang Ji. GDR-Net: Geometry-Guided
  Direct Regression Network for Monocular 6D Object Pose Estimation. CVPR, 2021.
He Wang, Srinath Sridhar, Jingwei Huang, Julien Valentin, Shuran Song, and Leonidas J Guibas.
  Normalized Object Coordinate Space for Category-Level 6D Object Pose and Size Estimation.
  CVPR, 2019.
Shuzhe Wang, Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, Boris Chidlovskii, and Jerome Revaud. DUSt3R:
  Geometric 3D Vision Made Easy. CVPR, 2024.
Bowen Wen and Kostas Bekris. BundleTrack: 6D Pose Tracking for Novel Objects without Instance
  or Category-Level 3D Models. IROS, 2021.
Bowen Wen, Jonathan Tremblay, Valts Blukis, Stephen Tyree, Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Dieter
  Fox, Jan Kautz, and Stan Birchfield. BundleSDF: Neural 6-DoF Tracking and 3D Reconstruction
  of Unknown Objects. CVPR, 2023.
Bowen Wen, Wei Yang, Jan Kautz, and Stan Birchfield. FoundationPose: Unified 6D Pose Estima-
  tion and Tracking of Novel Objects. CVPR, 2024.
Jane Wu, Georgios Pavlakos, Georgia Gkioxari, and Jitendra Malik. Reconstructing Hand-Held
  Objects in 3D. arXiv:2404.06507, 2024.
Yu Xiang, Tanner Schmidt, Venkatraman Narayanan, and Dieter Fox. PoseCNN: A Convolutional
  Neural Network for 6D Object Pose Estimation in Cluttered Scenes. RSS, 2018.
Yang Xiao, Vincent Lepetit, and Renaud Marlet. Few-Shot Object Detection and Viewpoint Esti-
  mation for Objects in the Wild. TPAMI, 2022.
Lior Yariv, Yoni Kasten, Dror Moran, Meirav Galun, Matan Atzmon, Basri Ronen, and Yaron Lip-
  man. Multiview Neural Surface Reconstruction by Disentangling Geometry and Appearance.
  NeurIPS, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xumin Yu, Lulu Tang, Yongming Rao, Tiejun Huang, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Point-BERT: Pre-
  training 3D Point Cloud Transformers with Masked Point Modeling. CVPR, 2022.
Jason Y Zhang, Sam Pepose, Hanbyul Joo, Deva Ramanan, Jitendra Malik, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
  Perceiving 3D Human-Object Spatial Arrangements from a Single Image in the Wild. ECCV,
  2020.
Chen Zhao, Yinlin Hu, and Mathieu Salzmann. Fusing Local Similarities for Retrieval-based 3D
  Orientation Estimation of Unseen Objects. ECCV, 2022.
Xu Zhao, Wenchao Ding, Yongqi An, Yinglong Du, Tao Yu, Min Li, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang.
  Fast Segment Anything. arXiv:2306.12156, 2023.
Kateryna Zorina, Justin Carpentier, Josef Sivic, and Vladimı́r Petrı́k. Learning to Manipulate Tools
  by Aligning Simulation to Video Demonstration. RA-L, 2021.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

In this Appendix, we provide additional technical information related to our method. In Section A,
we describe implementation details of our method. The details on CAD model retrieval are de-
scribed in Section A.1. In Section A.2, we provide details on the rotation estimation part of our
pipeline together with a discussion on how camera focal length priors can be used in case of un-
known focal length. Then, in Section A.3, we describe the technical details of the scale estimation
part of our method. In Section A.4, we provide more technical details on object tracking. Sec-
tion A.5 then provides details on the runtime of our method. Section A.6 provides details on motion
retargeting to a robotic manipulator. Section B provides details on metrics used in the evaluation of
our method. Section C describes additional abblation studies of our method. Finally, in Section C.5
and Section D, we provide additional quantitative and qualitative results obtained by our method.


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.1   CAD M ODEL R ETRIEVAL D ETAILS

Our model database contains approximately ∼50,000 objects from Objaverse-LVIS (Deitke et al.,
2023) and Google Scanned Objects (Downs et al., 2022) datasets. Each CAD model is rendered
in M = 600 views at 420x420 pixels, with rotations sampled from SO(3) using viewpoint sam-
pler (Alexa, 2022) from which 1024D FFA representation descriptor is computed. When construct-
ing FFA mesh descriptor the averaged foreground patch token is computed from layer 22 of the
DINOv2 model (Oquab et al., 2024) for each of the M = 600 rendered views of the CAD model.
The resulting per-view foreground patch tokens are then aggregated to create per-object patch token.
While such a representation may seem expensive to compute, it needs to be computed only once for
each CAD model in the database.
To retrieve CAD models for a given image, we first generate proposals using GroundingDINO (Liu
et al., 2024b) with prompt "objects" combined with SAM 2 (Ravi et al., 2024). Then, the
retrieval process is done by matching a single 1024D FFA descriptor extracted from a query image
to a database of ∼50,000 1024D descriptors (one descriptor for one object) by means of the dot
product.

A.2   6D O BJECT P OSE E STIMATION D ETAILS

Rotation estimation. The rotation estimation part is built on the pre-trained DINOv2 ViT-L / 14
(Oquab et al., 2024) model. The rotation is estimated using spatial patch features from layer 22 of
DINOv2 model by directly matching proposal image to M = 600 pre-rendered templates of the
retrieved CAD model. The proposal image is cropped and resized to 420x420 pixels to match the
resolution of pre-rendered templates, which gives feature maps of 30x30 tokens for matching.
Camera focal length priors. In general, for the complete 6D pose estimation, both the camera
intrinsics and the exact CAD model with the correct absolute scale must be known. Knowing only
one of these is insufficient. Therefore, when ground truth camera
                                                              √ focal length is not available, we
use the commonly used prior of the camera focal length f = w2 + h2 , where w and h are image
width and height in pixels, to obtain an approximate point cloud. Our method tackles the problem
when the exact CAD model with the ground truth scale is unavailable. Hence, by definition, there are
infinitely many solutions (up to the unknown scale of the object) and defining absolute translation
error is not meaningful both with and without known camera intrinsics. To get an approximate
translation, our method estimates the absolute scales of objects in the scene by leveraging a prior
knowledge available in an LLM as is described in Section 3.1 and, similarly, we use the commonly
used prior of the camera focal length as stated above when the intrinsics are not available.
For robotic experiments, we rescale the predicted object trajectory so that the robotic arm can exe-
cute the motion. This rescaling would be necessary, even if both the camera intrinsics and the ground
truth CAD model were known, as the robots and manipulated objects vary in size and the motion
executed by a human in the video needs to be translated into the space of the robot. However, this
task-specific scale refinement can be done automatically using, for example, a task specific reward,


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


e.g. to maximize the amount of poured liquid, in the aligned simulated environment as used, e.g., in
Zorina et al. (2021).

A.3   O BJECT S CALE E STIMATION D ETAILS

LLM scale database generation. When obtaining metric scales using an LLM, we precompute
a database of object text descriptions and their typical size in meters. To create the database, the
keywords were generated by the GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024) model by repeatedly querying the following
prompt:

   You help researchers to understand the 3D world around them. You
   need to generate 250 keywords for common real-world objects and you
   also need to estimate the average object scale in that category by
   considering the average largest dimension in meters. The keyword
   should be generated in the form of an article, followed by adjective
   (if needed), and then by noun.
   Examples:       a coffee mug, a computer mouse, a pan, a laptop.
   In output, please ignore natural entities such as mountains, planets,
   do not include imaginary creatures, and buildings. Also, do not
   consider niche objects such as diving equipment or rare scientific
   equipment.
   The output should be following this structure:
   object 1:      scale 1
   object 2:      scale 2
   The input should be made only of this list. The scales should
   represent numbers in meters, but do not include units.

The scales obtained were accumulated and, in case of repeated occurrence, the median scale was
taken, and saved in the database with CLIP feature vectors of the text descriptions. In total, we
collected a list of 2200 objects, with scale values ranging from 1cm to 300m (“a cruise ship”), with
90% of the objects being under 2m. This makes it possible to use the proposed approach for the most
common indoor scenarios, but possibly some outdoor scenarios as well. However, when a different
environment is expected, the list of objects can be easily adapted by adjusting the LLM prompts to
generate objects from this environment.
LLM scale retrieval. During inference, we extract CLIP features from the images of masked objects
depicted in the input scene. Then, we retrieve the K most similar text descriptions with the corre-
sponding scales for each object using the extracted CLIP features, and aggregate the K retrieved
scales using the median into metric scale mi per object i.
Relative scale estimation. To obtain relative scales of objects in a scene, we use the depth estimation
approach (Bhat et al., 2023) to obtain a depth map and compute a pointcloud for each object i in the
scene using its segmentation mask. We then identify the direction of the centered point cloud with
the largest variance using the SVD decomposition and estimate the relative object scale ri for object
i as the size of the largest dimension of the point cloud.
Global rescaling. To combine the metric scale mi from the LLM with the relative scale ri from the
depth map for object i, we first compute the ratio ρi = mi /ri between the scales obtained using
these two methods. Then, we take the median value of these ratios over all objects in the scene
obtaining a single correction factor ρ for the entire scene. Finally, we obtain the metric scale si for
each object i by correcting the relative scale ri obtained from the automatic depth estimation using
the scene correction factor ρ as si = ri ρ. The outcome is an estimate of a real-world scale si (in
meters) for each extracted object i.
Please note that for some objects with high size variation, the size can be difficult to estimate, e.g.
a bicycle for a kid or an adult, or a real-sized car compared to a toy car. To cope with these issues,
we use median aggregation during the global rescaling, making our method robust to outliers, i.e.
tolerating large portions of incorrect scale estimates within the same scene.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4   P OSE T RACKING D ETAILS

To track the object, we detect objects in the first frame of the input video using a strong open set
object detector GroundingDINO (Liu et al., 2024b) to localize salient object candidates, and then
track them in the video frames using SAM2 (Ravi et al., 2024). We then use our 6D pose estimation
method on each frame to retrieve similar CAD model from the database and align them in each
frame of the video. The highest confidence alignment is used to initialize pose tracking based on
3D-2D correspondences obtained using the 6D pose from the selected frame and 2D tracks from
CoTracker (Karaev et al., 2024).

A.5   C OMPUTATIONAL R ESOURCES AND RUNTIMES

All experiments were carried out on a cluster featuring nodes with 8x NVIDIA A100 (40 GB of
VRAM per GPU), 2x 64-core AMD EPYC 7763 CPU, 1024 GB RAM. The total storage needed
for this project was around 4TB. Each experiment on the YCB-V dataset takes around 6 hours on a
single GPU and on the HOPE-Video dataset around 14 hours on a single GPU.
The method onboarding stage consists of pre-rendering the meshes and extracting the features. The
Objaverse-LVIS database with roughly ∼50,000 objects can be rendered in 3 days on one 8-GPU
node. The extraction of visual features for retrieval then takes around 3 days on one 8-GPU node as
well, and takes around 200MB of disk space. In practice, we used the before mentioned cluster to
parallelize and speed up the rendering and extraction processes significantly.
When running on a single image, the resulting runtime for detection, retrieval, and scale estimation
is ∼2s per image. For the pose estimation part, the runtime is on average ∼0.2s per object with
caching. However, when running on an instructional video, we run the detector only on the first
frame and track the detected objects through the video using SAM 2 (Ravi et al., 2024), which can
run in real-time. Then we run the retrieval and scale estimation, which can benefit from multi-frame
prediction aggregation, but does not necessarily have to use all video frames, especially for longer
videos. In practice, we used 30 frames throughout the video for the retrieval and scale estimation.
In contrast to single-image estimation, we use CoTracker (Karaev et al., 2024) combined with PnP
to extract smooth poses from the video, with run-time of ∼1s per frame.

A.6   R ETARGETING TRAJECTORIES TO A ROBOTIC MANIPULATOR

Initial object pose replication. To initiate the trajectory following process, the object needs to be
placed in an initial configuration that corresponds to the starting pose of the video demonstration. We
manually placed the object into the gripper (effectively fixing the transformation from the gripper
to the object). The robot was then commanded to move the object to the initial pose, calculated
           0             0
as TRC TCO     , where TCO   is the object pose relative to the camera frame at the first frame of the
video, as estimated by our method, and TRC is the fixed transformation from the robot base to the
virtual camera frame, manually chosen to simulate a camera viewing the robot from the front with
a 30◦ elevation relative to the gravity vector. Transformation TRC was manually defined and held
constant across all demonstrations. This allows us to move the object to a pose visually similar to the
initial state in the videos. However, in a practical robotic system, this manual initialization would
be superseded by pre-existing grasp configurations or an automated grasping procedure (e.g., using
a combination of motion planning and GraspIT (Miller & Allen, 2004) or GraspNet (Fang et al.,
2020)).
Trajectory following via optimization. To achieve trajectory transfer, we represent the ob-
                                             0
ject’s motion relative to its initial pose, TCO . This yields a sequence of relative transformations,
   0   −1
(TCO ) TCO (t), that define the object’s movement. A reference trajectory is then generated by ap-
plying these relative transformations to a chosen initial pose in the robot’s task space in simulation
or real life. Finally, trajectory optimization (Eq. 4) determines the joint torques necessary for the
robot to imitate this reference trajectory. We employed the publicly available dynamic model for
the Franka Emika Panda robot from the example-robot-data package (available via Conda
and PyPI), which provides kinematic, geometric, and inertial parameters for each robot link. For
forward dynamics computations, we utilized the Pinocchio library (Carpentier et al., 2019), also
employed internally by the Aligator trajectory optimization package (Jallet et al., 2023). Given a
sequence of joint torques, the dynamic model computes corresponding joint positions and velocities.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Forward kinematics, based on the kinematic model, then maps these joint states to the object’s pose.
Consequently, the optimized joint torques (Eq. 4) directly influence both the end-effector pose and
the joint velocities.

B     M ETRICS
B.1   S INGLE F RAME M ETRICS

Our method is evaluated on three different metrics, Complement over Union, Chamfer Distance
and Projected Chamfer Distance. Each of the metrics is described in more details below.
 • Complement over Union (CoU) is defined as IoU between the rendered mask of the ground
   truth mesh under the ground truth pose and the predicted mesh under the predicted pose. This
   metric measures the visual alignment of the two masks as well as the silhouette appearance of
   the two objects.
 • Chamfer Distance (CH) is a standard measure used to compare similarity of two pointclouds.
   This metric was chosen since the only way to compare quality of the pose estimate in 3D is
   via geometric alignment of the ground truth (GT) and predicted meshes under GT and predicted
   poses accordingly. This metric takes into account both pose and scale predictions and hence
   allows to see full performance of our model in 3D.
 • Projected Chamfer Distance (pCH) is complementary to the full Chamfer distance since it
   allows to evaluate how well estimated poses reproject into the image, essentially marginalizing
   over the scale in the chamfer distance. Inspired by the MSPD (Maximum Symmetry-Aware
   Projection Distance) metric used in the BOP challenge, pCH is given by
                                  1
                                          min ||π(x, K, T ) − π(y, K, T̂ )||22
                                      P
                          pCH = |M  |
                                          x∈M y∈M̂
                                                                                                   (4)
                                    1
                                                 min ||π(x, K, T ) − π(y, K, T̂ )||22
                                          P
                                + |M̂ |          x∈M
                                          y∈M̂

    where K is camera intrinsics, T is a predicted pose, T̂ is ground truth pose, M is a set of points
    sampled from the predicted mesh, M̂ is a set of points sampled from the ground truth mesh, x
    and y are vertices of the meshes, and function π projects 3D vertex into 2D pixel. The core idea
    of this metric is to evaluate how well the estimated pose visually aligns when projected onto the
    image plane. As the closest vertex is found for each vertex of other mesh, this metric can be used
    for non-identical meshes or for symmetric meshes. This approach allows us to assess alignment
    quality, even when the predicted scale is not exact, since the scale is factored out during the
    projection.

B.2   T RACKING M ETRICS

To allow comparison of different methods, we collect 32 videos consisting of 15 instructional
YouTube videos and 17 egocentric videos from the EPIC-KITCHENS (Damen et al., 2022) dataset.
These videos contain altogether 6947 frames. We manually create the ground-truth annotations by
visually aligning the semi-automatically retrieved mesh from the Objaverse dataset with the manip-
ulated object in the video. When comparing the estimated object trajectories of different methods,
we focus more on the relative object motion rather than precise 6D object trajectory. To this end,
we use three metrics that measure spatial velocity error in rotation, projected translation, and depth.
Specifically, we compute errors as the average error over all pairs of poses in video frames separated
by a temporal distance δ, where δ ∈ Γ and Γ is a set containing 10 integer values linearly spaced
from 1 to ⌊N/2⌋. Here, N represents the total number of frames in the video, and ⌊·⌋ denotes the
floor function, rounding down to the nearest integer. The overall errors are computed as:
                                                    N −δ
                                           1 X 1 X 1 rot
                                erot =                   e      ,                                  (5)
                                          |Γ| N − δ i=1 δ i,i+δ
                                                 δ∈Γ
                                                     N −δ
                                            1 X 1 X 1 proj
                                eproj =                   e      ,                                 (6)
                                           |Γ| N − δ i=1 δ i,i+δ
                                                 δ∈Γ


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        N −δ
                                    depth      1 X 1 X 1 depth
                                e           =                e      ,                                 (7)
                                              |Γ| N − δ i=1 δ i,i+δ
                                                 δ∈Γ
                  proj         depth
where erot
         i,i+δ , ei,i+δ , and ei,i+δ are errors computed between frames i and i+δ for rotation, projected
translation and depth. These errors are divided by the time difference δ to obtain a relative error per
frame. The inner sum computes the error across the N − δ frames of the whole video, which is then
normalized by N − δ to obtain the average error. With the averaging over multiple time differences
δ ∈ Γ (the outer sum), we penalize inconsistencies in velocities both locally (δ = 1) and globally
δ = ⌊N/2⌋.
Rotation error. Given the estimated rotations Ri , Rj and the ground-truth rotations R̂i , R̂j for
frames i and j, we compute the rotation error erot
                                                i,j as the error of the ground-truth and the estimated
rotation spatial velocities in the camera frame, expressed in degrees. In addition, we minimize
the rotation error over the set of discretized ground-truth object symmetries S, when the object
symmetry axis is defined by the human annotator (if available). The error is computed as:
                                                ⊤                 ⊤
                             erot
                              i,j = min log(Ri Rj ) − log(R̂i S R̂j ) ,                               (8)
                                      S∈S

where log is SO(3) logarithm (Sola et al., 2018). Note that because we compare spatial velocities
when computing rotation error, having different meshes for ground-truth annotation and the estima-
tion does not affect the rotation error. However, this is not necessarily true for projected translation
and depth errors, as explained in the following paragraph.
Projected translation error. When computing projected translation error, we need to consider
that we can have two different meshes for the ground-truth and the estimation, as their coordinate
system origins do not necessarily have to project to the same 2D point in the image. As illustrated
in Figure 7, the velocity of the projected object center can change differently, depending on the
3D position and the rotation of the object. We therefore recompute the translational part of the
estimated object trajectory t to a new trajectory t∗ that corresponds to the same object motion but
with a changed origin of the object coordinate system. In the best-case scenario, where the ground-
truth and estimated trajectory would be exactly the same up to the choice of the object origin, we
would shift the estimated object origin so that it is the same 3D point as the origin of the ground-
truth object when expressed in the camera coordinate frame. This is, however, impossible because
the objects can have different velocities in different video frames, and also because of the ambiguity
between the object’s depth and scale. We, therefore, use the following approach instead: In each
video frame i, we first compute a point that lies on the ray to the ground-truth object center, i.e. t̂i ,
but having the same distance from the camera as the estimated object. Then, we express this point in
the coordinate frame of the estimated object and compute the mean over all video frames, resulting
in the new object origin o∗ :
                                              N
                                          1 X −1
                                  o∗ =            T t̂i /∥t̂i ∥ · ∥ti ∥.                            (9)
                                          N i=1 i
Finally, by changing the object coordinate system, we compute the new translations as:
                                               t∗i = ti + Ri o∗ .                                    (10)
Note that by using this approach, the positions of the mesh vertices do not change, but we can
compensate for undesirable errors caused by having trajectories of two different meshes. In addition,
we limit the change of object origin by half of the estimated object scale to avoid a significant
unintentional error decrease in special cases of degenerate trajectories.
Given the ground-truth translations t̂ and the corrected translations t∗ , we now compute error of the
projected translation eproj
                       i,j as the error between the spatial velocities of the projected object origins:

                          100
              eproj
               i,j = √           (π(t∗i , K) − π(t∗j , K)) − (π(t̂i , K̂) − π(t̂j , K̂)) ,           (11)
                         w2 + h2
where the function π(x, K) projects a 3D point x to 2D image coordinates using a camera matrix
K described in Section A.2. The first difference in Equation 11 measures velocity for object with
corrected translation, while the second difference measures the velocity for object with ground-truth


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Visualization of object center projection. When evaluating translation and depth error,
the ground-truth (green) and estimated (red) meshes can have different object centers, causing the
spatial velocity between two frames to differ. We illustrate this in the image by showing a manipula-
tion of an object between two different frames i (left) and j (right) with visualization of trajectories
of two different meshes representing the motion of the same manipulated object. We overlay the
video frames with mesh contours and projected object centers, and corresponding velocities (dashed
lines). Even though both red and green objects reasonably describe the motion of the manipulated
object, the spatial velocities of the projected objects are different, requiring a change of the object
coordinate frame to prevent an unintended increase of the measured errors.



Table 5: Comparison with the state-of-the-art in 6D object tracking in the wild on the depth
metric. The 6D object tracking results of our approach are compared to MegaPose (Labbé et al.,
2022) and FoundPose (Örnek et al., 2024). Even though our method outperforms baselines on the
depth metric, note that in our experiments, we did not find the depth error to be informative. In
particular, all compared methods can be outperformed by a simple baseline that has zero velocity
in the depth direction, resulting in depth error of 0.0289. We hypothesize this could be due to, e.g.
the manipulated objects in both instructional and egocentric videos tend to move less in the depth
direction, and due to difficulty of the manual ground-truth object annotation performed by visually
aligning an approximate object mesh in the video.
                               MegaPose MegaPose FoundPose              Ours       Ours
                                (coarse)                                         (refined)
          Relative depth ↓      0.1198        0.1192        0.2592        0.0801    0.0800


translation. To consistently compare methods on videos of different resolutions, we normalize the
error and express it as a percentage of the video’s diagonal size.
Depth error. In a similar manner as the other two metrics, we measure spatial velocity error of the
estimated and ground-truth depths. However, normalized by the object scales s and ŝ:


                               edepth                    ˆ    ˆ
                                t1 ,t2 = (di − dj )/s − (di − dj )/ŝ ,                            (12)



where di = ∥t∗i ∥ is the estimated depth and dˆi = t̂i is the ground-truth depth. In our experi-
ments, we have found this metric to be insufficiently informative, as all compared methods can be
easily outperformed by a trivial assumption that the manipulated object does not move in the depth
direction at all, achieving a depth error of 0.0289 compared to 0.0801 of our method. We hypoth-
esize that this is due to two factors. First, objects in both instructional and egocentric videos tend
to move less in the depth direction. Second, it is hard for a human annotator to annotate depth by
visually aligning an object in the video, especially when the aligned object does not perfectly match
the shape of the depicted object. We show the complementary depth metric results in the Table 5.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Influence of different 3D model retrieval methods on 6D pose estimation. Oracle
(gray) shows an upper bound on the performance when the exact meshes of the objects depicted
in the image and their scales are known. Our approach outperforms the multimodal OpenShape
representation. Additionally, we observe that the model achieves the strongest performance using
FFA features from layer 22 of the DINOv2 model.
              Retrieval Method                  AR↑     ARCoU ↑     ARCH ↑    ARpCH ↑
              OpenShape (Liu et al., 2024a)     34.51     20.25      10.59      72.69
              Ours (layer 18 - CLS)             46.42     39.78      12.49      86.99
              Ours (layer 20 - CLS)             48.36     43.46      13.97      87.66
              Ours (layer 22 - CLS)             45.05     40.93      16.16      78.06
              Ours (layer 24 - CLS)             41.14     36.10      15.62      71.68
              Ours (layer 18 - FFA)             47.40     43.68      15.35      83.16
              Ours (layer 20 - FFA)             48.46     44.67      17.37      83.33
              Ours (layer 22 - FFA)             49.86     45.20      18.53      85.83
              Ours (layer 24 - FFA)             46.73     42.04      17.32      80.84
              Oracle - CLS                      63.31     52.42      46.43      91.07
              Oracle - FFA                      62.93     51.99      45.95      90.85


C     A DDITIONAL A BLATIONS AND Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

C.1   A BLATION OF CAD MODEL R ETRIEVAL AND A LIGNMENT

In Table 6 we explore how the overall performance of the pipeline changes by choosing tokens from
different layers of the DINOv2 model. We also provide comparison to using CLS token baseline
inspired by CNOS (Nguyen et al., 2023). In our experiments, we observe that doing retrieval and
pose estimation using patch features from the layer 22 of the DINOv2 model yields the best per-
formance. Compared to the related work of FoundPose (Örnek et al., 2024), which used layer 18
in their pipeline, our method achieves optimal performance using layer 22 features, indicating that
our task needs more semantic information, which is predominately in the last layers of ViT models
(Amir et al., 2022).

C.2   E FFECT OF PROPOSAL GENERATION ON SCALE ESTIMATION

Our scale estimation approach uses all detected objects in the image to compute the absolute object
sizes. If the detections are of poor quality, the estimated object sizes will be incorrect. Therefore,
we validate object proposal methods on the YCB-V dataset using the standard object detection met-
rics (average precision and recall) as well as the median scale error relative to the ground-truth. In
Table 7, we show that our approach based on an off-the-shelf object detector and mask segmenter
significantly outperforms the widely used proposal generator method CNOS (Nguyen et al., 2023).
Crucially, we observe the CNOS method oversegments the scene and produces a large amount of
spurious proposals. The number of spurious proposals of CNOS can be over 50%, negatively af-
fecting the object scale estimation even as our approach uses an outlier rejection method to cope
with incorrect proposals and scale estimates. Finally, we also show the scale estimation error when
using the ground truth object masks. Interestingly, the scale estimation error in this case is worse
than using our method to obtain the masks. This can be explained by the fact our method detects
additional objects in the background, such as chairs, that are not in the ground truth masks but help
with the scale estimation.

C.3   A BLATION OF N UMBER OF V IEWPOINTS

To examine the effect of the rotation sampling on the overall pipeline performance, we perform an
ablation study on YCB-V dataset shown in Table 8 in which we increase the number of sampled
views in the utilized sampling strategy (Alexa, 2022). In our method, we use N = 600 samples,
which, on average, leads to a ∼25◦ geodesic error between the closest rotations. When increasing


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Effect of proposal generation methods on scale estimation, precision, and recall. We
compare our proposal generation approach to the CNOS method (Nguyen et al., 2023) with Fast-
SAM segmenter (Zhao et al., 2023).
       Method                Scale error [%] ↓   AP ↑      AR@10 ↑     Proposals per image
       CNOS (FastSAM)             118.55         61.60      71.80               34
       Ours                       14.42          69.70      76.70               6
       GT Masks                   16.65           100        100                 -


N to N = 1200 or N = 1800, we observe that the overall pipeline performance remains similar,
while the computational requirements for storage and runtime increase linearly. Our prerendered
mesh database takes ∼1TB of disk space for N = 600 views, ∼2 TB for N = 1200 views and ∼3
TB for N = 1800 views. The runtime also scales linearly from ∼0.2s per object to ∼0.4s per object
for 1200 views and ∼0.6s per object for 1800 views.


Table 8: Ablation of Number of Viewpoints. The overall pose estimation performance compared
to our choice of N = 600 views is not substantially affected by increasing the number of rendered
viewpoints of each object, while the overall runtime and storage requirements increase linearly.
                   Nsamples AR↑ ARCoU ↑ ARCH ↑ ARpCH ↑ Avg Err
                   600        49.86     45.20      18.53     85.83      ∼25◦
                   1200       49.66     44.64      19.10     85.24      ∼20◦
                   1800       49.10     43.95      18.25     85.11      ∼16◦


C.4   LLM M ODEL A BLATION

To evaluate the dependence of our scale estimation method on the choice of LLM, we conducted
an additional ablation study using three other models: one proprietary (GPT-3.5-Turbo) and two
open-source models (Llama-3.1-8B Llama Team (2024) and Gemma2-9B Gemma Team (2024)).
We adapted prompts for each model to ensure the generation of a scale database in the expected
format and the best possible coverage of real-world objects.
The results of our experiments are shown in the Table 9. We observe that GPT-4 outperforms all
other models, with Llama-3.1-8B achieving a similar score. Surprisingly, GPT-3.5-Turbo performs
the worst, while the Gemma2-9B model is slightly better than GPT-3.5-Turbo but still lags behind
GPT-4 and Llama-3.1-8B. Please note that scale estimation does not affect the projected metrics and
therefore ARCoU and ARpCH remain constant.


Table 9: Ablation of LLM Model. While GPT-4 performs the best, the open-source Llama-3.1-
8B model achieves a similar performance. The GPT-3.5-Turbo and Gemma2-9B models perform
significantly worse in our study.
                      LLM model      AR↑ ARCoU ↑ ARCH ↑ ARpCH ↑
                     GPT-4             49.86     45.20      18.53      85.83
                     GPT-3.5-Turbo     45.29     45.20       4.85      85.83
                     Llama-3.1-8B      49.32     45.20      16.92      85.83
                     Gemma2-9B         46.00     45.20       6.98      85.83


C.5   R ESULTS ON DTTD2 DATASET

In Table 10 we provide additional quantitative results on the DTTD2 (Huang et al., 2023) dataset,
which is a dataset featuring 100 scenes and 18 objects, which partially overlap with the widely used
YCB-V dataset. On this dataset, our method outperforms all previous state-of-the-art methods by a
large margin.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Comparison with the state-of-the-art on the DTTD2 dataset. The 6D pose estimation
results of our approach are compared to MegaPose (Labbé et al., 2022), GigaPose (Nguyen et al.,
2024), and FoundPose (Örnek et al., 2024). Our method outperforms all other methods in all the
metrics.
                   Method               AR↑ ARCoU ↑ ARCH ↑ ARpCH ↑
                   MegaPose (coarse)      26.15        13.72    6.67      58.05
                   MegaPose               27.84        17.73    8.77      57.00
                   GigaPose               41.84        39.32   12.16      74.00
                   FoundPose              37.39        31.32   11.41      69.44
                   Ours                   47.11        52.10   12.68      76.54


D    A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
In Figures 8 and 9, we provide more qualitative results on the EPIC-Kitchens dataset, showing
that our approach can work from an egocentric point of view. In Figures 10 and 11, we provide
additional qualitative results featuring extraction of object poses from the Internet videos and their
transfer to the real robot. The robot trajectory is always computed to closely imitate the relative 6D
pose transformations of the detected object from the video. We only transform the trajectory from
the camera frame into the robot frame to account for differences in scale and robot position. The
perceived differences between the estimated object trajectory from the video, the object trajectory
executed by the robot in the simulation and the object trajectory executed by the real robot are due
to the differences of camera viewpoints.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Additional results of our method on the EPIC-Kitchens dataset. Our method is able
to detect and align objects from an egocentric point of view. We show frames from the input video
in the top row of each example, and the tracked 6D poses of the retrieved object together with 2D
point tracks in the second row of each example. Please note the differences in object geometry and
texture between the objects depicted in the video and the retrieved objects from the database.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Additional results of our method on the EPIC-Kitchens dataset. Our method is able
to detect and align objects from an egocentric point of view. We show frames from the input video
in the top row of each example, and the tracked 6D poses of the retrieved object together with 2D
point tracks in the second row of each example. Please note the differences in object geometry and
texture between the objects depicted in the video and the retrieved objects from the database.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Input video
Prediction
Simulation
Real robot
Input video
Prediction
Simulation
Real robot


Figure 10: Additional qualitative results on Internet videos. For each video, we first show
several input frames, followed by the alignment obtained by our method together with tracked 2D-
3D correspondences shown as colored tracks. Please note the differences in object geometry and
texture between the objects depicted in the video and the retrieved (and aligned) objects from the
database. Temporally smooth poses are used to compute robot motion via trajectory optimization as
shown in the third row, followed by the video of a real robot execution.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Input video
Prediction
Simulation
Real robot
Input video
Prediction
Simulation
Real robot


Figure 11: Additional qualitative results on Internet videos. For each video, we first show
several input frames, followed by the alignment obtained by our method together with tracked 2D-
3D correspondences shown as colored tracks. Please note the differences in object geometry and
texture between the objects depicted in the video and the retrieved (and aligned) objects from the
database. Temporally smooth poses are used to compute robot motion via trajectory optimization as
shown in the third row, followed by the video of a real robot execution.


                                               28
