Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W IDE N EURAL N ETWORKS T RAINED WITH W EIGHT
D ECAY P ROVABLY E XHIBIT N EURAL C OLLAPSE
 Arthur Jacot∗, Peter Súkenı́k†, Zihan Wang‡, and Marco Mondelli§

                                             A BSTRACT
          Deep neural networks (DNNs) at convergence consistently represent the training
          data in the last layer via a geometric structure referred to as neural collapse. This
          empirical evidence has spurred a line of theoretical research aimed at proving
          the emergence of neural collapse, mostly focusing on the unconstrained features
          model. Here, the features of the penultimate layer are free variables, which makes
          the model data-agnostic and puts into question its ability to capture DNN train-
          ing. Our work addresses the issue, moving away from unconstrained features and
          studying DNNs that end with at least two linear layers. We first prove generic
          guarantees on neural collapse that assume (i) low training error and balancedness
          of linear layers (for within-class variability collapse), and (ii) bounded condition-
          ing of the features before the linear part (for orthogonality of class-means, and
          their alignment with weight matrices). The balancedness refers to the fact that
             ⊤
          Wℓ+1   Wℓ+1 ≈ Wℓ Wℓ⊤ for any pair of consecutive weight matrices of the linear
          part, and the bounded conditioning requires a well-behaved ratio between largest
          and smallest non-zero singular values of the features. We then show that such as-
          sumptions hold for gradient descent training with weight decay: (i) for networks
          with a wide first layer, we prove low training error and balancedness, and (ii) for
          solutions that are either nearly optimal or stable under large learning rates, we ad-
          ditionally prove the bounded conditioning. Taken together, our results are the first
          to show neural collapse in the end-to-end training of DNNs.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Among the many possible interpolators that a deep neural network (DNN) can find, Papyan et al.
(2020) showed a strong bias of gradient-based training towards representations with a highly sym-
metric structure in the penultimate layer, which was dubbed neural collapse (NC). In particular,
the feature vectors of the training data in the penultimate layer collapse to a single vector per class
(NC1); these vectors form orthogonal or simplex equiangular tight frames (NC2), and they are
aligned with the last layer’s row weight vectors (NC3). The question of why and how neural col-
lapse emerges has been considered by a popular line of research, see e.g. Lu & Steinerberger (2022);
E & Wojtowytsch (2022) and the discussion in Section 2. Many of these works focus on a simplified
mathematical framework: the unconstrained features model (UFM) (Mixon et al., 2020; Han et al.,
2022; Zhou et al., 2022a), corresponding to the joint optimization over the last layer’s weights and
the penultimate layer’s feature representations, which are treated as free variables. To account for
the existence of the training data and of all the layers before the penultimate (i.e., the backbone of
the network), some form of regularization on the free features is usually added. A number of papers
has proved the optimality of NC in this model (Lu & Steinerberger, 2022; E & Wojtowytsch, 2022),
its emergence with gradient-based methods (Mixon et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022) and a benign loss
landscape (Zhou et al., 2022a; Zhu et al., 2021). However, the major drawback of the UFM lies in
its data-agnostic nature: it only acknowledges the presence of training data and backbone through
a simple form of regularization (e.g., Frobenius norm or sphere constraint), which is far from being
equivalent to end-to-end training. Moving beyond UFM, existing results are either only applicable to
rather shallow networks (of at most three layers) (Kothapalli & Tirer, 2024; Hong & Ling, 2024) or
hold under strong assumptions, such as symmetric quasi-interpolation (Xu et al., 2023; Rangamani
& Banburski-Fahey, 2022), block-structured empirical NTK throughout training (Seleznova et al.,
2023), or geodesic structure of the features across all layers (Wang et al., 2024).
    ∗
      Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, NYU. Email: arthur.jacot@nyu.edu
    †
      Institute of Science and Technology Austria. Email: peter.sukenik@ista.ac.at
    ‡
      Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, NYU. Email: zw3508@nyu.edu
    §
      Institute of Science and Technology Austria. Email: marco.mondelli@ist.ac.at


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this paper, we provide the first end-to-end proof of within-class variability collapse (NC1) for a
class of networks that end with at least two linear layers. Furthermore, we give rather weak sufficient
conditions – either near-optimality or stability under large learning rates – for solutions to exhibit
the orthogonality of class-means (NC2) and the alignment of class means with the last weight matrix
(NC3). More precisely, our contributions can be summarized as follows:
    • First, we show that within-class variability collapse (i.e., NC1) occurs, as long as the training
                                                                               ⊤
      error is low and the linear layers are approximately balanced, i.e., Wℓ+1    Wℓ+1 − Wℓ Wℓ⊤ F is
      small, where Wℓ+1 , Wℓ are two consecutive weight matrices of the linear head. If, additionally,
      the conditioning of the linear head mapping is bounded, we bound the conditioning of the matrix
      of class means in the last layer, as well as that of the last weight matrix. This implies that, as
      the number of linear layers grows, class means become orthogonal and, furthermore, they align
      with the last layer’s row vectors, which proves both NC2 and NC3.
    • Next, we show that the sufficient conditions above for NC1 are satisfied by a class of deep net-
      works with a wide first layer, smooth activations and pyramidal topology, after gradient training
      with weight decay. This provides the first guarantee of the emergence of NC1 for a deep network
      trained end-to-end via gradient descent.
    • We present two sufficient conditions under which the linear head is well-conditioned, hence
      NC1, NC2 and NC3 hold: either the network approaches a global optimum of the ℓ2 -regularized
      square loss, or it nearly interpolates the data while being stable under large learning rates.
    • Our numerical experiments on various architectures (fully connected, ResNet) and datasets
      (MNIST, CIFAR) confirm the insights coming from the theory: (i) NC2 is more prominent
      as the depth of the linear head increases, and (ii) the final linear layers are balanced at con-
      vergence. Furthermore, we show that, as the non-linear part of the network gets deeper, the
      non-negative layers become less non-linear and more balanced.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Neural collapse. Since its introduction by Papyan et al. (2020), neural collapse has been inten-
sively studied, both from a theoretical and practical viewpoint. Practitioners use the NC for a num-
ber of applications, including transfer learning, OOD detection and generalization bounds (Galanti
et al., 2022a; Haas et al., 2022; Ben-Shaul & Dekel, 2022; Li et al., 2023a;b; Zhang et al., 2024). On
the theoretical front, the most widely adopted framework to study the emergence of NC is the un-
constrained features model (UFM) (Mixon et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2021). Under the UFM, the NC
has been proved to be optimal with cross-entropy loss (E & Wojtowytsch, 2022; Lu & Steinerberger,
2022; Kunin et al., 2022), MSE loss (Zhou et al., 2022a) and other losses (Zhou et al., 2022b). Op-
timality guarantees for the generalization of NC to the class-imbalanced setting have been provided
by Fang et al. (2021); Thrampoulidis et al. (2022); Hong & Ling (2023); Dang et al. (2024). Be-
sides global optimality, a benign loss landscape around NC solutions has been proved in Zhu et al.
(2021); Ji et al. (2022); Zhou et al. (2022a), and the emergence of NC with gradient-based optimiza-
tion under UFM has been studied by Mixon et al. (2020); Han et al. (2022); Ji et al. (2022); Wang
et al. (2022). Jiang et al. (2023) extend the analysis to large number of classes, Kothapalli et al.
(2023) to graph neural networks, Tirer et al. (2023) generalize UFM with a perturbation to account
for its imperfections, while Andriopoulos et al. (2024) generalize UFM and NC to regression prob-
lems. A deep neural collapse is theoretically analyzed with deep UFM for the linear case in Dang
et al. (2023); Garrod & Keating (2024), for linear case with data-specific assumptions in Wang et al.
(2023), for the non-linear case with two layers in Tirer & Bruna (2022), and for the deep non-linear
case in Súkenı́k et al. (2023; 2024), where, notably, the latter work provides the first negative result
on deep NC with deep UFM.
A line of recent work aims at circumventing the data-agnostic nature of UFM, showing the emer-
gence of neural collapse in settings closer to practice. Specifically, Seleznova et al. (2023) assume
a block structure in the empirical NTK matrix. Kernels are used by Kothapalli & Tirer (2024) to
analyze NC in wide two-layer networks, showing mostly negative results in the NTK regime. Bea-
glehole et al. (2024) prove the emergence of deep neural collapse using kernel-based layer-wise
training, and they show that NC is an optimal solution of adaptive kernel ridge regression in an
over-parametrized regime. Sufficient (but rather strong) conditions for the emergence of NC beyond
UFM are provided by Pan & Cao (2023). Hong & Ling (2024) analyze two and three layer net-
works end-to-end, but only provide conditions under which the UFM optimal solutions are feasible.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wang et al. (2024) consider the NC formation in residual networks, and the model is similar to the
perturbed UFM in Tirer et al. (2023). However, the results crucially assume that the features lie on
a geodesic in euclidean space, and proving that this is the case after training the ResNet is an open
problem. Rangamani & Banburski-Fahey (2022); Xu et al. (2023) focus on homogeneous networks
trained via gradient-based methods, making the strong assumption of symmetric quasi-interpolation.
Then, Rangamani & Banburski-Fahey (2022) do not prove this assumption, and the argument of Xu
et al. (2023) requires a regularization different from the one used in practice as well as interpolators
with a given norm (whose existence is an open question). We also note that the quasi-interpolation
property does not hold in practice exactly, which points to the need of a perturbation analysis.
Implicit bias. Our approach leverages the (approximate) balancedness of the weights, which plays
a central role in the analysis of the training dynamics of linear networks (Arora et al., 2018b) and
leads to a bias towards low-rank matrices (Arora et al., 2019; Tu et al., 2024). In the presence of
weight decay, the low-rank bias can be made even more explicit (Dai et al., 2021), and it is rein-
forced by stochastic gradient descent (Wang & Jacot, 2024). Moving towards nonlinear models,
shallow networks with weight decay exhibit low-rank bias, as described by the variational norm
(Bach, 2017), or Barron norm (E et al., 2019), and this bias provably emerges under (modified) GD
dynamics (Abbe et al., 2022; Bietti et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2024). However, a single hidden layer
appears to be insufficient to exhibit NC for most datasets. Moving towards deep nonlinear models,
networks with weight decay are also known to exhibit low-rank bias (Galanti et al., 2022b; Jacot
et al., 2022), which can be related to neural collapse (Zangrando et al., 2024). The dimensionality
and rank of the weights/representations varies between layers, exhibiting a bottleneck structure (Ja-
cot, 2023a;b; Wen & Jacot, 2024). We remark that existing results apply to the global minima of the
ℓ2 -regularized loss. In contrast, our paper provides rather general sufficient conditions that are then
provably satisfied by GD, thus showing that the training algorithm is responsible for neural collapse.

3   BALANCEDNESS AND I NTERPOLATION I MPLY N EURAL C OLLAPSE
Notation and problem setup. Given a matrix A of rank k, we denote by Ai: its i-th row, by A:i its
i-th column, by s1 (A) ≥ · · · ≥ sk (A) its singular values in non-increasing order, and by κ(A) the
ratio ssk1 (A)
           (A) between its largest and smallest non-zero singular values. We denote by ∥A∥F , ∥A∥op
and σmin (A) its Frobenius norm, its operator norm and its smallest singular value, respectively.
We consider a neural network with L1 non-linear layers with activation function σ : R → R fol-
lowed by L2 linear layers. Let L := L1 + L2 be the total number of layers, Wℓ ∈ Rnℓ ×nℓ−1 the
weight matrix at layer ℓ, X ∈ Rd×N the training data and Y ∈ RK×N the labels (for consistency,
we set n0 = d and nL = K), where the output dimension K corresponds to the number of classes
and N is the number of samples. We consider a one-hot encoding, i.e., the rows of Y are elements
                               ∈ Rnℓ ×N be the output of layer ℓ, given by
of the canonical basis. Let Zℓ 
                               X
                                              ℓ = 0,
                        Zℓ = σ Wℓ Zℓ−1        ℓ ∈ [L1 ],                                     (1)
                                              ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, . . . , L1 + L2 },
                               
                                Wℓ Zℓ−1
where the activation function σ is applied componentwise and, given an integer n, we use the
shorthand [n] := {1, . . . , n}. We write θ for the vector obtained by concatenating all param-
eters {Wi }i∈[L] and Wm:ℓ for the partial products of the weight matrices Wm · · · Wℓ , so that
Zm = Wm:ℓ+1 Zℓ for all m ≥ ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, . . . , L1 + L2 }. We index individual samples in a
feature matrix Z as zci , meaning the i-th sample of the c-th class, sometimes adding an upper-index
to denote the layer or matrix to which the sample belongs. Let µc denote the mean of all samples
from class c and µG the global mean. Let Z̄ be the matrix of class-means stacked into columns. The
                                                    W)
NC1 metric on a feature matrix Z is given by tr(Σ                       1                             ⊤
                                                                          P
                                                tr(ΣB ) , where ΣW = N      c,i (zci − µc )(zci − µc )
             1
               P  K                      ⊤
and ΣB = K        c=1 (µc −µG )(µc −µG ) . The NC2 metric on a feature matrix Z is defined as κ(Z̄),
                                             P matrix of Z. The NC3 metric on a feature matrix
i.e., the conditioning number of the class-mean
Z and a weight matrix W is defined as N1 c,i cos(zci , Wc: ), i.e., the average cosine similarity of
features and weight vectors corresponding to the features’ class.
At this point, we state our result giving a set of sufficient conditions for NC1, NC2 and NC3.
Theorem 3.1. If the network satisfies
 • approximate interpolation, i.e., ∥ZL − Y ∥F ≤ ϵ1 ,


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       ⊤
    • approximate balancedness, i.e., Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1 − Wℓ Wℓ⊤ op ≤ ϵ2 , for ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, . . . , L − 1},
   • bounded representations and weights, i.e., ∥ZL−2 ∥op , ∥ZL−1 ∥op , ∥Wℓ ∥op ≤ r, for ℓ ∈ {L1 +
     1, . . . , L},
                          q
                             (K−1)N
then if ϵ1 ≤ min sK (Y ),      4K     ,
                                                          √
                                NC1(ZL−1 ) = O (ϵ1 + ϵ2 )2 .

                                                                                                (2)
If we additionally assume that the linear part of the network is not too ill-conditioned, i.e.,
κ(WL:L1 +1 ) ≤ c3 , then
                                      1

                         κ(WL ) ≤ c3L2 + O(ϵ2 ),                                                      (3)
                                      1
                                     L2                 √
                    NC2(ZL−1 ) ≤ c3 + O(ϵ1 +                ϵ2 ),                                     (4)
                                     − L1       − L3                                          !
                                                                                             2
                                    c3   2
                                             + c3   2
                                                                        √         1

               NC3(ZL−1 , WL ) ≥                        − O ϵ1 +            ϵ2 + c3L2 − 1         .   (5)
                                             2
                                             q
                                                 (K−1)N
The restrictions ϵ1 ≤ sK (Y ) and ϵ1 ≤             4K    are mild, and we are interested in the regime
in which ϵ1 is small. In words, (2) shows that, when ϵ1 , ϵ2 ≈ 0 (i.e., the network approximately
interpolates the data in a balanced way), the within-class variability (which captures NC1) vanishes.
If in addition the depth of the linear part of the network grows, the RHS of (3) approaches 1, i.e., the
last weight matrix WL is close to orthogonal. This implies that (i) ZL−1 is also close to orthogonal
(which captures NC2), and (ii) the weights in the last layer align with ZL−1 (which captures NC3).
In fact, when ϵ1 , ϵ2 ≈ 0 and κ(WL ) ≈ 1, the RHS of (4) and (5) is close to 1. Below we give a proof
sketch. The complete argument is deferred to Appendix B, where we state a more precise version of
the result (see Theorem B.1) tracking the dependence of the bounds on r, N, K and sK (Y ).
Proof sketch. We start with NC1. If ZL is already well-collapsed (which is guaranteed by the
approximate interpolation) and WL is well-conditioned, then the only source of within-class vari-
ability in ZL−1 is within the null space of WL . However, if WL and WL−1 are balanced, the image
of ZL−1 must be approximately in a subspace of the row space of WL and, hence, ZL−1 has little
freedom within the kernel of WL . More formally, consider first the case of perfect balancedness
(i.e., ϵ2 = 0), and denote by WL+ the pseudo-inverse of WL . Then, Im(ZL−1 ) ⊂ Im(WL⊤ ) and
                                                                             ϵ1
                     WL+ WL ZL−1 − WL+ Y F = ZL−1 − WL+ Y F ≤                      .           (6)
                                                                          sK (WL )
As sK (WL ) can be lower bounded by using the assumptions on approximate interpolation and
boundedness of representations, the RHS of (6) is small and, therefore, ZL−1 is close to a matrix
with zero within-class variability. Moving to the case ϵ2 ̸= 0, we need to show that WL+ WL ZL−1 is
close to ZL−1 . As WL+ WL projects onto the row-space of WL , only the part of ZL−1 in the kernel
of WL has to be considered. This part is controlled after writing ZL−1 = WL−1 ZL−2 , using the
boundedness of ZL−2 and the approximate balancedness between WL and WL−1 . Finally, as ZL−1
is close to WL+ Y, a direct computation yields the bound on NC1.
Next, to bound κ(WL ), we notice that (WL WL⊤ )L2 − (WL:L1 +1 WL:L   ⊤
                                                                        1 +1
                                                                             ) has small operator norm,
since the weights of linear layers are approximately balanced. This allows to upper bound κ(WL )2L2
in terms of κ(WL:L1 +1 ) (plus a small perturbation), which gives (3). To lower bound the NC3
                                          ′
metric, we rescale ZL−1 and WL to ZL−1        and WL′ , so that their columns and rows, respectively,
                                                                                    ′
have roughly equal size. Then, we reformulate the problem to proving that ZL−1         , WL′ Y is close
to its theoretical maximum. We proceed to show this by arguing that, in this scaling and given that
WL is sufficiently well-conditioned, WL′ can be replaced by (WL′ )+ . As ZL−1 is close to WL+ Y , we
obtain (5). Finally, the bound on NC2 in (4) follows by combining (3) with the closeness between
ZL−1 and WL+ Y already obtained in the proof of NC1.

4     G RADIENT D ESCENT L EADS TO N O W ITHIN -C LASS VARIABILITY (NC1)
In this section, we show that NC1 holds for networks with one wide layer followed by a pyramidal
topology, as considered in Nguyen & Mondelli (2020). To do so, we show that the balancedness and


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


interpolation conditions of Theorem 3.1 hold. We consider the neural network in (1) and minimize
                                                       2         2
the λ-regularized square loss Cλ (θ) = 21 ∥zL (θ) − y∥2 + λ2 ∥θ∥2 , where zL and y are obtained by
vectorizing ZL and Y , and θ collects all the network parameters. To do so, we consider the gradient
descent (GD) update θk+1 = θk − η∇Cλ (θk ), where η is the step size and θk = (Wℓk )L   ℓ=1 contains
all parameters at step k. We also denote by Zℓk the output of layer ℓ after k steps of GD. We make
the following assumption on the pyramidal topology of the network, noting that this requirement is
also common in prior work on the loss landscape (Nguyen & Hein, 2017; 2018).
Assumption 4.1. (Pyramidal network topology) Let n1 ≥ N and n2 ≥ n3 ≥ . . . ≥ nL .
We make the following assumptions on the activation function σ of the non-linear layers.
Assumption 4.2. (Activation function) Fix γ ∈ (0, 1) and β ≥ 1. Let σ satisfy that: (i) σ ′ (x) ∈
[γ, 1], (ii) |σ(x)| ≤ |x| for every x ∈ R, and (iii) σ ′ is β-Lipschitz.
This includes smooth leaky ReLUs, the same assumption was employed by Nguyen & Mondelli
(2020); Frei et al. (2022) and a similar one by Chatterjee (2022). In principle, σ can change at all
layers, as long as it satisfies the above requirement. Next, let us introduce some notation1 for the
singular values of the weight matrices at initialization θ0 = (Wℓ0 )L
                                                                    ℓ=1 :
                                                                       Y  j              j
                                                                                         Y
                   0                0

   λℓ = σmin Wℓ , λ̄ℓ = Wℓ op + minℓ∈{3,...,L} λℓ , λi→j =                  λℓ , λ̄i→j =   λ̄ℓ . (7)
                                                                               ℓ=i                 ℓ=i

We also define λF = σmin σ(W10 X) as the smallest singular value of the output of the first hidden
layer at initialization. Finally, we make the following assumption on the initialization.
Assumption 4.3. (Initial conditions)                            s
                                                                    L
                                                                    2
                      λF λ3→L min(λF , minℓ∈{3,...,L} λℓ ) ≥ 8γ          C0 (θ0 ).              (8)
                                                                    γ

We note that (8) can be satisfied by choosing a sufficiently small initialization for the second layer
and a sufficiently large one for the remaining layers. In fact, the LHS of (8) depends on all the
layer weights except the second, so thisp   quantity can be made arbitrarily large. Next, by taking a
sufficiently small second layer, the term 2C0 (θ) = ∥ZL − Y ∥F can be upper bounded by 2∥Y ∥F .
                                                √             L/2
As a consequence, the RHS of (8) is at most 8 2∥Y ∥F γ γ2         . As the LHS of (8) can be arbitrarily
large, the inequality holds for a suitable initialization.
Theorem 4.4. Let the network satisfy Assumption 4.1,       q σ satisfy Assumption 4.2 and the initial
                                                                   (K−1)N
conditions satisfy Assumption 4.3. Fix 0 < ϵ1 ≤ 12                   K    , ϵ2
                                                                      > 0, and run k steps of λ-

regularized GD with step size η, where λ = Θ(ϵ21 ), η = O(ϵ2 ) and k = Ω ϵ21ϵ2 log ϵ12 . Then,
                                                                           1

                                        k                √ 2
                                 NC1(ZL−1 ) = O (ϵ1 + ϵ2 ) .                                   (9)

In words, if regularization and learning rate are small enough and we run GD for sufficiently long,
then the within-class variability vanishes. Below we provide a proof sketch. The complete argument
is deferred to Appendix B, where we state a more precise version of the result (see Theorem B.2)
                                                k
tracking the dependence of λ, η, k and NC1(ZL−1     ) on N , K, the data X, the network architecture
and the initial conditions.
Proof sketch. We show that the network trained via λ-regularized GD fulfills the three sufficient
conditions for NC1 given by Theorem 3.1, i.e., approximate interpolation, approximate balancedness
and bounded representations/weights. To do so, we distinguish two phases in the training dynamics.
The first phase lasts for logarithmic time in 1/λ (or, equivalently, 1/ϵ1 ) and, here, the loss decreases
exponentially fast to a value of at most 2λmλ ≤ ϵ21 . As the learning rate is small enough, the loss
cannot increase during the GD dynamics, which already gives approximate interpolation. To show
the exponential convergence, we proceed in two steps. First, Lemma 4.1 in (Nguyen & Mondelli,
2020) gives that the unregularized loss C0 (θ) satisfies the Polyak-Lojasiewicz (PL) inequality
                                                  2     α
                                        ∥∇C0 (θ)∥2 ≥ C0 (θ),                                         (10)
                                                        2
   1
       To avoid confusion, we note that this notation is different from the one used in (Nguyen & Mondelli, 2020).


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for all θ in a ball centered at initialization θ0 and with sufficiently large radius (captured by r0 ).
Next, we show that, if C0 (θ) satisfies the α-PL inequality in (10), then the regularized loss Cλ (θ) =
                 2
C0 (θ) + λ2 ∥θ∥2 satisfies a shifted α-PL inequality, which implies exponential convergence. This
second step is formalized by the proposition below proved in Appendix B.
Proposition 4.5. Let C0 (θ) satisfy the α-PL inequality (10) in the ball B(θ0 , r0 ). Then, in the same
ball, Cλ (θ) satisfies the inequality
                                               2     α
                                  ∥∇Cλ (θ))∥2 ≥ (Cλ (θ) − λmλ ) ,                                   (11)
                                                     4
                                                2
                      p                                                               p
where mλ = (1 + 4λ/α)2 (∥θ0 ∥2 + r0 ) . Furthermore, assume that r0 ≥ 8 Cλ (θ0 )/α and
∇C0 (θ) is β1 -Lipschitz in B(θ0 , r0 ). Then,&for any η < 1/(2β  '1 ), there exists
                                                 log Cλ (θλm λ
                                                          0 )−λmλ
                                        k1 ≤                                                        (12)
                                                   log(1 − η α8 )
such that the k1 -th iterate of GD satisfies                          r
                                                                          Cλ (θ0 )
                    Cλ (θk1 ) ≤ 2λmλ ,             ∥θk1 − θ0 ∥2 ≤ 8                ≤ r0 .          (13)
                                                                            α

The second phase lasts for linear time in 1/λ (or, equivalently in 1/ϵ21 ) and logarithmic time in 1/ϵ2
and, here, the weight matrices in the linear part of the network become balanced. More precisely,
we adapt the analysis of (Du et al., 2018) to show that, if Wℓ is a weight matrix of the linear part,
    ⊤
∥Wℓ+1  Wℓ+1 − Wℓ Wℓ⊤ ∥op decreases exponentially and the exponent scales with 1/λ, which gives
approximate balancedness. Finally, as the regularization term in the loss is at most ϵ21 , the operator
norm of representations and weight matrices is bounded by r as in (29), and the proof is completed
by an application of Theorem 3.1.

5     O RTHOGONALITY OF C LASS M EANS (NC2) AND A LIGNMENT WITH L AST
      W EIGHT M ATRIX (NC3)
To guarantee the orthogonality of class means and their alignment with the last weight matrix, the
crux is to show that the condition number κ(WL ) of the last weight matrix WL is close to one. In
fact, as ZL−1 ≈ WL+ Y , this implies that the last hidden representation ZL−1 is approximately a
rotation and rescaling of Y , which gives NC2, and a bound on NC3 of the form in (5) also follows.
The fact that κ(WL ) ≈ 1 is a consequence of the presence of many balanced linear layers.
                                                             1
                                                   ⊤
Indeed, balancedness implies WL WL⊤ = (WL:L1 +1 WL:L 1 +1
                                                          ) L2 , which gives that κ(WL ) =
               1
κ(WL:L1 +1 ) L2 . Thus, if the conditioning of the product of the linear layers WL:L1 +1 can be
bounded independently of L2 , one can guarantee that the conditioning of WL approaches 1 as
L2 → ∞. As this is difficult to obtain in full generality (in particular the assumptions of Theo-
rem 3.1 may not be sufficient), we show that the conditioning can be controlled (i) at any global
minimizer, and (ii) when the parameters are ‘stable’ under large learning rates.

5.1    G LOBAL M INIMIZERS

We first show that any set of parameters that approximately interpolate with small norm has bounded
condition number. We will then show that with the right choice of widths and ridge, all global
minimizers satisfy these two assumptions.
Proposition 5.1. Let σ satisfy Assumption 4.2. Then, for any network that satisfies

    • approximate interpolation, i.e., ∥ZL − Y ∥F ≤ ϵ1 ,
                                     2
    • bounded parameters, i.e., ∥θ∥2 ≤ LK + c,

the linear part WL:L1 +1 satisfies                                                     !!
                                         1                           sK (Y ) − ϵ1
                κ(WL:L1 +1 ) ≤ exp           c + L1 K log K − 2K log                        .      (14)
                                         2                             ∥X∥op


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 5.2. Let σ satisfy Assumption 4.2. Assume there exist parameters of the nonlinear part
θnonlin = (Wℓ )L                                   2
               ℓ=1 such that ZL1 = Y and ∥θnonlin ∥2 = c. Then, at any global minimizer of the
                1

                                         2            2              ϵ2
regularized loss Lλ (θ) = 12 ∥Y − ZL ∥F + λ2 ∥θ∥2 with λ ≤ KL+c   1
                                                                     , we have
                                             K
                                 ∥X∥op

                                                       1
            κ(WL:L1 +1 ) ≤                       exp     (c − L1 K + L1 K log K) ,
                               sK (Y ) − ϵ1            2
                                              LK2                                                   (15)
                                 ∥X∥op

                                                         1
                 κ(WL ) ≤                         exp        (c − L1 K + L1 K log K) .
                               sK (Y ) − ϵ1             2L2
This implies that the bounds on NC1, NC2 and NC3 in (2), (4) and (5), respectively, hold with
κ(WL ) upper bounded as above and ϵ2 = 0.

The assumption that the parameters of the nonlinear part can be chosen to fit the labels Y is guar-
anteed for large enough width (i) by relying on any traditional approximation result (Hornik et al.,
1989; Leshno et al., 1993; Arora et al., 2018a; He et al., 2018), or (ii) by taking the infinite time
limit of any convergence results (Nguyen & Mondelli, 2020), or (iii) by taking the limit λ ↘ 0 in
Proposition 4.5. A sketch of the arguments is below, with full proofs deferred to Appendix B.
Proof sketch. To prove Proposition 5.1, we write the norm of the linear and nonlinear parts of the
network in terms of the conditioning of WL:L1 +1 : for the linear part, this is a direct computation;
for the nonlinear part, we use Theorem 1 of Dai et al. (2021), which lower bounds the norm of the
parameters in terms of the product of the singular values, and manipulate the latter quantity to obtain
again the desired conditioning. Next, to prove Theorem 5.2, we pick the parameters of the nonlinear
part θnonlin s.t. ZL1 = Y and ∥θnonlin ∥22 = c, and set the linear layers to the identity. This leads to
a total parameter norm of KL2 + c and a regularized cost of λ2 (KL2 + c), and it forces the global
minimizer to satisfy the assumptions of Proposition 5.1, which gives the claim on κ(WL:L1 +1 ).
                                                                                        1
Then, as all local minimizers have balanced linear layers, κ(WL ) = κ(WL:L1 +1 ) L1 , which gives
(15). Finally, the claim on NC1, NC2 and NC3 follows from an application of Theorem 3.1.

5.2   L ARGE L EARNING R ATES

Previous works have observed that the learning rates used in practice are typically ‘too large’, i.e. the
loss may not always be strictly decreasing and GD diverges from gradient flow (Cohen et al., 2021).
Thankfully, instead of simply diverging, for large η (but not too large) the parameters naturally end
up at the ‘edge of stability’: the top eigenvalue of the Hessian HCλ is close to η2 , i.e., the threshold
below which GD is stable (Cohen et al., 2021; Lewkowycz et al., 2020). One can thus interpret
GD with learning rate η as minimizing the cost Cλ amongst parameters θ such that ∥HCλ ∥op < η2 .
These observations are supported by strong empirical evidence and have been also proved theoret-
ically for simple models (Damian et al., 2022), although a general result remains difficult to prove
due to the chaotic behavior of GD for large η. Specifically, the Hessian has the form
                                          ⊤
                    HCλ (θ) = (∇θ ZL ) ∂θ ZL + Tr (Y − ZL )∇2θ ZL + λIP ,

                                                                                                     (16)

with ∇θ ZL ∈ RP ×N K and P the number of parameters. The first term is the Fisher information
                                                      ⊤
matrix: this is dual to the NTK Θ = ∇θ ZL (∇θ ZL ) ∈ RN K×N K (Jacot et al., 2018). Therefore,
at approximately interpolating points, we have ∥HCλ (θ)∥op = ∥Θ∥op + O(ϵ1 ) + O(λ), where ϵ1 is
the interpolation error and λ the regularization parameter. We can thus interpret large learning rates
as forcing a bound on the operator norm of the NTK. For networks that approximately interpolate
the data with bounded NTK and bounded weights, the following proposition (proved in Appendix
B) guarantees good conditioning of the weights in the linear part (and therefore NC2-3):
Proposition 5.3. For any network that satisfies
                                                            2
                                             ∥∇θ Tr[ZL AT ]∥2
  • bounded NTK, i.e., ∥Θ∥op = maxA               ∥A∥2F
                                                                ≤ CL2 ,

  • approximate interpolation, i.e., ∥ZL − Y ∥F ≤ ϵ1 ,
  • bounded weights, i.e., ∥Wℓ ∥op ≤ r,


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                 √
for any M ≤ L2 , there is ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, . . . , L1 + M } such that κ(WL:ℓ ) ≤ √M (sCL(Y
                                                                                     2 Kr
                                                                                       )−ϵ )
                                                                                             .
                                                                                     K     1

Furthermore, any network that satisfies approximate interpolation and bounded weights is such that
                                                              2
                                                (sK (Y ) − ϵ1 )
                                      ∥Θ∥op ≥                   L2 .                             (17)
                                                     K 2 r2

As an example, by choosing M = L22 , we guarantee that there is at least one layer ℓ in the first half
                                      √
                                        2CKr
of the linear layers s.t. κ(WL:ℓ ) ≤ sK (Y )−ϵ1 . Now, assuming the ‘edge of stability’ phenomenon, a
learning rate of η = Lη02 implies a bound ∥Θ∥op ≤ ∥HCλ ∥op +O(ϵ1 )+O(λ) ≤ 2L      η0 +O(ϵ1 )+O(λ),
                                                                                    2


and thus Proposition 5.3 implies that there is a linear layer with bounded conditioning. The issue is
that the proof of Theorem 4.4 requires an extremely small learning rate for large depths (η ∼ c−L ,
see Theorem B.2 in Appendix B), whereas Proposition 5.3 is only useful when η ∼ L−1 . Note
that the first phase of training (where the dynamics is analogous to the NTK regime) is stable when
η ∼ L−1 ; it is the second phase that appears to require η ∼ c−L to ensure GD remains close to
gradient flow (we have much less control of the dynamics in this second phase and so we cannot rule
out the possibility that GD approaches highly unstable regions). We are hopeful that a more careful
analysis could show that a learning rate of η ∼ L−1 would push GD away from ill-conditioned and
unstable regions (possibly deviating from gradient flow), so that at the end of the second phase the
network would be interpolating, balanced, and have well-conditioned linear part thus guaranteeing
NC1-3.

6   N UMERICAL R ESULTS
In all experiments, we consider MSE loss and standard weight decay regularization. We train an
MLP and a ResNet20 with an added MLP head on standard datasets (MNIST, CIFAR10), consider-
ing as backbone the first two layers for the MLP and the whole architecture before the linear head
for the ResNet. We evaluate the following metrics related to neural collapse: for NC1, we compute
tr(ΣW )/tr(ΣB ), where ΣW , ΣB are the within- and between-class variability matrices of the feature
matrices, respectively; for NC2, we display the conditioning number of the class-mean matrix; for
NC3, we use the average cosine angle between the rows of a weight matrix and the columns of the
                                                                        ⊤
                                                                    ∥Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1 −Wℓ Wℓ⊤ ∥
                                                                                        op
preceding class-mean matrix. Finally, for balancedness we use     n                            o and
                                                               min ∥Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1 ∥ ,∥Wℓ Wℓ⊤ ∥
                                                                        ⊤
                                                                                 op         op
                       ∥Zℓ −σ(Zℓ )∥
                                 op
for negativity we use    ∥Zℓ ∥op    . We measure such metrics (and also index the layers) starting
from the output of the backbone. Our findings can be summarized as follows (see Appendix A for
additional complementary experiments).
The deeper the linear head, the more clear NC occurs. We first test whether the models with
deep linear heads exhibit NC and if that’s the case, whether it gets better as we deepen the linear
head. In Figure 1, we show the NC metrics and the gram matrices of the class-mean matrices of
the last layers for the training on CIFAR10 of ResNet20 with 6 extra layers of which the first three
have a ReLU activation. We use weight decay of 0.001 and learning rate of 0.001, training for 5000
epochs (the learning rate drops ten-fold after 80% of the epochs in all our experiments). The plot
clearly shows that the collapse is reached throughout the training. We also see that the NC2 metric
improves progressively with each layer of the linear head, as predicted by our theory. This effect
is also clearly visible from the gram matrices of the class-means (bottom row of Figure 1), which
rapidly converge towards the identity. We note that these findings are remarkably consistent across a
wide variety of hyperparameter settings and architectures. Wang et al. (2023) present similar results.
In Figure 2, we plot the dependence of the NC metrics on the number of layers in the linear head.
We train an MLP on MNIST with 5 non-linear layers and a number of linear layers ranging from 1
to 5. We average over 5 runs per each combination of weight decay (0.001, 0.004) and with learning
rate of 0.001. We also train the ResNet20 on CIFAR10 with one non-linear layer head and 1 to 6
linear layers on top. We use the same weight decay and learning rate. The relatively high variance
of the results is due to averaging over rather strongly different weight decay values used per each
depth. The plots clearly show that the NC2 significantly improves in the last layer as the depth of
the linear head increases, while it gets slightly worse in the input layer to the linear head. This is
consistent with our theory. The NC1 does not have a strong dependence with the number of layers.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Last 7 layers of a 9-layer MLP trained on MNIST with weight decay 0.0018 and learning
rate 0.001. Top: NC1s, NC2s, balancednesses and negativities, from left to right. Results are
averaged over 5 runs, and the confidence band at 1 standard deviation is displayed. Bottom: Class-
mean matrices of the last three layers (i.e., the linear head), the first before the last ReLU.


Figure 2: Upper/Lower row: MLP/ResNet20 with a deep linear head. Left to right: NC1 in the
last layer; NC1 in the first layer of the linear head; NC2 in the last layer; NC2 in the first layer
of the linear head. All plots are a function of the number of layers in the linear head. Results are
averaged over 50 runs (5 runs for each of the 10 hyperparameter setups), and the confidence band at
1 standard deviation is displayed.


Figure 3: Left to right: Minimum balancedness; mean balancedness; minimum negativity; mean
negativity across non-linear layers of the head as a function of the number of non-linear layers. Re-
sults are averaged over 10 runs (5 runs for each of the 2 hyperparameter setups), and the confidence
band at 1 standard deviation is displayed.

Linear layers are increasingly balanced throughout training. Figure 1 shows that the metric
capturing the balancedness exponentially decreases until it plateaus at a rather small value (due to
the large learning rate) and then again it exponentially decreases at a smaller rate after reducing the
learning rate. The balancedness of non-linear layers instead plateaus at a significantly larger value.
Non-linear layers are increasingly balanced and linear, as the depth of the non-linear part
increases. In Figure 3, we show the dependence of balancedness and non-linearity of the non-


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


linear layers as a function of the depth of the non-linear part. We plot minimum balancedness and
non-linearity across all layers, as well as mean balancedness and non-linearity. The depth of the non-
linear part ranges from 4 to 12 (the first two layers are considered as backbone and not measured),
the learning rate is either 0.001 or 0.002 (5 runs each), and the weight decay is 0.016 divided by the
total number of layers. Balancedness clearly improves with depth, both on average per layer and in
the most balanced layer. Similarly, the non-negativity of the layer that least uses the ReLU clearly
decreases, and a decrease in the mean negativity is also reported (although less pronounced). Thus,
these results suggest that the network tends to use non-linearities less as the depth increases and,
in addition, it becomes more balanced. We also note that, in order to fit the data, regardless of the
depth, the last non-linear layer(s) always exhibit significant negativity, heavily relying on the ReLU.


7   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUDING R EMARKS

Our paper presents a framework to provably obtain neural collapse, which leads to the first result for
the end-to-end training of deep networks. We now discuss our assumptions, compare with earlier
work by Nguyen & Mondelli (2020) and with the NTK regime, concluding a future direction.
Assumptions. Theorem 3.1 provides a connection between neural collapse and properties of well-
trained networks, i.e., approximate interpolation, approximate balancedness, bounded representa-
tions/weights and good conditioning of the features. As such, the result is rather general and requires
no assumptions beyond the aforementioned properties. Theorem 4.4 then instantiates our framework
for proving neural collapse to a class of networks with pyramidal topology (Assumption 4.1), smooth
activations (Assumption 4.2) and for a class of initializations (Assumption 4.3). These assumptions
are used only for the analysis of the first phase of the training dynamics, where the network achieves
approximate interpolation. Thus, they could be replaced by any other set of assumptions guarantee-
ing that gradient descent reaches small training loss. Specifically, such guarantees are obtained by
Zou & Gu (2019) for deep ReLU networks (with stronger requirements on over-parameterization
but no assumptions on the topology) and by Bombari et al. (2022) for networks with minimum over-
parameterization (under a requirement on the topology milder than Assumption 4.1). As concerns
Assumption 4.3 on the initialization, we discuss in page 5 a setting where it holds. In addition,
by following the argument in Appendix C of Nguyen & Mondelli (2020), one readily obtains that
Assumption 4.3 also holds for the widely used LeCun’s initialization, i.e., Wℓ0 has i.i.d. Gaussian
entries with variance 1/nℓ−1 for all ℓ ∈ [L], as long as n1 = Ω(N ).
Comparison with Nguyen & Mondelli (2020). The condition n1 = Ω(N ) mentioned above pro-
vides a strict improvement upon n1 = Ω(N 2 ) required in Section 3.2 of (Nguyen & Mondelli, 2020)
for LeCun’s initialization. This is due to Assumption 4.3 being weaker than the corresponding con-
dition on initialization in Nguyen & Mondelli (2020), see Assumption 3.1 therein. We now elaborate
on similarities and differences between the proof of Theorem 4.4 and the analysis in Nguyen & Mon-
delli (2020). The strategy to handle the first phase of the dynamics in Theorem 4.4 is similar: the
weights of the network reach an arbitrarily small loss without leaving a suitable ball centered at ini-
tialization. However, the implementation of this strategy is significantly different and our approach
relies on Proposition 4.5. More precisely, the improvement comes from upper bounding the gradi-
ent as in (26) in Appendix B, which uses again the PL inequality. In contrast, Nguyen & Mondelli
(2020) use the loose bound in (18) of their work. We also note that the analysis of the second phase
of the dynamics is entirely new, as balancedness was not needed in Nguyen & Mondelli (2020).
NTK regime and beyond. Our analysis of the training dynamics in Theorem 4.4 is split into two
phases. While the first phase uses typical NTK tools, the second phase is governed by the effects of
weight decay, leading to a fundamentally different behavior. In fact, at the end of the second phase,
we observe low-rank weight matrices and feature learning, which could not appear with pure NTK
dynamics. The two-phase behavior arises thanks to a separation of timescales as λ gets smaller: the
NTK phase lasts roughly Θ(η −1 ) steps, but the effect of weight decay is only observable over the
longer timescale of the second phase, which lasts roughly Θ(η −1 λ−1 ) steps. This strategy gives us
the best of both worlds: interpolation from the NTK regime, and balancedness from weight decay.
One important assumption in our work is that there is a linear head in the network, containing at
least two layers. However, experimental evidence suggests that two linear layers are not necessary
for collapse to happen. Thus, an exciting future direction is to use the approach developed here, e.g.,
the NTK analysis and the separation of timescales, to prove collapse without two linear layers.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
M. M. and P. S. are funded by the European Union (ERC, INF2 , project number 101161364). Views
and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those
of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European
Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
  necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
  networks. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pp. 4782–4887, 2022.
George Andriopoulos, Zixuan Dong, Li Guo, Zifan Zhao, and Keith Ross. The prevalence of neural
  collapse in neural multivariate regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04180, 2024.
Raman Arora, Amitabh Basu, Poorya Mianjy, and Anirbit Mukherjee. Understanding deep neural
  networks with rectified linear units. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2018a.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, and Elad Hazan. On the optimization of deep networks: Implicit
  acceleration by overparameterization. In International conference on machine learning (ICML),
  pp. 244–253, 2018b.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
  factorization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 18(1):629–681, 2017.
Daniel Beaglehole, Peter Súkenı́k, Marco Mondelli, and Mikhail Belkin. Average gradient outer
  product as a mechanism for deep neural collapse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13728, 2024.
Ido Ben-Shaul and Shai Dekel. Nearest class-center simplification through intermediate layers. In
  Topological, Algebraic and Geometric Learning Workshops, 2022.
Alberto Bietti, Joan Bruna, Clayton Sanford, and Min Jae Song. Learning single-index models with
  shallow neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp.
  9768–9783, 2022.
Simone Bombari, Mohammad Hossein Amani, and Marco Mondelli. Memorization and optimiza-
  tion in deep neural networks with minimum over-parameterization. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Sourav Chatterjee. Convergence of gradient descent for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.16462, 2022.
Jeremy Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on
   neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Zhen Dai, Mina Karzand, and Nathan Srebro. Representation costs of linear neural networks: Anal-
  ysis and design. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Alex Damian, Eshaan Nichani, and Jason D Lee. Self-stabilization: The implicit bias of gradient
  descent at the edge of stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15594, 2022.
Hien Dang, Tan Nguyen, Tho Tran, Hung Tran, and Nhat Ho. Neural collapse in deep linear net-
  work: From balanced to imbalanced data. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2023.
Hien Dang, Tho Tran, Tan Nguyen, and Nhat Ho. Neural collapse for cross-entropy class-
  imbalanced learning with unconstrained ReLU feature model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02058,
  2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Simon S Du, Wei Hu, and Jason D Lee. Algorithmic regularization in learning deep homogeneous
  models: Layers are automatically balanced. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems (NeurIPS), 2018.
Weinan E and Stephan Wojtowytsch. On the emergence of simplex symmetry in the final and penul-
 timate layers of neural network classifiers. In Mathematical and Scientific Machine Learning,
 2022.
Weinan E, Chao Ma, and Lei Wu. Barron spaces and the compositional function spaces for neural
 network models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08039, 2019.
Cong Fang, Hangfeng He, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. Exploring deep neural networks via layer-
  peeled model: Minority collapse in imbalanced training. In Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences (PNAS), volume 118, 2021.
Spencer Frei, Niladri S Chatterji, and Peter Bartlett. Benign overfitting without linearity: Neural
  network classifiers trained by gradient descent for noisy linear data. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, pp. 2668–2703. PMLR, 2022.
Tomer Galanti, András György, and Marcus Hutter. Improved generalization bounds for transfer
  learning via neural collapse. In First Workshop on Pre-training: Perspectives, Pitfalls, and Paths
  Forward at ICML, 2022a.
Tomer Galanti, Zachary S Siegel, Aparna Gupte, and Tomaso Poggio. Sgd and weight decay prov-
  ably induce a low-rank bias in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05794, 2022b.
Connall Garrod and Jonathan P Keating. Unifying low dimensional observations in deep learning
  through the deep linear unconstrained feature model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06106, 2024.
Jarrod Haas, William Yolland, and Bernhard T Rabus. Linking neural collapse and l2 normalization
   with improved out-of-distribution detection in deep neural networks. Transactions on Machine
   Learning Research (TMLR), 2022.
X. Y. Han, Vardan Papyan, and David L Donoho. Neural collapse under mse loss: Proximity to and
  dynamics on the central path. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2022.
Juncai He, Lin Li, Jinchao Xu, and Chunyue Zheng. Relu deep neural networks and linear finite
  elements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03973, 2018.
Wanli Hong and Shuyang Ling. Neural collapse for unconstrained feature model under cross-
 entropy loss with imbalanced data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09725, 2023.
Wanli Hong and Shuyang Ling. Beyond unconstrained features: Neural collapse for shallow neural
 networks with general data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01832, 2024.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are uni-
  versal approximators. Neural Networks, 2(5):359 – 366, 1989.
Arthur Jacot. Implicit bias of large depth networks: a notion of rank for nonlinear functions. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023a.
Arthur Jacot. Bottleneck structure in learned features: Low-dimension vs regularity tradeoff. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, pp. 23607–23629,
  2023b.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gener-
  alization in neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2018.
Arthur Jacot, Eugene Golikov, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Feature learning in l 2-
  regularized dnns: Attraction/repulsion and sparsity. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenlong Ji, Yiping Lu, Yiliang Zhang, Zhun Deng, and Weijie J Su. An unconstrained layer-peeled
 perspective on neural collapse. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
 2022.
Jiachen Jiang, Jinxin Zhou, Peng Wang, Qing Qu, Dustin G Mixon, Chong You, and Zhihui Zhu.
   Generalized neural collapse for a large number of classes. In Conference on Parsimony and
   Learning (Recent Spotlight Track), 2023.
Vignesh Kothapalli and Tom Tirer. Kernel vs. kernel: Exploring how the data structure affects neural
  collapse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02105, 2024.
Vignesh Kothapalli, Tom Tirer, and Joan Bruna. A neural collapse perspective on feature evolution
  in graph neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2023.
Daniel Kunin, Atsushi Yamamura, Chao Ma, and Surya Ganguli. The asymmetric maximum margin
  bias of quasi-homogeneous neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2022.
Jason D Lee, Kazusato Oko, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Neural network learns low-dimensional
  polynomials with sgd near the information-theoretic limit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01581,
  2024.
Moshe Leshno, Vladimir Lin, Allan Pinkus, and Shimon Schocken. Multilayer Feedforward Net-
 works with a Non-Polynomial Activation Function Can Approximate Any Function. Neural Net-
 works, 6(6):861–867, 1993.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Guy Gur-Ari. The large
  learning rate phase of deep learning: the catapult mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02218,
  2020.
Xiao Li, Sheng Liu, Jinxin Zhou, Xinyu Lu, Carlos Fernandez-Granda, Zhihui Zhu, and Qing Qu.
  Principled and efficient transfer learning of deep models via neural collapse. In Conference on
  Parsimony and Learning (Recent Spotlight Track), 2023a.
Zexi Li, Xinyi Shang, Rui He, Tao Lin, and Chao Wu. No fear of classifier biases: Neural collapse
  inspired federated learning with synthetic and fixed classifier. In Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023b.
Jianfeng Lu and Stefan Steinerberger. Neural collapse under cross-entropy loss. Applied and Com-
   putational Harmonic Analysis, 59, 2022.
Dustin G Mixon, Hans Parshall, and Jianzong Pi. Neural collapse with unconstrained features. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2011.11619, 2020.
Quynh Nguyen and Matthias Hein. The loss surface of deep and wide neural networks. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Quynh Nguyen and Matthias Hein. Optimization landscape and expressivity of deep CNNs. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Quynh Nguyen and Marco Mondelli. Global convergence of deep networks with one wide layer fol-
  lowed by pyramidal topology. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2020.
Leyan Pan and Xinyuan Cao. Towards understanding neural collapse: The effects of batch normal-
  ization and weight decay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04644, 2023.
Vardan Papyan, X. Y. Han, and David L Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
  phase of deep learning training. In Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS),
  volume 117, 2020.
Akshay Rangamani and Andrzej Banburski-Fahey. Neural collapse in deep homogeneous classifiers
  and the role of weight decay. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mariia Seleznova, Dana Weitzner, Raja Giryes, Gitta Kutyniok, and Hung-Hsu Chou. Neural (tan-
 gent kernel) collapse. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Peter Súkenı́k, Marco Mondelli, and Christoph Lampert. Deep neural collapse is provably optimal
  for the deep unconstrained features model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2023.
Peter Súkenı́k, Marco Mondelli, and Christoph Lampert. Neural collapse versus low-rank bias: Is
  deep neural collapse really optimal? arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14468, 2024.
Christos Thrampoulidis, Ganesh Ramachandra Kini, Vala Vakilian, and Tina Behnia. Imbalance
  trouble: Revisiting neural-collapse geometry. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Tom Tirer and Joan Bruna. Extended unconstrained features model for exploring deep neural col-
  lapse. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
Tom Tirer, Haoxiang Huang, and Jonathan Niles-Weed. Perturbation analysis of neural collapse. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Zhenfeng Tu, Santiago Aranguri, and Arthur Jacot. Mixed dynamics in linear networks: Unifying
  the lazy and active regimes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17580, 2024.
Peng Wang, Huikang Liu, Can Yaras, Laura Balzano, and Qing Qu. Linear convergence analysis of
  neural collapse with unconstrained features. In NeurIPS Workshop on Optimization for Machine
  Learning (OPT), 2022.
Peng Wang, Xiao Li, Can Yaras, Zhihui Zhu, Laura Balzano, Wei Hu, and Qing Qu. Understanding
  deep representation learning via layerwise feature compression and discrimination. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.02960, 2023.
Sicong Wang, Kuo Gai, and Shihua Zhang. Progressive feedforward collapse of resnet training.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00985, 2024.
Zihan Wang and Arthur Jacot. Implicit bias of SGD in L2 -regularized linear DNNs: One-way jumps
  from high to low rank. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Yuxiao Wen and Arthur Jacot. Which frequencies do CNNs need? Emergent bottleneck structure in
  feature learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08010, 2024.
Mengjia Xu, Akshay Rangamani, Qianli Liao, Tomer Galanti, and Tomaso Poggio. Dynamics in
 deep classifiers trained with the square loss: Normalization, low rank, neural collapse, and gener-
 alization bounds. In Research, volume 6, 2023.
Emanuele Zangrando, Piero Deidda, Simone Brugiapaglia, Nicola Guglielmi, and Francesco Tud-
  isco. Neural rank collapse: Weight decay and small within-class variability yield low-rank bias.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03991, 2024.
Jiawei Zhang, Yufan Chen, Cheng Jin, Lei Zhu, and Yuantao Gu. EPA: neural collapse inspired
   robust out-of-distribution detector. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01710, 2024.
Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Tianyu Ding, Chong You, Qing Qu, and Zhihui Zhu. On the optimization
   landscape of neural collapse under MSE loss: Global optimality with unconstrained features. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022a.
Jinxin Zhou, Chong You, Xiao Li, Kangning Liu, Sheng Liu, Qing Qu, and Zhihui Zhu. Are all
   losses created equal: A neural collapse perspective. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
   ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022b.
Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A geo-
  metric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Difan Zou and Quanquan Gu. An improved analysis of training over-parameterized deep neural
  networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Last 7 layers of a 9-layer MLP trained on MNIST with weight decay 0.0018 and learning
rate 0.001. Top: NC1s, NC2s, balancednesses and negativities, from left to right. Results are
averaged over 5 runs, and the confidence band at 1 standard deviation is displayed. Bottom: Class-
mean matrices of the last four layers (i.e., the linear head).


Figure 5: ResNet20 trained on MNIST with a deep linear head. Left to right: NC1 in the last layer;
NC1 in the first layer of the linear head; NC2 in the last layer; NC2 in the first layer of the linear
head. All plots are a function of the number of layers in the linear head. Results are based on 50 runs
(5 runs for each of the 10 hyperparameter setups), and the confidence band at 1 standard deviation
is displayed.


A      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

We complement the experiments from Section 6 with additional numerical findings. We start by
showing an analog of Figure 1 for MLP trained on MNIST to show that the behavior is robust with
respect to the backbone and dataset. The results are shown in Figure 4. The architecture is an MLP
with 5 non-linear layers followed by 4 linear layers. We use weight decay of 0.0018 and learning rate
of 0.001, training for 10000 epochs. The plot fully agrees with the one in Figure 1 with ResNet20
training on CIFAR10 in every qualitative aspect, and it only differs in the numerical values attained
by the NC metrics. Therefore, the conclusion is that the NC is attained across different architectures
and NC2 progressively improves as we get closer to the last layer of the DNN.
Next, we extend Figure 2 with experiments on ResNet20 trained on MNIST, which are shown in
Figure 5. As above, the results match the interpretations discussed in Section 6, which proves the
robustness of our findings across different achitectures, datasets and hyperparameter settings.


B      D EFERRED P ROOFS

Theorem B.1 (More precise version of Theorem 3.1). If the network satisfies

    • approximate interpolation, i.e., ∥ZL − Y ∥F ≤ ϵ1 ,
                                       ⊤
    • approximate balancedness, i.e., Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1 − Wℓ Wℓ⊤ op ≤ ϵ2 , for ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, . . . , L − 1},


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  • bounded representations and weights, i.e., ∥ZL−2 ∥op , ∥ZL−1 ∥op , ∥Wℓ ∥op ≤ r, for ℓ ∈ {L1 +
    1, . . . , L},
                          q
                            (K−1)N
then if ϵ1 ≤ min sK (Y ),     4K     ,

                                           r2     (Ψ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r))2
                                       NC1(ZL−1 ) ≤                  2 ,                     (18)
                                           N    q
                                                   K−1         2
                                                    K − N ϵ1
                                                             √


                                      √

where Ψ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r) = r sK (Yϵ1)−ϵ1 + nL−1 ϵ2 . If we additionally assume that the linear part of
the network is not too ill-conditioned, i.e., κ(WL:L1 +1 ) ≤ c3 , then
                                                              1            1
                                                                       1       −1
                                          κ(WL ) ≤ c3L2 (1 + ϵ) L2 + c3L2           ϵ,                       (19)
                     L22 2(L2 −1) ϵ
                      2 r           2
with ϵ =    (sK (Y )−ϵ1 )2   L2
                                                 . Finally,
                           −   2 r 2(L2 −1) ϵ
                      2L1     2              2
             ∥X∥2op r

                    κ(WL ) + sK (Y )−1 rΨ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r)
        NC2(ZL−1 ) ≤                                                                (20)
                      1 − sK (Y )−1 rΨ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r)
                     √                                            √                2
                    ( N − ϵ1 )2 + N (κ(WL ))−2 − rΨ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r) + K(κ(WL )2 − 1)
  NC3(ZL−1 , WL ) ≥                                                                  .
                                              2N κ(WL )(1 + ϵ1 )
                                                                                    (21)

By performing Taylor expansions and some algebraic manipulations, one readily obtains (2), (3),
(4), (5) from (18), (19), (20), (21), respectively.

Proof of Theorem B.1. NC1: We start by proving the claim (18) on NC1. We have
            sK (Y ) − ϵ1 ≤ sK (Y + (ZL − Y )) = sK (ZL ) = sK (WL ZL−1 ) ≤ sK (WL )r,                        (22)
where the first inequality is the application of Weyl’s inequality for singular values and the last one
uses sk (A)s1 (B) ≥ s1 (AB). Denote WL+ the pseudoinverse of WL . Then, we have that WL+ WL
equals the projection P on the row space of WL . We can now write
       ZL−1 = P ZL−1 + (I − P )ZL−1 = WL+ Y + WL+ (ZL − Y ) + (I − P )WL−1 ZL−2 .
Note that
                                                         ϵ1 r
                                            WL+ (ZL − Y ) F ≤     ,
                                                     sK (Y ) − ϵ1
since sK (WL ) ≥ (sK (Y ) − ϵ1 )/r by (22). Furthermore,
                                      2                            2       2   ⊤
      ∥(I − P )WL−1 ZL−2 ∥F ≤ ∥(I − P )WL−1 ∥F ∥ZL−2 ∥op ≤ r2 tr((I − P )WL−1 WL−1 )
                                                                 ⊤
                                          = r2 tr((I − P )(WL−1 WL−1 − WL⊤ WL )) ≤ r2 nL−1 ϵ2 .
Putting these together, we have:

                                                               ϵ1       √
                     ZL−1 − WL+ Y           F
                                              ≤r                       + nL−1 ϵ2         = Ψ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r).   (23)
                                                          sK (Y ) − ϵ1

From now on, we will drop the index L − 1 and treat everything without layer label as belonging to
that layer (the membership to any other layer will be indexed). We have that
                                                            
                               1 X                               1 X               2
                tr(ΣW ) = tr        (zci − µc )(zci − µc )⊤  =        ∥zci − µc ∥2
                               N c,i                             N c,i
                                   1 X                  2   1                                  2
                               ≤         zci − (WL+ )c: 2 =   ZL−1 − WL+ Y                     F
                                                                                                 .
                                   N c,i                    N


                                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Furthermore,
                                              K
                                                                              !            K
                                     1 X                                               1 X             2
                  tr(ΣB ) = tr             (µc − µG )(µc − µG )⊤                  =          ∥µc − µG ∥2
                                     K c=1                                             K c=1
                                       K  2                                    K
                             ∥WL ∥op 1 X                           2       1 X L         2
                         ≥                             ∥µc − µG ∥2 ≥              µ − µL
                                                                                       G 2.
                                     r2       K c=1                       Kr2 c=1 c
Now we proceed by lower-bounding the last term:
        K                                     K
                                                                !2
    1 X L        2                    1 X L
          µ − µL
               G 2 ≥                        µ − µL
    K c=1 c                           K c=1 c    G 2


                                         K                K
                                                                                                                    !2
                                      1 X Y      Y     1 X Y
                             ≥              µ − µG 2 −       µ − µL      Y    L
                                                                  c 2 − µG − µG 2                                        ,
                                      K c=1 c          K c=1 c

where µYc , µYG are the class
                           qand global means of the label matrix Y. A direct computation yields that
1
  P K        Y      Y         K−1
K   c=1 µc − µG =              K . Next we have:


                                        1 X L       1 X Y        1 X L
                   µYG − µL
                          G 2 =               zci −       zci ≤             Y
                                                                       z − zci
                                        N c,i       N c,i        N c,i ci       2
                                                             2
                                       s
                                         1 X L        Y 2 = √1 ∥Z − Y ∥ ≤ √    ϵ1
                                     ≤           z − zci           L              .
                                         N c,i ci         2
                                                               N
                                                                         F
                                                                                N
Finally, for any fixed c we have
                                              1X Y      1X L                          1X Y
                    µYc − µL
                           c 2 =                  zci −     z                 ≤                  L
                                                                                          zci − zci   .
                                              n i       n i ci                        n i           2
                                                                          2
Therefore we get:
                K
             1 X Y             1 X Y              1              ϵ1
                   µc − µL
                         c 2 ≤
                                          L
                                     z − zci   ≤ √ ∥ZL − Y ∥F ≤ √ .
             K c=1             N c,i ci      2
                                                  N               N

Upper bounding these terms in the above computation and dividing tr(ΣW ) by tr(ΣB ) yields (18).
Conditioning of WL : We now prove the claim (19) on the conditioning of WL . We rely first on
Lemma C.2 to relate the singular values of WL to the L2 -th root of those of WL:L1 +1 . We therefore
obtain that
                                                  L2
 s1 (WL )2L2   s1 (WL:L1 +1 )2 + 22 r2(L2 −1) ϵ2
         2L
             ≤                   L2
 sK (WL ) 2    sK (WL:L +1 )2 − 2 r2(L2 −1) ϵ2
                                 1                2
                                                                   L2                                     L2
                    s1 (WL:L1 +1 )     sK (WL:L1 +1 )2 22 r2(L2 −1) ϵ2 + s1 (WL:L1 +1 )2 22 r2(L2 −1) ϵ2
                                          2
                =                  2
                                     +                                                                   .
                    sK (WL:L1 +1 )                               L2
                                             s (W       K  )2 − 2 r2(L2 −1) ϵ s (W
                                                               L:L1 +1            2            2)2 K      L:L1 +1

We have that
                    sK (ZL ) ≤ sK (WL:L1 +1 ) ∥ZL1 ∥op ≤ sK (WL:L1 +1 ) ∥X∥op rL1 ,
and therefore
                                                          sK (ZL )   sK (Y ) − ϵ1
                             sK (WL:L1 +1 ) ≥                      ≥              .
                                                         ∥X∥op rL1    ∥X∥op rL1
This gives that
        s1 (WL )2L2   s1 (WL:L1 +1 )2           1 + κ(WL:L1 +1 )2          L22 2(L2 −1)
                    ≤                 +                                       r         ϵ2 .
        sK (WL )2L2   sK (WL:L1 +1 )2     (sK (Y )−ϵ1 )2  L2
                                                         − 2 r2(L2 −1) ϵ   2
                                               2
                                                            ∥X∥op r 2L1           2            2



                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus, the following chain of inequalities gives (19):
                                                     1
              κ(WL ) ≤ κ(WL:L1 +1 )2 (1 + ϵ) + ϵ 2L2
                                               1               1                   1                   1
                       ≤ κ(WL:L1 +1 ) L2 (1 + ϵ) 2L2 + κ(WL:L1 +1 ) L2 −1 (1 + ϵ) 2L2 −1 ϵ
                                               1               1                   1
                     ≤ κ(WL:L1 +1 ) L2 (1 + ϵ) 2L2 + κ(WL:L1 +1 ) L2 −1 ϵ,
using the concavity of the 2L2 -th root.
NC(2+3): We start with the proof of the claim (21) on NC3, as the derivations will be used in the
proof of the claim (20) on NC2 later. Since the cosine similarity does not depend on the scale of the
involved matrices, we perform the following rescaling: denoting α = ∥WL ∥, we define WL′ = WαL
      ′                                                      (L−1)
and ZL−1   = αZL−1 . Similarly to before we denote (z ′ )ci         the i-th sample of the c-th class in the
         ′
matrix ZL−1  . Then, we write
                                                                             D                       E
                                                                                  ′ (L−1)      ′
                            1                                      1           (z  )ci    , (W L )c:
                                             (L−1)
                              X                                       X
              ′
      NC3(ZL−1    , WL′ ) =        cos((z ′ )ci    , (WL′ )c: ) =
                            N c,i                                 N c,i (z ′ )(L−1) ∥(W ′ ) ∥
                                                                                 ci              L c: 2
                                                                                        2
                                 D                       E
                                     ′ (L−1)
                                              , (WL′ )c:
                            P
                              c,i (z )ci
                                                                    ′
                                                               2 ZL−1   , (WL′ )⊤ Y
                          ≥                                =
                                N κ(WL )(1 + ϵ1 )               2N κ(WL )(1 + ϵ1 )
                               ′           2                        2                              2
                              ZL−1 F
                                     + (WL′ )⊤ Y F − ZL−1
                                                        ′
                                                            − (WL′ )⊤ Y                            F
                          =                                                                            .
                                         2N κ(WL )(1 + ϵ1 )
Here, the first inequality follows from upper bounding ∥(WL′ )c: ∥2 trivially by 1 and

             (L−1)                (L)                     (L)
       (z ′ )ci      ≤ κ(WL ) zci       ≤ κ(WL ) yc − zci         + ∥yc ∥2 ≤ κ(WL )(1 + ϵ1 ).
                   2                           2                               2
Now,                                                          √
                    ′   2        2                        2
                   ZL−1 F
                          ≥ ∥ZL ∥F ≥ (∥Y ∥F − ∥ZL − Y ∥F ) = ( N − ϵ1 )2 .
                                                                    √
Furthermore, we readily have that (WL′ )⊤ Y                   F
                                                                ≥ κ(WNL ) . Finally, we have:
            ′
           ZL−1 − (WL′ )⊤ Y        F
                                          ′
                                       ≤ ZL−1 − (WL′ )+ Y               F
                                                                            + (WL′ )+ Y − (WL′ )⊤ Y         F
                                                                                                                .
From (23), we obtain that

               ′                                                ϵ1       √
              ZL−1 − (WL′ )+ Y         F
                                           ≤r      2
                                                                        + nL−1 ϵ2          = rΨ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r).       (24)
                                                           sK (Y ) − ϵ1
Finally, we proceed with upper bounding (WL′ )+ Y − (WL′ )⊤ Y F , which can be done via a sand-
wich bound on the singular values using the conditioning number. This gives
                                        √                             √

                                                             1
             (WL′ )+ Y − (WL′ )⊤ Y F ≤ K κ(WL ) −                  ≤ K(κ(WL )2 − 1).
                                                          κ(WL )
Putting all the obtained bounds together, we get the desired bound (21) on NC3.
Finally, to pass from the bound (19) on κ(WL ) to the bound (20) on NC2, we use the inequality
                                                                              ′
in (24) obtained in the proof of NC3. Note that obtaining a bound on κ(Z̄L−1      ) is equivalent to
obtaining a bound on κ(Z̄L−1 ) since multiplying by a scalar does not change the condition number.
Using (24) we get:
         ′
       Z̄L−1 − (WL′ )+ F = ZL−1 ′
                                    Y + − (WL′ )+ Y Y + F ≤ Y + op ZL−1   ′
                                                                                − (WL′ )+ Y F
                                  rΨ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r)
                              ≤                   .
                                    sK (Y )
As ∥(WL′ )+ ∥op = κ(WL ) and sK ((WL′ )+ ) = 1, we conclude that
                               ′      κ(WL ) + rΨ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r)(sK (Y ))−1
                           κ(Z̄L−1 )≤                                     ,
                                        1 − rΨ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r)(sK (Y ))−1
which gives the desired bound in (20).



                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 4.5. Let C0 (θ) satisfy the α-PL inequality (10) in the ball B(θ0 , r0 ). Then, in the same
ball, Cλ (θ) satisfies the inequality
                                               2     α
                                  ∥∇Cλ (θ))∥2 ≥ (Cλ (θ) − λmλ ) ,                                   (11)
                                                     4
                                                2
                      p                                                               p
where mλ = (1 + 4λ/α)2 (∥θ0 ∥2 + r0 ) . Furthermore, assume that r0 ≥ 8 Cλ (θ0 )/α and
∇C0 (θ) is β1 -Lipschitz in B(θ0 , r0 ). Then,&for any η < 1/(2β  '1 ), there exists
                                                 log Cλ (θλm λ
                                                          0 )−λmλ
                                        k1 ≤                                                        (12)
                                                   log(1 − η α8 )
such that the k1 -th iterate of GD satisfies                           r
                                                                           Cλ (θ0 )
                   Cλ (θk1 ) ≤ 2λmλ ,               ∥θk1 − θ0 ∥2 ≤ 8                ≤ r0 .            (13)
                                                                             α

Proof. Let θ ∈ B(θ0 , r0 ). Then, the following chain of inequalities holds:
                                 2                             2
                ∥∇C0 (θ) + λθ∥2 ≥ (∥∇C0 (θ)∥2 − λ ∥θ∥2 )
                                        r                      2
                                            α
                                    ≥         C0 (θ) − λ ∥θ∥2
                                            2
                                         r                                 !2
                                            α           αλ     2
                                    =         Cλ (θ) −      ∥θ∥2 − λ ∥θ∥2
                                            2            4
                                         r                    r !           !2
                                            α                    αλ                                  (25)
                                    ≥         Cλ (θ) − λ +            ∥θ∥2
                                            2                     4
                                                                   2
                                                          α √
                                                       r
                                       α                                 2
                                    ≥ Cλ (θ) − λ            + λ ∥θ∥2
                                       4                  4
                                                             r !2                    
                                       α                        4λ                  2
                                    ≥       Cλ (θ) − λ 1 +             (∥θ0 ∥2 + r0 ) .
                                       4                         α
                                          pα
Here, in the second line we use that          2 C0 (θ) ≥ λ ∥θ∥2 , √
                                                                  which follows from Cλ (θ) ≥ λmλ
                                                                             √     √
(otherwise, the claim is trivial); in the fourth line we use that a − b ≥ a − b for a ≥ b; in the
                                     2
fifth line we use that (a − b)2 ≥ a2 − b2 for all a, b; and in the sixth line we use that θ is in the ball
                                                      2
B(θ0 , r0 ). As the LHS of (25) equals ∥∇Cλ (θ))∥2 , this proves (11).
Next, let (θk )k∈N be the GD trajectory. Pick k s.t. θk ∈ B(θ0 , r0 ). Then,
                                   Z 1
       Cλ (θk+1 ) − Cλ (θk ) = −η      ⟨∇Cλ (θk − sη∇Cλ (θk )), ∇Cλ (θk )⟩ds
                                         0
                                 Z 1
                           2
       = −η ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2 + η             ⟨∇Cλ (θk − sη∇Cλ (θk )) − ∇Cλ (θk ), ∇Cλ (θk )⟩ds
                                     0
                                 Z 1
                           2
       ≤ −η ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2 + η             ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2 ∥∇Cλ (θk − sη∇Cλ (θk )) − ∇Cλ (θk )∥2 ds
                                     0
                           2                        2
       ≤ −η ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2 + η 2 β1 ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2
                                         2
        = −η(1 − ηβ1 ) ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2
             η             2
        ≤ − ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2
             2
               α
        ≤ −η (Cλ (θk ) − λmλ ) .
               8
Here, in the fourth line we use that the gradient is β1 -Lipschitz in B(θ0 , r0 ); in the sixth line we use
that η < 1/(2β1 ); and in the last line we use (11). Thus, as long as θj ∈ B(θ0 , r0 ) for all j ∈ [k],
by iterating the argument above, we have
                                                                        α  k
                          Cλ (θk ) − λmλ ≤ (Cλ (θ0 ) − λmλ ) 1 − η             .
                                                                        8

                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This readily implies that, by letting k1 be the first index k s.t. Cλ (θk ) ≤ 2λmλ , (12) holds. Finally,
the distance ∥θk1 − θ0 ∥2 is upper bounded by
    1 −1
   kX                                1 −1
                                    kX                     2
                                            ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2
           η ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2 = η
                                            ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2
    k=0                             k=0
                       1 −1
                      kX
              4           Cλ (θk ) − Cλ (θk+1 )
            ≤√             p
               α              Cλ (θk ) − λmλ
                      k=0
                 1    k −2
              4 X  Cλ (θk ) − Cλ (θk+1 )   4 Cλ (θk −1 ) − Cλ (θk1 )
            =√      p                    +√ p 1
               α       Cλ (θk ) − λmλ       α Cλ (θk1 −1 ) − λmλ
                      k=0
                       1 −2
                      kX
              8                             Cλ (θk ) − Cλ (θk+1 )            8 Cλ (θk1 −1 ) − λmλ
            ≤√                p                          p                 +√ p
               α                  Cλ (θk+1 ) − λmλ +        Cλ (θk ) − λmλ    α Cλ (θk1 −1 ) − λmλ
                      k=0
                       1 −2
                      kX
              8               p                            p                       8 p
            =√                     Cλ (θk ) − λmλ −            Cλ (θk+1 ) − λmλ + √   Cλ (θk1 −1 ) − λmλ
               α                                                                    α
                      k=0
              8 p                   8 p
            =√    Cλ (θ0 ) − λmλ ≤ √    Cλ (θ0 ),
               α                     α
                                                                                                       (26)
which concludes the proof.

                                                                                 q 4.1, σ
Theorem B.2 (More precise version of Theorem 4.4). Let the network satisfy Assumption
satisfy Assumption 4.2 and the initial conditions satisfy Assumption 4.3. Fix 0 < ϵ1 ≤ 21 (K−1)NK    ,
ϵ2 > 0, let b ≥ 1 be s.t. ∥X:i ∥2 ≤ b for all i, and run k steps of λ-regularized GD with step size η,
where
                                                                        !
                     γ  L−2             2C0 (θ0 )            ϵ21
      λ ≤ min 2              λF λ3→L ,          2 ,                       ,
                     2                   ∥θ0 ∥2 18(∥θ0 ∥2 + λF /2)2
                                                                                       
                                                                          L1 +L
                1                       1                       1    λ            ϵ2 
       η ≤ min 
                2β1 ,                                        , ,      2
                                                                                        ,        (27)
                               3           2ϵ21
                                                 3L/2
                                                         5/2
                                                                2λ 2ϵ1          4∥X∥2op 
                        5N βb max 1, λ                  L

                 log Cλ (θλm                    log λϵ
             &               λ
                                    '       &          2
                                                               '
                          0 )−λmλ                   4ϵ2
      k≥                       +              1
                                                    ,
              log(1 − η α8 )      log(1 − ηλ)
                      Q                     3
                          L                                                         2
                                                              p
with β1     = 5N βb3      ℓ=1 max(1, λ̄ℓ )    L5/2 , mλ = (1 + 4λ/α)2 (∥θ0 ∥2 + r0 ) , r0 =
1                                        −(L−3) L−2
2 min(λF , minℓ∈{3,...,L} λℓ ), and α = 2      γ    λF√λ3→L . Then, we have that
                                      k     r2 (Ψ(ϵ1 2, ϵ2 , r))2
                              NC1(ZL−1 ) ≤                         ,                                   (28)
                                            N   K−1 2√2  2
                                                 q
                                                    K − N ϵ1
                                                          √

                                           √

                                  ϵ1
with Ψ(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , r) = r       sK (Y )−ϵ1 +   nL−1 ϵ2
                                           and
                             r        r !L−2            r !L−1       
                                2       2                 2
                    r = max ϵ1   , ϵ1        ∥X∥op , ϵ1        ∥X∥op  .                              (29)
                                λ       λ                 λ

Since the terms β1 , mλ , r0 , α do not depend on ϵ1 , ϵ2 (but just on the network architecture and
initialization), taking λ = Θ(ϵ21 ) and η = O(ϵ2 ) (as in the statement of Theorem 4.4) satisfies the
first two requirements in (27), also giving that r in (29) is of constant order. Finally, as log(1 − x) ≈
−x for small x, the quantity ηk – which quantifies the time of the dynamics, since it is the product
of learning rate and number of GD steps                  log(1/λ) + log(1/ϵ2 )/λ. Thus, after some
                                           – is of order
                                            1        1
manipulations, one obtains that k = Ω ϵ2 ϵ2 log ϵ2 (as in the statement of Theorem 4.4).
                                                    1


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Theorem B.2. By Lemma 4.1 in (Nguyen & Mondelli, 2020), the loss C0 (θ) satisfies the α-
                                              QL
PL inequality with α = 4γ L−2 σmin (Z1 ) p=3 σmin (Wp ), where we have also used that σ ′ is lower
bounded by γ by Assumption 4.2. Thus, by taking r0 = 21 min(λF , minℓ∈{3,...,L} λℓ ), we have that,
for all θ ∈ B(θ0 , r0 ), C0 (θ) satisfies the α-PL inequality with α = 2−(L−3) γ L−2 λF λ3→L .
By using Assumption 4.3 and that λ is upper bounded by 2C       0 (θ0 )
                                                              ∥θ0 ∥22
                                                                        in (27), one can readily verify
           p
that r0 ≥ 8 Cλ (θ0 )/α. Furthermore, by Lemma C.1, we have that ∇C0 (θ) is β1 -Lipschitz for all
θ ∈ B(θ0 , r0 ). Hence, we can apply Proposition 4.5, which gives that, for some k1 upper bounded
in (12),
                                       Cλ (θk1 ) ≤ 2λmλ ≤ ϵ21 ,
where the last inequality uses again the upper bound on λ in (27).
With gradient flow, the regularized loss would only decrease further after k1 steps. Since we are
working with gradient descent, we simply need to assume that the learning rate is small enough to
guarantee a decreasing loss. If the gradient ∇Cλ (θ) is β2 -Lipschitz, then
        Cλ (θk+1 ) − Cλ (θk ) = Cλ (θk − η∇Cλ (θk )) − Cλ (θk )
                         Z 1
                   = −η       ⟨∇Cλ (θk − sη∇Cλ (θk )), ∇Cλ (θk )⟩ ds
                            0
                                       2
                    ≤ −η ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2
                      + η ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2 maxs∈[0,1] ∥∇Cλ (θk ) − ∇Cλ (θk − sη∇C(θk ))∥2
                                       2                          2
                    ≤ −η ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2 + η 2 β2 ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2
                                                     2
                   = −η(1 − ηβ2 ) ∥∇Cλ (θk )∥2 ,
which is non-positive as long as η ≤ 1/β2 . p Furthermore, as long as the regularized loss is de-
creasing, the parameter
                     norm  is bounded
                                        by ϵ1 2/λ. Lemma C.1 then implies that the gradient is
                           2 3L/2
β2 = 5N βb3 max 1, ϵ3L  1  λ        L5/2
                                         -Lipschitz and, therefore, η ≤ 1/β2 holds by (27). This
allows us to conclude that, for all k satisfying the lower bound in (27), Cλ (θk ) ≤ ϵ21 , hence the
network achieves approximate interpolation, i.e.,
                                                         √
                                       ∥ZLk − Y ∥F ≤ ϵ1 2.                                      (30)
Next, we show approximate balancedness. To do so, for ℓ ∈ {L1 + 2, . . . , L − 1}, we define
             Tℓk := (Wℓ+1
                       k
                          )⊤ · · · (WLk )⊤ (ZLk − Y )(ZLk 1 )⊤ (WLk1 +1 )⊤ · · · (Wℓ−1
                                                                                   k
                                                                                       )⊤ .
Then, we have
      Wℓk+1 (Wℓk+1 )⊤ = ((1 − ηλ)Wℓk − ηTℓk )((1 − ηλ)Wℓk − ηTℓk )⊤
             = (1 − ηλ)2 Wℓk (Wℓk )⊤ − (1 − ηλ)η(Wℓk (Tℓk )⊤ + Tℓk (Wℓk )⊤ ) + η 2 Tℓk (Tℓk )⊤ .
Similarly,
     k+1 ⊤  k+1
  (Wℓ+1  ) Wℓ+1
  = (1 − ηλ)2 (Wℓ+1
                 k
                    )⊤ Wℓ+1
                        k                   k
                            − (1 − ηλ)η((Wℓ+1   )⊤ Tℓ+1
                                                    k        k
                                                        + (Tℓ+1   )⊤ Wℓ+1
                                                                      k
                                                                          ) + η 2 (Tℓ+1
                                                                                    k
                                                                                        )⊤ Tℓ+1
                                                                                            k
                                                                                                .
Let us define
                            Dℓk = (Wℓ+1
                                     k
                                        )⊤ Wℓ+1
                                              k
                                                  − Wℓk (Wℓk )⊤ .
             k ⊤         ⊤ k             k ⊤
        k            k                k
Since Tℓ (Wℓ ) = (Wℓ+1 ) Tℓ+1 and Wℓ (Tℓ ) = (Tℓ+1  k
                                                       )⊤ Wℓ+1
                                                            k
                                                                , we have
                        Dℓk+1 = (1 − ηλ)2 Dℓk + η 2 ((Tℓ+1
                                                       k
                                                           )⊤ Tℓ+1
                                                               k
                                                                   − Tℓk (Tℓk )⊤ ).
                                                                √                         p
Recall that, for all k lower bounded in (27), ∥ZLk − Y ∥F ≤ ϵ1 2 and ∥Wℓk ∥F ≤ ∥θk ∥2 ≤ ϵ1 2/λ,
                                       p        L1
which also implies that ∥ZL1 ∥F ≤ ϵ1 2/λ             ∥X∥op . Thus,
    ∥Dℓk+1 ∥op ≤ (1 − ηλ)2 ∥Dℓk ∥op + η 2 (∥Tℓk ∥2op + ∥Tℓ+1
                                                         k
                                                             ∥2op )
                                                                          Y                     Y
               ≤ (1 − ηλ)2 ∥Dℓk ∥op + η 2 ∥ZLk 1 ∥2op ∥ZLk − Y ∥2op (            ∥Wjk ∥2op +            ∥Wjk ∥2op )
                                                                          j̸=ℓ                 j̸=ℓ+1
                                                             L1 +L−1
                                                     2ϵ21

               ≤ (1 − ηλ)2 ∥Dℓk ∥op + 4η 2 ϵ21                         ∥X∥2op .
                                                      λ


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                L1 +L
                               1                         λ                    ϵ2
By using the upper bounds η ≤ 2λ and η ≤                2ϵ21                4∥X∥2op in (27), we have that:


       • if ∥Dℓk ∥op ≥ ϵ2 , then ∥Dℓk+1 ∥op ≤ (1 − ηλ)∥Dℓk ∥op ;

       • if ∥Dℓk ∥op ≤ ϵ2 , then ∥Dℓk+1 ∥op ≤ (1 − ηλ)ϵ2 ≤ ϵ2 .
                                                               λm
                                                             λ

                                                   log C (θ )−λm
This implies that, for all k̄ ≥ 0 and k1 ≥               λ
                                                     log(1−η α
                                                               0        λ
                                                                                ,
                                                             8)



                            ∥Dℓk1 +k̄ ∥op ≤ max((1 − ηλ)k̄ ∥Dℓk1 ∥op , ϵ2 ).
Note that
                                                                                           4ϵ21
                            ∥Dℓk1 ∥op ≤ ∥Wℓ+1
                                          k1 2
                                              ∥op + ∥Wℓk1 ∥2op ≤                                ,
                                                                                            λ
which allows us to conclude that, for all k lower bounded in (27),
                                                   ∥Dℓk ∥2 ≤ ϵ2 .
Finally, we have the following bounds on the representations and weights at step k:
                                           r !L−2
                             k                2
                           ZL−2  op
                                    ≤ ϵ1             ∥X∥op ,
                                              λ
                                           r !L−1
                             k                2
                           ZL−1  op
                                    ≤ ϵ1             ∥X∥op ,
                                              λ
                                        r
                               k           2
                             Wℓ op ≤ ϵ1      , for ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, . . . , L}.
                                           λ
Hence, an application of Theorem 3.1 proves the desired result.
Proposition 5.1. Let σ satisfy Assumption 4.2. Then, for any network that satisfies

  • approximate interpolation, i.e., ∥ZL − Y ∥F ≤ ϵ1 ,
                                     2
  • bounded parameters, i.e., ∥θ∥2 ≤ LK + c,

the linear part WL:L1 +1 satisfies
                                                                                                               !!
                                         1                             sK (Y ) − ϵ1
              κ(WL:L1 +1 ) ≤ exp               c + L1 K log K − 2K log                                              .   (14)
                                         2                               ∥X∥op

Proof. Let us split the parameter norm into the contribution from the nonlinear and linear layers:
                                         2                         2                 2
                                     ∥θ∥2 = ∥θnonlin ∥2 + ∥θlin ∥2 .
We first lower bound both parts in terms of the product of the linear part WL:L1 +1 . This then allows
us to bound the conditioning of WL:L1 +1 . We start with the nonlinear part:
                                         L1                                                              L21
                                         Y                                          1            2
                  ∥ZL1 ∥F ≤ ∥X∥op              ∥Wℓ ∥F ≤ ∥X∥op                          ∥θnonlin ∥2             ,
                                                                                    L1
                                         ℓ=1

which implies that
                                                               ! L2                                 ! L2
                               2               ∥ZL1 ∥F              1
                                                                                      ∥ZL1 ∥op         1

                     ∥θnonlin ∥2 ≥ L1                                   ≥ L1                               .
                                                ∥X∥op                                    ∥X∥op

Since ∥Y − WL:L1 +1 ZL1 ∥F ≤ ϵ1 , we have
                sK (Y ) ≤ sK (WL:L1 +1 ZL1 ) + ϵ1 ≤ sK (WL:L1 +1 ) ∥ZL1 ∥op + ϵ1 ,


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


so that ∥ZL1 ∥op ≥ sKsK (Y )−ϵ1
                      (WL:L +1 ) and thus
                              1

                                                                             ! L2
                                                                                1
                                       2                 sK (Y ) − ϵ1
                             ∥θnonlin ∥2 ≥ L1                                        .                   (31)
                                                     sK (WL:L1 +1 ) ∥X∥op
Next, for the linear part, we know from Theorem 1 of Dai et al. (2021) that
                                                 L                           Rank(A)
                                                 X                            X                  2
           min(Wℓ )Lℓ=L +1 :A=WL:L1 +1                 ∥Wℓ ∥2F = (L − L1 )               si (A) L−L1 ,
                         1
                                             ℓ=L1 +1                           i=1

so that
                         Rank(WL:L1 +1 )
                                X                            2
         2
  ∥θlin ∥2 ≥ (L − L1 )                      si (WL:L1 +1 ) L−L1 ≥ (L − L1 )K + 2 log |WL:L1 +1 |+ , (32)
                                i=1
                                    2
                                          2
where we used the fact that x L−L1 ≥ 1 + L−L 1
                                               log x.
We also have following bound on the condition number κ(WL:L1 +1 ):
                                                   K
                                  s1 (WL:L1 +1 )   Y si (WL:L1 +1 )    |WL:L1 +1 |+
               κ(WL:L1 +1 ) =                    ≤                  =                 .                  (33)
                                  sK (WL:L1 +1 ) i=1 sK (WL:L1 +1 )   sK (WL:L1 +1 )K

By combining (31), (32), and (33) (after applying the log on both sides of (33)), we obtain
                                   ! L2
                                       1
   2            s K (Y ) − ϵ 1
∥θ∥2 ≥ L1                                + (L − L1 )K + 2 log |WL:L1 +1 |+
            sK (WL:L1 +1 ) ∥X∥op
                                   ! L2
                                       1
                sK (Y ) − ϵ1
     ≥ L1                                + (L − L1 )K + 2 log κ(WL:L1 +1 ) + 2K log sK (WL:L1 +1 ).
            sK (WL:L1 +1 ) ∥X∥op

The above is lower bounded by the minimum over all possible choices of sK (WL:L1 +1 ). This
                                                 L1
minimum would be attained at sK (WL:L1 +1 ) = K − 2 sK∥X∥
                                                       (Y )−ϵ1
                                                               , thus leading to the lower bound
                                                                    op


                   2                                                                sK (Y ) − ϵ1
               ∥θ∥2 ≥ LK + 2 log κ(WL:L1 +1 ) − L1 K log K + 2K log                              .
                                                                                      ∥X∥op

This implies
                                             2                                      sK (Y ) − ϵ1
                2 log κ(WL:L1 +1 ) ≤ ∥θ∥2 − LK + L1 K log K − 2K log
                                                                                      ∥X∥op
                                                                     sK (Y ) − ϵ1
                                        ≤ c + L1 K log K − 2K log                 .
                                                                       ∥X∥op


Theorem 5.2. Let σ satisfy Assumption 4.2. Assume there exist parameters of the nonlinear part
θnonlin = (Wℓ )L                                   2
               ℓ=1 such that ZL1 = Y and ∥θnonlin ∥2 = c. Then, at any global minimizer of the
                1

                                             2           2            ϵ2
regularized loss Lλ (θ) = 12 ∥Y − ZL ∥F + λ2 ∥θ∥2 with λ ≤ KL+c   1
                                                                     , we have
                                             K
                                 ∥X∥op

                                                       1
            κ(WL:L1 +1 ) ≤                       exp     (c − L1 K + L1 K log K) ,
                               sK (Y ) − ϵ1            2
                                              LK2                                                        (15)
                                 ∥X∥op

                                                         1
                 κ(WL ) ≤                         exp        (c − L1 K + L1 K log K) .
                               sK (Y ) − ϵ1             2L2
This implies that the bounds on NC1, NC2 and NC3 in (2), (4) and (5), respectively, hold with
κ(WL ) upper bounded as above and ϵ2 = 0.


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. By assumption, there are parameters of the nonlinear part θnonlin such that the representation
at the end of the nonlinear layers already matches the outputs ZL1 = Y with finite parameter
                2
norm ∥θnonlin ∥2 = c. We can now build a deeper network by simply setting all the linear layers
                                                 2
to be the K-dimensional identity, so that ∥θlin ∥2 = KL2 , leading to a total parameter norm of
    2
∥θ∥2 = c + KL2 . Since the outputs matches the labels exactly, we have that the regularized loss is
bounded by λ(KL2 + c)/2. This implies that any global minimizer θ∗ satisfies
                                                    2
                                      ∥Y − ZL ∥F ≤ λ(KL2 + c),
                                                     2
                                               ∥θ∗ ∥2 ≤ KL2 + c.
                    ϵ2
Choosing λ ≤ KL21 +c , we obtain that the global minimizer θ∗ must satisfy the assumptions of
Proposition 5.1, which readily gives the desired upper bound on κ(WL:L1 +1 ).
To finish the proof, we show that all critical points of the regularized loss have balanced linear layers,
so that we may relate the conditioning of WL to that of the product WL:L1 +1 . At any critical point,
the gradient w.r.t. to any weight matrix amongst the linear layers must be zero, that is
                                      ⊤
                    0 = ∇Wℓ Cλ (θ) = WL:ℓ+1 (ZL − Y )ZL⊤1 Wℓ−1:L
                                                           ⊤
                                                                 1 +1
                                                                      + λWℓ .
                               ⊤
This implies that Wℓ = − λ1 WL:ℓ+1   (ZL − Y )ZL⊤1 Wℓ−1:L
                                                        ⊤
                                                             1 +1
                                                                   for all linear layers ℓ. Balancedness
then follows directly
                                1 ⊤
                   Wℓ Wℓ⊤ = − WL:ℓ+1      (ZL − Y )ZL⊤1 Wℓ:L ⊤
                                                                1 +1
                                                                      = Wℓ+1⊤
                                                                               Wℓ+1 .
                                λ
Finally, the balancedness implies that
                                                    LK2
                                       ∥X∥op

                             1                                    1
     κ(WL ) = κ(WL:L1 +1 ) ≤L2
                                                         exp          (c − L1 K + L1 K log K) .
                                     sK (Y ) − ϵ1               2L2


Proposition 5.3. For any network that satisfies
                                                                  2
                                               ∥∇θ Tr[ZL AT ]∥2
  • bounded NTK, i.e., ∥Θ∥op = maxA                 ∥A∥2F
                                                                      ≤ CL2 ,

  • approximate interpolation, i.e., ∥ZL − Y ∥F ≤ ϵ1 ,
  • bounded weights, i.e., ∥Wℓ ∥op ≤ r,
                                                                                              √
for any M ≤ L2 , there is ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, . . . , L1 + M } such that κ(WL:ℓ ) ≤ √M (sCL(Y
                                                                                     2 Kr
                                                                                       )−ϵ )
                                                                                             .
                                                                                                  K   1

Furthermore, any network that satisfies approximate interpolation and bounded weights is such that
                                                                        2
                                                   (sK (Y ) − ϵ1 )
                                      ∥Θ∥op ≥                      L2 .                                       (17)
                                                        K 2 r2

Proof. As the NTK is a sum over all layers, we can lower bound it by the contribution of the linear
layers only. Formally, we have
                                       2                                2
                         ∇θ Tr[ZL A⊤ ] 2 ≥ ∇θlin Tr[ZL A⊤ ] 2
                                                 L
                                                 X                                        2
                                           =              Wℓ−1:L1 +1 ZL1 A⊤ WL:ℓ+1 F
                                               ℓ=L1 +1


Let v1 , . . . , vK ∈ RN be K orthonormal vectors that span the preimage of ZL (ZL is rank K as
long as ϵ1 ≤ sK (Y )), and e1 , . . . , eK ∈ RK be the standard basis of RK . We can then sum over
K 2 possible choices of matrices A = ei vjT to obtain
                    K                              K          L
                    X                      2       X          X                          2                2
     K 2 ∥Θ∥op ≥            ∇θ (eTi ZL vj ) 2 ≥                       ∥Wℓ−1:L1 +1 ZL1 vj ∥2 eTi WL:ℓ+1 2 .
                   i,j=1                          i,j=1 ℓ=L1 +1



                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        +                         +
We know use the fact that PImWL:ℓT Wℓ−1:L +1 ZL
                                          1     1
                                                   = WL:ℓ  WL:ℓ Wℓ−1:L1 +1 ZL1 = WL:ℓ ZL to
obtain the lower bound
                                   K    L
                                  X   X
                                                 +        2            2
                     K 2 ∥Θ∥op ≥              WL:ℓ ZL vj 2 eTi WL:ℓ+1 2
                                        i,j=1 ℓ=L1 +1
                                          L
                                          X
                                                       +              2                   2
                                   =                  WL:ℓ ZL F ∥WL:ℓ+1 ∥F
                                        ℓ=L1 +1
                                                          L                                     2
                                                          X
                                                                       +           2   ∥WL:ℓ ∥F
                                   ≥ sK (ZL )2                        WL:ℓ F            ∥Wℓ ∥op
                                                      ℓ=L1 +1
                                                            2        L
                                         (sK (Y ) − ϵ1 )             X
                                   ≥                                           κ(WL:ℓ )2 .
                                               r2
                                                                 ℓ=L1 +1

This then implies that
                                                                          2    L
                                               (sK (Y ) − ϵ1 )                 X
                         CL2 ≥ ∥Θ∥op ≥                                                   κ(WL:ℓ )2 .
                                                    K 2 r2
                                                                              ℓ=L1 +1

Let us now assume by contradiction that for all the layers ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, . . . , L1 + M } we have
               CL2 K 2 r 2
κ(WL:ℓ )2 > M (s (Y )−ϵ )2
                           , then
                 K       1

                                                  2       L
                             (sK (Y ) − ϵ1 )              X
                                                                     κ(WL:ℓ )2 > CL2 ,
                                  K 2 r2
                                                      ℓ=L1 +1

which yields a contradiction. Therefore, there must be a layer within the layers ℓ ∈ {L1 +
                                             CL2 K 2 r 2
1, . . . , L1 + M } such that κ(WL:ℓ )2 ≤ M (s (Y )−ϵ )2
                                                         .
                                                      K          1


Furthermore, since κ(WL:ℓ ) ≥ 1, we know that
                                                                               2
                                                      (sK (Y ) − ϵ1 )
                                        ∥Θ∥op ≥                       L2 .
                                                           K 2 r2



C    T ECHNICAL R ESULTS
Lemma C.1. Let b ≥ 1 be s.t. ∥X:i ∥2 ≤ b for all i. Then, inside the set of parameters with
bounded weights ∥Wℓ ∥op ≤ rℓ for all ℓ ∈ [L] and rℓ ≥ 1, the gradient of the loss ∇C0 (θ) is
        Q         3
          L
5N βb3    j=1 rj    L5/2 -Lipschitz.

                                                  ′     ′ L                   ′
Proof. Consider two parameters θ = (Wℓ )L  ℓ=1 , θ = (Wℓ )ℓ=1 , and let Zm , Zm be the corresponding
outputs at layer m. Then, we obtain the following telescopic sum:
                                  L
                                  X
                       ′                                           ′
           (Zm ):i − (Zm ):i =      (Wm · · · Wℓ+1 ◦ σ ◦ Wℓ ◦ σ ◦ Wℓ−1 · · · ◦ W1′ )(X:i )
                                   ℓ=1
                                                                                                           (34)
                                − (Wm · · · Wℓ+1 ◦ σ ◦ Wℓ′ ◦ σ ◦ Wℓ−1
                                                                  ′
                                                                      ◦ · · · ◦ W1′ )(X:i ),
so that
                                m m−1
                                X Y
                   ′
      ∥(Zm )i: − (Zm )i: ∥2 ≤               rj ∥Wℓ − Wℓ′ ∥F ∥X:i ∥2
                                ℓ=1 j=1
                                            v                                                              (35)
                                  L−1       um                 L−1
                                  Y       √ uX            2
                                                               Y √
                             ≤b         rj mt  ∥Wℓ − W ′ ∥ ≤ b     rj m ∥θ − θ′ ∥ .
                                                                              ℓ F                      2
                                  j=1                 ℓ=1                                     j=1



                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, the gradient equals
                                                                       ⊤
                         XN ℓ−1
                            Y                                 L
                                                              Y
            ∇C0 (θ) =          Dj,i Wj X:i (Y:i − (ZL ):i )⊤   Wj Dj,i 
                              i=1 j=1                                           j=ℓ+1
                                                                                                       ℓ=1,...,L
where Dj,i is a diagonal matrix with diagonal entries given equal to the vector σ ′ ((Zj ):i ) for j ∈ [L1 ]
                                                                  ′
and it is equal to the identity otherwise. Similarly, we define Dj,i as a diagonal matrix with diagonal
                                     ′    ′
entries given equal to the vector σ ((Zj ):i ) for j ∈ [L1 ] and equal to the identity otherwise. Since
σ ′ is β-Lipschitz, we have
                                                           L−1
                                          ′
                                                           Y          √
                                  Dj,i − Dj,i F
                                                ≤ βb                rj m ∥θ − θ′ ∥2 .
                                                           j=1
                      ′
Furthermore since σ ≤ 1 ,we have that ∥Dj,i ∥op ≤ 1. By summing over all terms that need to be
changed, we obtain
                              L X
                              X N                                         X          Y
∥∇C0 (θ) − ∇C(θ′ )∥2 ≤                  ∥X:i ∥2 ∥Y:i − (ZL ):i ∥2                                     ′
                                                                                            rj ∥Wm − Wm ∥F
                              ℓ=1 i=1                                     m̸=ℓ j̸∈{m,L}
                                                                                            2
                              L X
                                N                                         L1         L−1
                              X                                           X          Y           √
                          +             ∥X:i ∥2 ∥Y:i − (ZL ):i ∥2                         rj  β m ∥θ − θ′ ∥2 ∥X:i ∥2
                              ℓ=1 i=1                                     m=1        j=1
                                                          2
                              L X
                                N                 L−1
                              X                   Y                 √
                          +             ∥X:i ∥2          rj           L ∥θ − θ′ ∥2 ∥X:i ∥2 ,
                              ℓ=1 i=1               j=1

where the three terms correspond to the effect of changing the Wℓ ’s, the Dℓ ’s and the Zℓ ’s respec-
tively. This can then be simplified to
                                                       
                                                 YL       L−1
                                                          Y
            ∥∇C0 (θ) − ∇C0 (θ)∥2 ≤ N b2 1 +         rj      rj L3/2 ∥θ − θ′ ∥2
                                                          j=1            j=1
                                                                                  2
                                                          L                   L−1
                                                                                              3/2
                                                          Y                   Y
                                        + N b3 1 +             rj                rj  LL1 β ∥θ − θ′ ∥2
                                                          j=1                 j=1
                                                              2
                                                    L−1
                                                    Y
                                        + N b2           rj  L3/2 ∥θ − θ′ ∥2
                                                    j=1
                                                                   3
                                                         L
                                                         Y
                                        ≤ 5N βb3              rj  L5/2 ∥θ − θ′ ∥2 ,
                                                        j=1
                                               QL
where we use the fact that ∥(ZL ):i ∥2 ≤ b          j=1 rj .

Lemma C.2. If the network satisfies
                                   T
       • approximate balancedness Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1 − Wℓ WℓT                           op
                                                                                    ≤ ϵ2 for ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, · · · L − 1},

       • bounded weights ∥Wℓ ∥op ≤ r for ℓ ∈ {L1 + 1, · · · , L},
                            L 2                                          L2
then we have     WL WL⊤                       ⊤
                                  − WL:L1 +1 WL:L 1 +1
                                                                    ≤ 22 ϵ2 r2(L2 −1) , where L2 = L − L1 .
                                                               op


Proof. We denote Dℓ := Wℓ Wℓ⊤ − Wℓ+1
                                 ⊤
                                     Wℓ+1 and
                                    ℓ
                                    X
                                             ⊤
                                                            i−L1 −1                          ℓ−i
                          Eℓ =              Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1                     Dℓ Wℓ Wℓ⊤                .
                                  i=L1 +1


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We have that
         ℓ−L1              ℓ−L1 −1                     ℓ−L1 −1
 Wℓ Wℓ⊤       = Dℓ Wℓ Wℓ⊤             ⊤
                                   + Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1 Wℓ Wℓ⊤
                           ℓ−L1 −1                        ℓ−L1 −2              2         ℓ−L1 −2
              = Dℓ Wℓ Wℓ⊤             ⊤
                                   + Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1 Dℓ Wℓ Wℓ⊤             ⊤
                                                                  + Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1    Wℓ Wℓ⊤
               = ...
                                              ℓ
                  ⊤
                                  ℓ−L1        X
                                                          ⊤
                                                                               i−L1 −1                       ℓ−i
               = Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1               +               Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1                          Dℓ Wℓ Wℓ⊤
                                             i=L1 +1
                    ⊤
                              ℓ−L1
               =   Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1       + Eℓ .
Then,
                   ⊤
         WL:L1 +1 WL:L 1 +1
                            = WL · · · WL1 +1 WL⊤1 +1 · · · WL⊤
                               = WL · · · WL1 +2 WL⊤1 +2 WL1 +2 + EL1 +1 WL⊤1 +2 · · · WL⊤

                                                                2
                               = WL · · · WL1 +3 WL⊤1 +2 WL1 +2 WL⊤1 +3 · · · WL⊤ + EL1 +1
                               = ...
                                                         L−1
                                              L 2        X
                               = WL WL⊤             +             Ei ,
                                                        i=L1 +1

                             ⊤
where Ei = WL · · · Wi+1 Ei Wi+1 · · · WL⊤ . As a result, we have
                                                                     L−1                         L−1
                        L2                                           X                           X
              WL WL⊤                     ⊤
                             − WL:L1 +1 WL:L 1 +1
                                                              =                   Ei        ≤             ∥Ei ∥op .
                                                         op
                                                                   i=L1 +1             op       i=L1 +1

Since ∥Wk ∥op ≤ r for all k = {L1 + 1, · · · L}, we have ∥Eℓ ∥op ≤ (ℓ − L1 )ϵ2 r2(ℓ−L1 −1) and
∥Eℓ ∥op ≤ r2(L−ℓ) (ℓ − L1 )ϵ2 r2(ℓ−L1 −1) = (ℓ − L1 )ϵ2 r2(L2 −1) . Thus, we have
                                  L 2                                             L22
                       WL WL⊤                       ⊤
                                        − WL:L1 +1 WL:L 1 +1
                                                                              ≤       ϵ2 r2(L2 −1) .
                                                                         op       2


                                                         27
