Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROCEDURAL K NOWLEDGE IN P RETRAINING D RIVES
R EASONING IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Laura Ruis∗                     Maximilian Mozes               Juhan Bae
 AI Centre, UCL                  Cohere                         University of Toronto & Vector Institute

 Siddhartha Rao Kamalakara                 Dwarak Talupuru          Acyr Locatelli       Robert Kirk
 Cohere                                    Cohere                   Cohere               AI Centre, UCL

 Tim Rocktäschel                       Edward Grefenstette                    Max Bartolo
 AI Centre, UCL                         AI Centre, UCL                         Cohere



                                                A BSTRACT

             The capabilities and limitations of Large Language Models (LLMs) have been
             sketched out in great detail in recent years, providing an intriguing yet conflicting
             picture. On the one hand, LLMs demonstrate a general ability to solve prob-
             lems. On the other hand, they show surprising reasoning gaps when compared
             to humans, casting doubt on the robustness of their generalisation strategies. The
             sheer volume of data used in the design of LLMs has precluded us from applying
             the method traditionally used to measure generalisation: train-test set separation.
             To overcome this, we study what kind of generalisation strategies LLMs employ
             when performing reasoning tasks by investigating the pretraining data they rely
             on. For two models of different sizes (7B and 35B) and 2.5B of their pretraining
             tokens, we identify what documents influence the model outputs for three simple
             mathematical reasoning tasks and contrast this to the data that are influential for
             answering factual questions. We find that, while the models rely on mostly dis-
             tinct sets of data for each factual question, a document often has a similar influence
             across different reasoning questions within the same task, indicating the presence
             of procedural knowledge. We further find that the answers to factual questions
             often show up in the most influential data. However, for reasoning questions the
             answers usually do not show up as highly influential, nor do the answers to the
             intermediate reasoning steps. When we characterise the top ranked documents for
             the reasoning questions qualitatively, we confirm that the influential documents
             often contain procedural knowledge, like demonstrating how to obtain a solution
             using formulae or code. Our findings indicate that the approach to reasoning the
             models use is unlike retrieval, and more like a generalisable strategy that synthe-
             sises procedural knowledge from documents doing a similar form of reasoning.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Current advancements in artificial intelligence are characterised by the increasing scale of datasets,
computational power, and model size (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). While one of
the manifestations of this approach, Large Language Models (LLMs), is rapidly saturating bench-
marks measuring reasoning capabilities (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021, inter alia), the
debate over whether they exhibit ‘genuine understanding’ is ongoing (as reviewed by Mitchell &
Krakauer, 2023). The well-documented robust and versatile reasoning abilities (Webb et al., 2023;
2024; McLeish et al., 2024, inter alia) sharply contrast with the line of work highlighting the brittle-
ness of LLM reasoning (Razeghi et al., 2022; McCoy et al., 2023; Ullman, 2023; Wu et al., 2024;
Mahowald et al., 2024). A finding common to these works is that LLM reasoning depends on the
frequency of similar problems in the training data.
    ∗
        Work done while at Cohere, correspondence to laura.ruis.21@ucl.ac.uk


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: A summary of our most important findings towards answering the question “how do LLMs
learn to reason from pretraining data?” We rank 5 million pretraining documents according to their
influence on the likelihood of completions of two models, Cohere’s Command R 7B and 35B, for 40
factual and 40 reasoning queries. We find that procedural knowledge drives influence on reasoning
traces: a document’s influence on the reasoning traces of one query is strongly predictive of that
document’s influence on another query with the same mathematical task, in 3 of the 4 cases. We
show this on the left through arrows indicating influence, and on the right through correlations of
all 5M document influences between a random sample of 10 queries per task (a plot with all queries
can be found in Figure 12 in Appendix A.9.1). Further, we find that the answers to factual queries
often show up in the top 0.01% of pretraining documents (see text in bottom row of documents), but
not for the reasoning questions. Finally, individual documents influence reasoning traces much less
strongly than factual answer generations, indicating models rely on documents less when reasoning.
All documents and queries shown are redacted versions of real data, and the relations are based on
documents found in the top 50 for the queries.


A key reason why benchmark saturation cannot be taken at face value is the issue of data contamina-
tion: benchmark data often appear in the pretraining set. Where we typically measure generalisation
in machine learning by separating the test data from the training data, the trillions of tokens used
in the design of current state-of-the-art models cannot reasonably be separated from benchmarks
anymore. Recent works have documented the extent of the contamination issue (Brown et al., 2020;
Touvron et al., 2023; Gunasekar et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2024), showing that many
common benchmarks have a high percentage of contaminated data. Additionally, Yang et al. (2023)
show that even rephrased benchmark data that elude N-gram-based detection methods can impact
performance, further complicating the issue. However, it is unclear how and when state-of-the-art
LLMs rely on contaminated data to perform reasoning.
This raises the question: “how do LLMs learn to reason from pretraining data?” In this work, we
take a complementary approach to most interpretability research by focusing on the pretraining data
used by language models to generalise, rather than interpreting the model weights themselves. We
investigate which data influence the model’s produced reasoning traces and how those data relate
to the specific problems being addressed. Are models simply ‘retrieving’ answers from previously
seen pretraining data and reassembling them, or are they employing a more robust strategy for
generalisation? We use a technique from robust statistics (Hampel, 1974) adapted to large-scale
Transformers (Koh & Liang, 2017; Grosse et al., 2023) to compute the influence of pretraining
documents on the likelihood of prompt-completions pairs under a trained model. In the extreme
case, a language model answering reasoning questions may rely heavily on retrieval from parametric
knowledge influenced by a limited set of documents within its pretraining data. In this scenario,


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


specific documents containing the information to be retrieved (i.e. the reasoning traces) contribute
significantly to the model’s output, while many other documents play a minimal role. Conversely,
at the other end of the spectrum, the model may draw from a broad range of documents that are
more abstractly related to the question, with each document influencing many different questions
similarly, but contributing a relatively small amount to the final output. We propose generalisable
reasoning should look like the latter strategy.
We investigate the pretraining data (called ‘documents’) that are influential for a set of factual and
reasoning questions (called ‘queries’). The reasoning questions cover three mathematical tasks;
two-step arithmetic, calculating slopes, and solving linear equations. The factual questions require
retrieving from parametric knowledge. We experiment with two LLMs (7B and 35B) and 2.5B of
their pretraining tokens. Our findings are as follows (summarised in Figure 1):

      1. Procedural knowledge in documents drives influence on reasoning traces: a docu-
         ment’s influence on the reasoning traces of a query is strongly predictive of that document’s
         influence on another query with the same mathematical task (Figure 1 and Finding 1 in Sec-
         tion 5.1). By contrast, this does not hold for factual queries. This indicates that documents
         often contribute similarly to many questions that require applying the same procedure to
         different numbers. The correlation is particularly strong for queries involving calculating a
         slope, and for that task we find procedures for a solution in code or math in the top 0.002%
         of ranked pretraining data multiple times for most queries (Finding 4 in Section 5.2).
      2. The models rely less on individual documents for reasoning questions, and the set
         of documents they rely on is less specific: we find that the magnitude of influence of
         documents per unit of query information generated by the models is usually much lower
         for reasoning questions than for factual questions (Finding 2 in Section 5.1). Further, the
         overall magnitude of influence of the set of documents is less volatile. The former indicates
         that when generating reasoning traces, the models rely less on each individual document
         per nat of query information they generate than for factual retrieval. The latter indicates
         that for a random subset of 2.5B pretraining tokens, it is more up to chance whether highly
         influential documents are part of it for factual questions than for reasoning questions. Taken
         together, this indicates the models likely generalise from a more general set of documents
         for reasoning than for factual questions, relying on each individual document less.
      3. For the factual questions, the answer often shows up as highly influential, whereas for
         reasoning questions it does not: we look at the top 500 (top 0.01%) influential documents
         for each query, and find the answer to factual questions relatively often (55% of the queries
         for the 7B, and 30% for the 35B), and almost never for reasoning questions, even when we
         do find the answers in the larger set of 2.5B tokens (Finding 3 in Section 5.2).
      4. We find evidence for code being important for mathematical reasoning: code data is
         strongly overrepresented w.r.t. the training distribution for the top portions of the positively
         and negatively influential rankings for reasoning queries (Finding 5 in Section 5.2).

Our findings suggest a generalisation strategy for reasoning that is unlike retrieval from the paramet-
ric knowledge formed during pretraining. Instead, the models learn to apply procedural knowledge
extracted from documents involving similar reasoning processes, either in the form of general de-
scriptions of procedures, or applications of similar procedures. This indicates that we may not need
to cover every possible case in the pretraining data; focusing on high-quality data demonstrating
procedures across diverse reasoning tasks could be more effective. Although our findings are lim-
ited to models learning from procedures within the same mathematical task, we observe that code
plays a significant role for all tasks we look at. This raises an interesting question: is there a type
of pretraining data — such as code — from which models, particularly larger ones, can learn about
multiple tasks? Understanding the extent of procedural generalisation can inform future pretraining
strategies and help determine where to concentrate data selection efforts.

2   R ELATED WORK
The subfield with the aim of understanding how large language models generalise is growing rapidly.
This question can be approached in different ways, and many recent works interpret weights of
smaller models on synthetic tasks to explain particular phenomena that we observe in language


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


models at scale such as grokking (Wang et al., 2024), in-context learning (Olsson et al., 2022; Singh
et al., 2024), or superposition (Elhage et al., 2022; Bricken et al., 2023). Scaling interpretability
methods to modern-sized LLMs is challenging for many reasons, of which one is computational
tractability. Nonetheless, there are a few works that apply techniques from interpretability to lan-
guage models at scale. Templeton et al. (2024) use sparse autoencoders to extract interpretable
features from Claude 3 Sonnet, and demonstrate how to use these features to control model outputs.
Grosse et al. (2023) adapt EK-FAC influence functions (George et al., 2018) to large-scale Trans-
formers, and use them to understand what kind of pretraining data influence completions of models
up to 50B parameters. The authors show, among many other things, that larger models rely on pre-
training data that are more abstractly related to the completion than smaller models. In this work,
we build on the results of Grosse et al. (2023), leaning heavily on their efforts to make influence
functions tractable at scale, but focus instead on understanding reasoning specifically.

3    C OMPUTING THE INFLUENCE OF A DOCUMENT ON A COMPLETION
Background on influence functions. Given a pretrained model θ u that parametrises a distribution
over next tokens conditioned on a prompt pθu (yc | yp ) (where yc = {y1 , . . . , ym } is a completion,
yp = {y1 , . . . , yn } a prompt, and u indicates the parameters are not necessarily trained to conver-
gence), we are interested in finding data from the pretraining set D = {xi }N   i=1 that influence the
completion. Put differently, we want to know which examples in the pretraining set ‘caused’ a com-
pletion. To this end, we use EK-FAC influence functions for large-scale transformers as proposed by
Grosse et al. (2023). The parameters θ u are typically found by performing a gradient-based iterative
algorithm on an objective function and stopping based on some criterion. We want to know the influ-
ence of a training document xj ∈ D on the parameters θ u (which can be reformulated to influence
on any continuous differentiable function of θ u using the chain-rule). We can calculate influence
exactly by removing xj from the original training set, re-training the model, and comparing the re-
sulting set of parameters (or a function thereof) to the originally trained model. This is intractable
for any interesting number of documents and parameters. Influence functions estimate this counter-
                                                                                                      1
factual by taking a Taylor expansion of the response function
                                                           P (shown here for optimal parameters):
θ ⋆ (ϵ) = arg minθ∈RD J (θ, D, ϵ) = arg minθ∈RD N1 i̸=j L(xi , θ) + ϵL(xj , θ), where L(·) is
a loss function, like the cross-entropy. The first-order Taylor approximation around ϵ = 0 of the
response function is used to reason about how the optimal parameters change if you change ϵ, which
changes the weight of the document we want to know the influence of. Using the implicit function
                                                                  ⋆
theorem, influence can then be defined as follows: Iθ⋆ (x) = dθ dϵ       = −H−1 ∇θ L(x, θ ⋆ ). Where
                                                                       ϵ=0
H = ∇2θ J (θ ⋆ , D) is the Hessian of the objective. Using the chain-rule, we can estimate influence
of a training document x = {x1 , . . . , xk } on the completion given a prompt by approximating the
following:
                                If (x) = −∇θ f (θ ⋆ )T H−1 ∇θ L(x, θ ⋆ )                                (1)

Since we are investigating models with billions of parameters D, the above Hessian is intractable,
and we estimate it using EK-FAC estimation. For a detailed derivation, the reader is referred to
Section 2 and 3 in Grosse et al. (2023). We will mention here that it involves estimating two ex-
pectations Epθ [∆θ∆θ T ] and Epθ [AAT ] where A denotes the activations of the model. To make
this estimation tractable we make a number of simplifying assumptions across all our estimations,
like independence between layers and we only take into account MLP parameters of the transformer
layers (Grosse et al., 2023). A full list of approximations can be found in Appendix A.7.
Adapting EK-FAC influence functions to our problem. Prior work has shown that EK-FAC in-
fluence functions more accuractely estimate the counterfactual given by the response function than
other types of influence functions (Grosse et al., 2023). However, besides influence on language
model completions, we are also interested in influence on the accuracy of a trained language model
when answering questions. We can only calculate the influence on a continuous differentiable func-
tion, and to the best of our knowledge, no work has shown that influence functions also estimate
effect on the underlying accuracy of text produced by next-token prediction. As a proxy for accu-
racy, we take as a continuous differentiable function the cross-entropy loss function (f in Equation
   1
     The actual response function to derive influence functions for non-converged parameters like θ u is the
Proximal Bregman response function. The reader is referred to a derivation in Grosse et al. (2023).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 1: Example from the reasoning set that          Table 2: Example from the factual set that
    involves simple two-step arithmetic.                  requires retrieving the right answer.

     Reasoning query set (arithmetic)                      Factual query set
     Prompt                                                Prompt
     Calculate the answer: (7 - 4) * 7                     What is the tallest mountain in the world
     Think step-by-step.                                   and how tall is it?
     Completion (by 7B)                                    Completion (by 7B)
     First, let’s evaluate the expression                  The tallest mountain in the world is Mount
     inside the parentheses:                               Everest, which is located in the Himalayas.
     7-4=3                                                 It is 29,029 feet tall.
     Now, let’s multiply the result by 7:
     3 * 7 = 21
     Therefore, the answer to the expression is 21.



1). In Appendix A.1 we show that the influence calculated in this way surfaces documents that have
a causal effect on the accuracy of a 7B model fine-tuned to do reasoning and reading comprehension
tasks. Namely, if we remove documents from the fine-tuning data according to their influence and
re-train the model, the accuracy drops significantly more than if we take out the same amount of
documents randomly, or the same amount of documents using gradient similarity. In parallel, we
motivate the use of EK-FAC estimations of the Hessian, by showing it significantly improves over a
method using only first-order information.
It is only reasonably possible to loop over the pretraining data sample once, and to store more than
a single query gradient in memory (which has the same memory complexity as the model itself),
Grosse et al. (2023) use singular-value decomposition (SVD). Instead of SVD, we use approximate
SVD with a probabilistic algorithm (Halko et al., 2011), which significantly speeds up the compu-
tation of the query gradients. We justify each approximation we do in Appendix A.2.1.
We approximate Equation 1 to get scores for documents from the pretraining data D that represent
the influence they have on a completion yc given a prompt yp . Given the counterfactual question
approximated by the response function, an influence score of 1 implies the log-probability of the
sequence yc is increased by 1 (Grosse et al., 2023). To compare influence scores across different
completions (and token lengths), we normalise the scores for each query by the information content
of its completion yc , measured in nats. The information content of a query is defined as I(yc ) =
− log (pθu (yc | yp )). The influence scores induce a ranking over documents from most positively
to most negatively influential, where a score can be interpreted as the increase (or decrease) in log-
probability per nat of query information. The pipeline is shown in Figure 6 in the Appendix.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Query set. We collect a query set with different types of questions, of which 40 are reasoning
questions and 40 factual questions. Note that it is only tractable to loop over the pretraining sample
we look at once, so we need to be able to store all query gradients in memory and cannot go beyond
about 80 questions. For the reasoning questions, we identify two types of mathematical reasoning
each model can do robustly with zero-shot chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022). We do this by
evaluating the models on larger sets of 100 questions for each type of reasoning, and selecting tasks
where it gets at least 80% correct. This surfaces simple two-step arithmetic for the 7B model (Table
1), calculating the slope between two numbers for both models (of which two redacted examples
are shown in Figure 1), and solving for x in linear equations for the 35B model (see Table 9 in
Appendix A.3 for prompt-completion pairs of the linear equations task). We ensure no query ever
requires outputting a fraction. To make the results between 7B and 35B more comparable, we use
the same slope questions for both models. For the 40 factual questions, we make sure the model
gets half right and half wrong, allowing us to identify failures of retrieving facts from parametric
knowledge, and we also ensure 16 of 40 overlap between models. We calculate influence over
the full completion, which includes the chain-of-thought in the reasoning case. The query sets are
provided in the supplement.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Documents set. We want to compare the influence of pretraining data on reasoning by differently
sized models (7B and 35B), so we select two models that are trained on the same data. The EK-FAC
estimation of the Hessian only needs to be done once per model, but the other terms in Equation 1
require two forward- and backward-passes through the model per document-query pair. This means
that obtaining a ranking over pretraining data for a single query has a computational complexity
similar to pretraining itself. To overcome this issue, we sample a set of documents from the pre-
training data that covers multiple examples from each batch seen during pretraining, giving a total
of 5 million documents (approximately 2.5B tokens) distributed similary as the training distribution.
We batch queries and obtain the influence scores in parallel. Each document contains 512 tokens.2
EK-FAC estimation. To estimate the Hessian for the 7B and 35B models (the expectations from
Section 3), we randomly sample 100 000 documents equally spread-out through pretraining for both
models. Details on how exactly we approximate the Hessian are in Appendix A.2. We note here that
although this aspect of the pipeline requires estimating over 300B parameters representing second-
order information, the bottleneck remains calculating document gradients.
Models. We look at two models of different sizes, 7B and 35B, which are base and supervised
fine-tuned versions of Cohere’s Command R series.3 We estimate the second order information
and calculate document gradients using the base models, and generate completions and calculate
the query gradients using the models fine-tuned with supervised instruction-tuning. The reason for
choosing this setup is that the fine-tuned models are much better at instruction following. This means
we are assuming the EK-FAC for the fine-tuning phase is the identity (Bae et al., 2024), and we are
focusing only on the influence of the pretraining data and ignoring the fine-tuning data.


5       E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

We compare the rankings (from most positively to most negatively influential) over pretraining data
produced by influence functions for reasoning questions to the rankings for factual questions (which
can only be answered by retrieving parametric knowledge). We first analyse the rankings quanti-
tatively by looking at the influence of different documents per nat of generated query information
(Section 5.1). We aim to elucidate how generalisable the information in the influential documents
is, and how many documents the model is relying on when doing reasoning compared to retrieval.
Then, in Section 5.2 we investigate how the documents relate to the queries qualitatively.

5.1       Q UANTITATIVE ANALYSIS

Finding 1: There is a significant positive correlation between the influence scores of documents
for queries with the same underlying reasoning task, indicating that these documents are relevant
for questions requiring the same procedure applied to different numbers.
If models are relying on documents that contain ‘general’ knowledge that is applicable to any query
with the same task (e.g. queries that require finding the slope between two points for many different
points), we would expect there to be a significant correlation in the influence scores for these queries.
We calculate the Pearson’s R correlation of all 5 million document scores for all query combinations
(leading to 802 correlations per model). The results can be seen in the right panel of Figure 1 for a
subsample of 10 queries per task, and all query correlations can be found in Figure 12 in Appendix
A.9.1. We find a strongly significant (p-values all below 4e − 8) positive correlation between many
queries of the same reasoning type, and a strongly significant absence of correlation (p-values all
around 4e − 3) for most (but not all) factual queries or other combinations (e.g. reasoning queries
of different types). This means that many documents have a similar influence on the same type
of reasoning. Given that each type of reasoning query requires applying the same procedure to
different numbers, the positive correlation indicates that the influence scores for reasoning queries
pick up on procedural knowledge. The correlations are strongest for the slope queries by the 35B
model, and this is also the type of reasoning the model can do most robustly compared to solving
linear equations. For the model to be able to solve linear equations with an accuracy of more than
80%, we restrict the calculations to lead to positive x, whereas for the slopes questions the answers
can be positive or negative. In Appendix A.9.1 we falsify the hypothesis that the correlations are
    2
        We choose 512 tokens because qualitatively interpreting more is hard (usually spanning multiple topics).
    3
        https://cohere.com/command


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


caused by the fact that the reasoning questions are superficially similar to each other, by using a set
of control queries that are also superficially similar but do not require any reasoning and repeating
the entire experiment. For the control queries we mostly do not observe a correlation. In Appendix
A.9.1 we highlight examples of queries with high or low correlation for different query sets, finding
that some of the correlation seems driven by formatting of reasoning steps, and most by reasoning
procedure.
Finding 2: When reasoning, the model on average relies on each individual document less per
generated nat of information than when answering factual questions, and the total magnitude of
influence is much less volatile, indicating it is generalising from a more general set of documents.
The effect is more pronounced for the larger model.
 In Figure 2 we show the total influence for different percentiles of the positive parts of the rankings.


Figure 2: The total influence per nat of query completion information for different portions of the
positive ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. The total influence per nat
is usually lower for reasoning questions than for factual questions, and the influence per document
varies more for factual questions than for reasoning questions, especially for the 35B model.

The results depict the total amount of influence contained in the top-k percentile of the positively
ranked documents: e.g. the 20th percentile contains 20% of the positive documents for a query,
and the amount of total influence shown is the sum of all document influences up to that part of
the ranking. The equivalent for the negative portions looks similar (Figure 15 in Appendix A.9.2)
and the discussion below applies similarly to the negative ranking. We observe two things for both
models. Firstly, the amount of total influence for most factual questions at any part of the ranking is
higher than for reasoning questions. Secondly, there is more variation in the influence of documents
at the same rank across different factual queries (and for a few factual queries the amount of influence
is actually lower than for the reasoning queries, seen more clearly in Figure 20 in Appendix A.9.3).
The first result means that, on average, the models rely on individual documents within our set less
for generating reasoning traces than for answering factual questions. The second result indicates that
for the factual questions the model relies on more ‘specific’ and infrequent documents: for a factual
question it is more up to chance whether relatively highly influential documents (w.r.t. influence of
documents for other factual questions) are part of the pretraining sample or not.
Influence spread. Another way to analyse the magnitude of influence is to look at the dispersion
of influence across the ranking: how much of total influence for each query is contained at the top
and bottom parts of the ranking? Similarly to what Grosse et al. (2023) report, we observe that
the top parts of the rankings over documents follow a power law characterised by a linear relation
between rank and influence per nat in log-log space (shown in Figure 20 in Appendix A.9.3). We
find that the slopes for the reasoning questions by the 35B are slightly steeper than for the factual
questions, and therefore the percentage of positive influence contained in the top portions of the
rankings for the 35B reasoning questions increases faster with rank than for the factual questions
(shown in Figure 22 in Appendix A.9.3). For the 7B, the slopes for the reasoning questions the
model gets right are on average also a bit steeper than for the factual questions, but the effect goes
away when comparing slopes for all factual vs. reasoning queries. This means that the percentage of
the total positive influence the top sequences cover is higher for the reasoning questions than for the
factual questions for the 35B model (and similarly for the bottom sequences, see Figure 15). There


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is a chance this finding is caused by noise for the 35B model and we discuss this possibility more in
Appendix A.9.3, where we note that for the reasoning query with the steepest power law, the top 1
document is qualitatively entirely unrelated to the prompt.
If we compare the result between models, we find that the difference in magnitude and volatility are
more pronounced for the 35B model across the full rankings. We look into this in Appendix A.9.2,
and find that the effect remains even if we only look at queries that are the same for both models,
which points to higher data efficiency for the larger model.

5.2   Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS

We perform three qualitative analyses on the top portions of the rankings for each query; we search
for the answer, we characterise the documents’ relation to the reasoning queries, and we investigate
what source datasets they are from (for both the top and bottom parts of the ranking, e.g. code,
Wikipedia, etc). To filter some of the noise, we divide the influence scores by the document gradient
norm and re-rank them, which has empirically been found to help (Choe et al., 2024).
Finding 3: The answer to the factual questions shows up relatively often in the top influ-
ential documents for the factual questions, and almost never for the reasoning questions.
To find the answer to the questions in the queries in
the top documents manually, we construct keywords
for each query that should be in the document if the
answer is there. For example, for the factual query in
Table 2, the keywords are “tallest”, “highest”, “Mount
Everest”, “29029”, “8848”. For the reasoning queries,
we construct many more keywords per query, but some
examples for the example in Table 2 are 7 − 4, 3, 21,
3∗7, as well as replacing the operations with words like
‘minus’ and ‘times’, and different ways of represent-
ing the content in this query. For details on which key- Figure 3: We search for the answer in the
words we use for each query, see Appendix A.4. We top 500 (top 0.01%) documents, and find
determine the occurrence of each of these keywords in- it relatively frequently for the factual ques-
dependently in the top 100 documents for each query tions. For the reasoning questions, we find
(meaning even if just the keyword ‘7’ is present it the answer twice for the 7B, and never for
would be a hit), resulting in many false-positives. We the 35B. Both those times, the answers to
manually look over the hits to find the answer. On top the steps occur in separate documents.
of that, we craft a prompt for Command R+ (a more
capable 100B model) to find the answer in a query-
document pair, and use it to find the answer in the top 500 documents for each query independent of
keyword overlap (the prompt is given in Appendix A.5). Then, we manually look over the hits and
keep track of documents that have the answer to a query. We verify that Command R+ finds all, and
more, of the answers we have identified manually. We look for the full answer in a single document.
For the reasoning queries, we also count partial answers in separate documents if they combine to
the full answer. For example, if one document contains 7 − 4 = 3, and another 3 ∗ 7 = 21, we
consider that an answer. Finally, we apply the keyword overlap search combined with prompting
Command R+ to a subset of the broader 2.5B pretraining tokens to verify that the answer to the
questions are in the entire set even if they do not show up in the top 500 documents for queries.
The results are shown in Figure 3. For the 7B model, we find the answer in the top 500 documents
for 55% of the factual queries, compared to 7.4% of the reasoning queries. For the 35B model,
the answer to the factual queries shows up in the top influential documents 30% of the time, and
never for the reasoning set. We expect the answer shows up less frequently for the 35B model
simply because the factual questions are much more ‘niche’. For example, one of the questions the
model gets correct is “In which year did the Beinecke Library open?”. Moreover, in certain cases,
the answer shows up multiple times in the top 500 documents. If we count all these separately, as
opposed to a binary ‘yes’ or ‘no’ per query on which the results in Figure 3 are based, answers to
questions show up 30 times for the factual questions in the 7B rankings, and twice for the reasoning
questions. For the 35B, the same result is 15 times for the factual questions, and never for the
reasoning questions. Interestingly, the answer to the factual questions often shows up in different
languages, like Spanish or Portuguese. We give two examples in Appendix A.8.2. To falsify the


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


hypothesis that the answers to reasoning questions are not showing up because they are not present
in the set of 5M documents, we repeat the above keyword search over a random subset of the 5M
documents. We identify answers to reasoning steps in documents that do not show up in the top
500 documents for 13 of 20 arithmetic queries and a full answer for 1 of 20, and expect more to be
there that elude the keyword search. For the slopes and linear equation queries, we find answers to 3
reasoning steps which do not show up in the top 0.01%. In Appendix A.8.1 we show some of these
documents and their ranks.
Finding 4: We find that influential documents for the reasoning queries are often doing a similar
form of step-by-step reasoning, e.g. also arithmetic. Further, we find that the influential docu-
ments often implement a solution to reasoning questions in code or general math.
For the slope queries (of which we have 20 which are the same for both models), many different
documents surface as highly influential that show how to calculate the slope between two points in
code or math. For the 7B model, documents that present procedural knowledge on how to calculate
the slope in either code or math show up in the top 100 documents for 16/20 queries (38 times), and
for the 35B model they show up for all queries (51 times). All together, we manually find 7 unique
documents that implement the slope in code in the top 100 documents, and 13 that present equations
for calculating the slope. The 7B model relies on 18 of these documents for its completions (mean-
ing 18 different ones appear in the top 100 documents for all queries), and the 35B on 8. An example
of a highly influential document implementing the solution in JavaScript (left) and in maths (right):

    Positively influential code                         Positively influential math
    function eqOfLine(x1, y1, x2, y2) {                 If    a   straight     line    passing      through      the points
      if (x1 === x2) {                                  P (x1 , y1 ), Q(x2 , y2 ) is making an angle θ with the
        // Handle a vertical line                       positive X-axis, then the slope of the straight line is:
        return ‘x = ${x1}‘;
                                                            y +y
      } else {                                          (A) x2 +x1
                                                              2     1
        // Calculate the slope                          (B) θ
        const m = (y2 - y1) / (x2 - x1);                    y −y
        const b = y1 - m * x1;                          (C) x2 −x1
                                                              2     1
        // Return y = mx + b                            (D) sin θ
        return ‘y = ${m}x + ${b}‘;
      }                                                 Solution:
    }                                                   Correct answer: (C)


We prompt Command R+ to further characterise the top 500 documents for each query by choosing
from a set of provided keywords, and find that often the documents are doing similar arithmetic on
other numbers (e.g. much larger or smaller), doing similar arithmetic on similar numbers (for the
slope questions), or similar algebraic operations on similar numbers (for solving linear equations).
We present the detailed results and prompt for this analysis in Appendix A.8.3.
Finding 5: For factual queries, the most influential data sources include Wikipedia and trivia,
while for reasoning, key sources consist of maths, StackExchange, ArXiv, and code.
We look at the type of source datasets that represent the most influential documents. Specif-
ically, we count the source datasets of the top and bottom k documents with k ∈
{50, 500, 5000, 50000, 500000}, and compare the count to the pretraining distribution. We present
the details in Appendix A.8.4, but mention here that code data is highly influential for reasoning.
StackExchange as a source has ten times more influential data in the top portions of the rankings than
expected if the influential data was randomly sampled from the pretraining distribution. Other code
sources are twice as influential as expected when drawing randomly from the pretraining distribution
for k = 50 up to k = 50000. Similar patterns hold for the bottom portions of the rankings.


6   D ISCUSSION , L IMITATIONS , AND F UTURE W ORK

In this work, we investigate what kind of generalisation strategy two LLMs (7B and 35B respec-
tively) employ when reasoning, and contrast it to the strategy used for a task that requires retrieving
factual parametric knowledge. By creating rankings for 200 such questions over 5 million pretrain-
ing documents based on their influence on the likelihood of the completions, we conclude that the
generalisation strategy for reasoning is unlike retrieval. More often than not, even if the answer is
part of the set of pretraining documents we look at, it does not show up as highly influential as the


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


answers to factual questions do. We find that instead, the positively influential documents often con-
tain procedural knowledge on how to get to a solution. Further, the models rely less on individual
documents when reasoning than when answering factual questions, and the set of documents they
rely on is more general. Finally, documents often have a similar influence on reasoning queries that
require applying the same procedure to different numbers. These findings can inform pretraining
data selection for more robust reasoning: we likely do not need to cover every case in pretraining
but can rather focus on data describing and applying procedures to diverse reasoning problems.
We find that the distribution of influence is less spread out for reasoning than for factual questions,
characterised by steeper power laws. The distribution of influence over documents tells us something
about the type of generalisation strategy the model is using; the more documents that contribute to
each nat of query information (i.e. the more spread out the total influence), the more documents the
model is relying on to produce the completion. One would perhaps expect a steeper power law for
factual questions than for reasoning (meaning more of the total positive influence contained at the
top parts of the ranking), but our results show evidence for the opposite. Perhaps a model needs to
generalise from a broader set of documents for factual retrieval than for reasoning because it needs
to see the same information more often to memorise it. This is supported by the finding that for
factual questions the answer often shows up multiple times in the top 0.01% most influential data.
There are important limitations to our approach, most notably that we do not calculate influence
on the entire training set, which is intractable. An alternative explanation of our results is then
the opposite conclusion: the model is relying on data for reasoning that are so infrequent that a
random sample of 2.5B tokens does not surface relatively highly influential samples for any of the
60 unique reasoning queries. This would result in the conclusion that LLMs rely on sparse and
infrequent documents for reasoning. That means we are effectively looking at a set of relatively
uninfluential documents for reasoning, and that perhaps the answers to reasoning traces would be
highly influential when looking at the entire pretraining data. We would argue that this is the more
unlikely explanation for three reasons: (1) the qualitative analysis shows that the influential data for
the reasoning questions are intuitively highly relevant, and that the answers to many reasoning traces
are part of the 2.5B tokens, they are just not highly influential for reasoning, (2) the correlation of
influence scores for the different reasoning tasks is highly significant, and (3) we confirm that these
results do not hold for control queries that look similar to the reasoning queries superficially, but
do not require step-by-step reasoning. Moreover, it seems unlikely that the model is learning to do
retrieval from such infrequent data for one of the simplest forms of mathematical reasoning, namely
subtraction and multiplication on small numbers. Taken together we argue the results indicate a
generalisation strategy that relies on procedural knowledge. Regardless, the nature of interpretability
research such as the work presented here is that all we can do is provide evidence, and not proof.
Another limitation is that we do not look at the supervised fine-tuning stage. The reason we only
look at the pretraining data is because the fine-tuning stage is targeted at making the models more
aligned and ‘instructable’, and prior work has shown that SFT serves primarily to enhance existing
model capabilities (Jain et al., 2024; Kotha et al., 2024; Prakash et al., 2024). Nonetheless, an
interesting direction for future work is applying the same method used here to the fine-tuning data.
This work spurs further avenues for future work. Firstly, as previously discussed, identifying data
types that are similarly influential across reasoning types could provide additional insight into data
selection techniques for improved reasoning. Relatedly, what properties of code data makes it influ-
ential for reasoning? What kind is positively influential, and what kind negatively? Further, since we
only take into account the feed-forward layers and treat the attention as fixed, an interesting avenue
for future work would be to investigate how the relatively low magnitude of influence of pretraining
data on feed-forward parameters for reasoning traces interacts with attention, connecting to a finding
from literature that certain forms of reasoning happen in the attention heads (Olsson et al., 2022).
Finally, in this work we investigate mathematical reasoning. Future work should verify whether
similar results hold for other types of reasoning, such as inductive reasoning.
With this work, we do not claim to say contamination is not an issue, or that LLM reasoning is
not brittle and reliant on pretraining statistics. What we demonstrate is that, in principle, it appears
possible for LLMs to produce reasoning traces using a generalisation strategy that combines infor-
mation from procedurally related documents, as opposed to doing a form of retrieval. This is not
to say that there are no cases of LLM reasoning where the model is in fact doing retrieval, on the
contrary, models can be overfit to contaminated data if it appears often enough in the training data.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Although this work is based on proprietary models and pretraining data, we make the following
efforts for reproducibility. We add pretraining data with answers to factual and reasoning questions
to the supplement, as well as data in which procedures for calculating the slope have been identified.
For one of the models we use (the 35B model), the final-stage model (further trained after SFT)
is publicly available on HuggingFace.4 We provide all queries, completions, and keywords in the
supplemental material. Additionally, we verify that the influence scores generated with our internal
codebase correlate with a Pearson’s R of more than 0.99 with a public implementation of EK-FAC
influence functions (see Appendix A.2.2). Further, we provide details on hyperparameters for every
experiment we have done at the relevant sections, as well as the prompts used to find answers to the
reasoning questions and characterise the relationship between the query-document pairs (Appendix
A.5 and A.6 respectively).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We’d like to thank Andrew Lampinen, Stephanie Chan, Akbir Khan, and Philipp Jettkant for fruit-
ful discussions about the work presented here. This work was supported by the EPSRC Grant
EP/S021566/1 and UCL International Scholar Award for Doctoral Training Centres.

R EFERENCES
Viraat Aryabumi, Yixuan Su, Raymond Ma, Adrien Morisot, Ivan Zhang, Acyr Locatelli, Marzieh
  Fadaee, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. To code, or not to code? exploring impact of code in
  pre-training, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10914.
Juhan Bae, Wu Lin, Jonathan Lorraine, and Roger Grosse. Training data attribution via approximate
  unrolled differentiation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12186.
Elnaz Barshan, Marc-Etienne Brunet, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Relatif: Identifying ex-
  planatory training samples via relative influence. In Silvia Chiappa and Roberto Calandra (eds.),
  Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1899–1909. PMLR, 26–28 Aug
  2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/barshan20a.html.
Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Con-
  erly, Nick Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu,
  Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex
  Tamkin, Karina Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter,
  Tom Henighan, and Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language
  models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. https://transformer-
  circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Sang Keun Choe, Hwijeen Ahn, Juhan Bae, Kewen Zhao, Minsoo Kang, Youngseog Chung, Adithya
  Pratapa, Willie Neiswanger, Emma Strubell, Teruko Mitamura, Jeff Schneider, Eduard Hovy,
  Roger Grosse, and Eric Xing. What is your data worth to gpt? llm-scale data valuation with
  influence functions, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.13954.
   4
       https://huggingface.co/CohereForAI/c4ai-command-r-v01


                                                    11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.
Dask Development Team. Dask: Library for dynamic task scheduling, 2016. URL http://
  dask.pydata.org.
Chunyuan Deng, Yilun Zhao, Xiangru Tang, Mark Gerstein, and Arman Cohan. Benchmark
  probing: Investigating data leakage in large language models. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop
  on Backdoors in Deep Learning - The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=a34bgvner1.
Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner.
  DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In
  Proc. of NAACL, 2019.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna
  Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse,
  Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah.
  Toy models of superposition. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022. https://transformer-
  circuits.pub/2022/toy model/index.html.
Thomas George, César Laurent, Xavier Bouthillier, Nicolas Ballas, and Pascal Vincent. Fast
  approximate natural gradient descent in a kronecker factored eigenbasis. In S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/
  file/48000647b315f6f00f913caa757a70b3-Paper.pdf.
Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, Evan Hubinger, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen,
  Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, and Samuel R. Bowman. Studying large lan-
  guage model generalization with influence functions, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2308.03296.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, Adil Salim, Shital
  Shah, Harkirat Singh Behl, Xin Wang, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Adam Tauman Kalai,
  Yin Tat Lee, and Yuanzhi Li. Textbooks are all you need, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2306.11644.
N. Halko, P. G. Martinsson, and J. A. Tropp. Finding structure with randomness: Probabilistic
  algorithms for constructing approximate matrix decompositions. SIAM Review, 53(2):217–288,
  2011. doi: 10.1137/090771806. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/090771806.
Frank R. Hampel. The influence curve and its role in robust estimation. Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 69(346):383–393, 1974. doi: 10.1080/01621459.1974.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  10482962. URL https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01621459.
  1974.10482962.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Thomas
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katherine Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Au-
  relia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karén Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Oriol Vinyals, Jack Rae, and Lau-
  rent Sifre. An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training. In
  S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 30016–30030. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/c1e2faff6f588870935f114ebe04a3e5-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Samyak Jain, Robert Kirk, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P. Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, Tim
  Rocktäschel, Edward Grefenstette, and David Krueger. Mechanistically analyzing the effects of
  fine-tuning on procedurally defined tasks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=A0HKeKl4Nl.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70, ICML’17,
  pp. 1885–1894. JMLR.org, 2017.
Suhas Kotha, Jacob Mitchell Springer, and Aditi Raghunathan. Understanding catastrophic forget-
  ting in language models via implicit inference. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VrHiF2hsrm.
Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang, and Eduard Hovy. RACE: Large-scale ReAding
  comprehension dataset from examinations. In Martha Palmer, Rebecca Hwa, and Sebastian Riedel
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
  ing, pp. 785–794, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1082. URL https://aclanthology.org/D17-1082.
Kyle Mahowald, Anna Ivanova, Idan Blank, Nancy Kanwisher, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Evelina
  Fedorenko. Dissociating language and thought in large language models. Trends in Cognitive
  Sciences, 28, 03 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2024.01.011.
R. Thomas McCoy, Shunyu Yao, Dan Friedman, Matthew Hardy, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Embers
  of autoregression: Understanding large language models through the problem they are trained to
  solve, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.13638.
Sean McLeish, Arpit Bansal, Alex Stein, Neel Jain, John Kirchenbauer, Brian R. Bartoldson, Bhavya
  Kailkhura, Abhinav Bhatele, Jonas Geiping, Avi Schwarzschild, and Tom Goldstein. Transform-
  ers can do arithmetic with the right embeddings, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2405.17399.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
  models, 2016.
Melanie Mitchell and David C. Krakauer. The debate over understanding in ai’s large language
 models. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(13):e2215907120, 2023. doi:
 10.1073/pnas.2215907120. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
 2215907120.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish,
  and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html.
Nikhil Prakash, Tamar Rott Shaham, Tal Haklay, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Fine-tuning
  enhances existing mechanisms: A case study on entity tracking. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=8sKcAWOf2D.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and
  H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 19920–19930.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2020/file/e6385d39ec9394f2f3a354d9d2b88eec-Paper.pdf.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining
  term frequencies on few-shot numerical reasoning. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and
  Yue Zhang (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp.
  840–854, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.59. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.findings-emnlp.59.
Aaditya K Singh, Ted Moskovitz, Felix Hill, Stephanie C.Y. Chan, and Andrew M Saxe. What needs
  to go right for an induction head? a mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits and their
  formation. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=O8rrXl71D5.
Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen,
  Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L
  Turner, Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers,
  Edward Rees, Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, Shan Carter, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan.
  Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Trans-
  former Circuits Thread, 2024. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/
  scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.
Tomer Ullman. Large language models fail on trivial alterations to theory-of-mind tasks, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.08399.
Boshi Wang, Xiang Yue, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. Grokked transformers are implicit reasoners: A
  mechanistic journey to the edge of generalization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2405.15071.
Taylor Webb, Keith Holyoak, and Hongjing Lu. Emergent analogical reasoning in large language
  models. Nature Human Behaviour, 7:1–16, 07 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41562-023-01659-w.

                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Taylor Webb, Keith J. Holyoak, and Hongjing Lu. Evidence from counterfactual tasks supports
  emergent analogical reasoning in large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2404.13070.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J.
Zhaofeng Wu, Linlu Qiu, Alexis Ross, Ekin Akyürek, Boyuan Chen, Bailin Wang, Najoung Kim,
  Jacob Andreas, and Yoon Kim. Reasoning or reciting? exploring the capabilities and limita-
  tions of language models through counterfactual tasks. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven
  Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 1819–1862, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.102. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  naacl-long.102.
Shuo Yang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Rethinking
  benchmark and contamination for language models with rephrased samples, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2311.04850.


A    A PPENDIX
Below we outline the contents of the appendix.
EK-FAC influence functions. In Appendix A.1 we discuss the counterfactual re-training experi-
ments that motivate our use of EK-FAC influence functions for estimating the effect of pretraining
data on the accuracy of downstream behaviour. We describe in more detail how we use influence
functions at scale in Appendix A.2, documenting how we estimate the Hessian, how we store many
query gradients in memory (each having the same memory complexity as the entire model), and
how we sample from the pretraining distribution.
Query sets examples. Then, in Appendix A.3, we show examples of the reasoning sets that we did
not show examples for in the main body of this manuscript.
Finding query answers in documents and characterising document-query relations. In
Appendix A.4 we discuss how we create keywords for each query in order to find the answer in the
top documents, and in the sections directly after that, Appendix A.5 and A.6, we give the prompts
we used to allow Command R+ to search for answers in the top 500 documents for each query, as
well as characterise their relationship.
Limitations. In Appendix A.7 we discuss limitations specific to influence functions.
Additional qualitative results. In Appendix A.8 we provide additional qualitative results.
Answer finding. We show examples of answer documents in Appendix A.8.1.
Cross-lingual transfer. We give some examples of cross-lingual transfer in Appendix A.8.2.
Characterise query-document relation. We give detailed results on the characterisation of the
relationship between queries and the top 500 documents in Appendix A.8.3.
Source-dataset analysis. We analyse which datasets the influential data comes from in Appendix
A.8.4.
Content analysis of relevant documents. We classify data from the source dataset code for whether
it actually contains code in Appendix A.8.5.
Additional quantitative results. In Appendix A.9 we provide additional quantitative results.
Correlation analysis. Further results for the correlation analysis of influence scores for documents
for different queries in Appendix A.9.1.
Magnitude of influence. Further results for the magnitude of influence in Appendix A.9.2.
Spread of influence. Further results for the spread of influence over the rankings in Appendix A.9.3.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.1     C OUNTERFACTUAL RE - TRAINING EXPERIMENTS WITH I NFLUENCE F UNCTIONS

We use EK-FAC influence functions to approximate the counterfactual question: which documents
from pretraining have a causal effect on the completions of a trained model. However, we are also
interested in the causal effect on the accuracy of the completions. In this section, we aim to motivate
two aspects of this choice; the fact that influence functions are designed to estimate the effect on
continuous differentiable functions, like the log-likelihood, and not on the accuracy. Secondly, we
motivate the need for estimating the second-order information of the pretraining objective using
EK-FAC, which is very computationally expensive. We present four different experiments in this
section, which show that indeed the influence of documents as determined by influence functions
also estimate the effect on downstream task accuracy, as well as the benefits from estimating second
order information over simply using first-order gradient information.
The pipeline for each of these experiments is similar; we take a pretrained model, we fine-tune it on
some dataset, and evaluate it on 50 validation examples with a metric (perplexity or accuracy). We
then use the fine-tuned weights to calculate the influence of the documents in the dataset used for
fine-tuning on the set of 50 validation questions with two methods: EK-FAC influence functions and
TracIn (Pruthi et al., 2020). Subsequently, we use those two methods to remove the k most positively
influential documents from the fine-tuning dataset, as well as randomly selecting k documents as a
baseline, and fine-tune the original pretrained model five times (with different seeds) on each new
fine-tuning dataset created (for different values for k). We then calculate the perplexity or accuracy
on the validation questions used to calculate the influence, and see how it changed. The more it
changed, the more the documents indeed influence the relevant metric (i.e. perplexity or accuracy).
Note that for n different values for k, this requires fine-tuning 3 ∗ 5 ∗ n models: five times for each
of the three methods of removing documents from the training set.
We start by motivating the use of EK-FAC influence functions over simple similarity information
between document and query gradients. In our setup, where we only have access to the final check-
point of pretraining, a dot-product between the query and document gradient effectively boils down
to a method for estimating influence of documents on queries called TracIn (Pruthi et al., 2020).
With access to multiple checkpoints, TracIn uses gradient information from all of them, account-
ing for the learning rate used at that point in training. However, we only use the final checkpoint
and hence taking into account learning rate only changes scores by a constant. We take GPT-2-
small (124M) from HuggingFace,5 and fine-tune it for three epochs with next-word prediction on
Wikitext-2 (Merity et al., 2016). We use Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with default param-
eters (b1 0.9, b2 0.999, eps 1e-8, additive weight decay 0.01). The results can be found in Figure
4 and Table 3, showing that removing documents using EK-FAC influence functions has a signifi-
cantly larger effect on downstream perplexity for all values of k. We do the exact same experiment
but instead remove the most negatively influential documents, and see that instead the perplexity
decreases significantly more for EK-FAC influence functions (Figure 4 and Table 4).

                                   Table 3: Wikitext remove top influential

       k→          50              100              150              200              250              300
 Random      22.09 ± 0.02     22.12 ± 0.02     22.10 ± 0.02     22.20 ± 0.06     22.19 ± 0.05     22.15 ± 0.05
 TracIn      22.16 ± 0.02⋆⋆   22.22 ± 0.02⋆⋆   22.25 ± 0.01⋆⋆   22.35 ± 0.03⋆⋆   22.42 ± 0.01⋆⋆   22.45 ± 0.02⋆⋆
 IF (ours)   22.49 ± 0.02⋆⋆   22.66 ± 0.02⋆⋆   22.73 ± 0.02⋆⋆   22.88 ± 0.01⋆⋆   22.97 ± 0.02⋆⋆   23.05 ± 0.05⋆⋆


                                Table 4: Wikitext remove bottom influential

       k→          50              100              150              200              250              300
 Random      27.40 ± 0.08     26.24 ± 0.10     25.62 ± 0.15     25.22 ± 0.10     25.04 ± 0.12     24.85 ± 0.10
 TracIn      26.73 ± 0.04⋆⋆   25.48 ± 0.05⋆⋆   24.86 ± 0.02⋆⋆   24.36 ± 0.04⋆⋆   24.16 ± 0.05⋆⋆   23.94 ± 0.03⋆⋆
 IF (ours)   25.96 ± 0.04⋆⋆   24.78 ± 0.05⋆⋆   23.95 ± 0.03⋆⋆   23.52 ± 0.03⋆⋆   23.46 ± 0.03⋆⋆   23.32 ± 0.04⋆⋆


Next, we turn to motivating the use of EK-FAC influence functions in estimating the effect of docu-
ments on downstream accuracy of model generations. To this end, we look at two different datasets:
   5
       https://huggingface.co/


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        (a)                                                    (b)

Figure 4: (a) Counterfactual retraining experiments on Wikitext-2. We finetuned GPT-2 (124M)
on Wikitext-2 and use three different methods to remove training examples from the training set:
randomly, TracIn, and Influence Functions (IF). For each number of samples removed we finetune
the base model five times with different training data ordering, the variance over these runs is repre-
sented by the error bars. Each point on the plot is the average perplexity achieved by the five models
after fine-tuning on the augmented dataset. We find that influence functions can find examples that
impact the perplexity significantly more than baselines. (b) We repeat the same experiment as in (a),
but retain top influential queries instead (removing most negatively influential).


DROP (Dua et al., 2019) and RACE (Lai et al., 2017). DROP is a reading comprehension dataset re-
quiring different skills like subtraction, addition, coreference resolution, counting, and other skills.
The model needs to generate an answer that often consists of one or a few words. We allow the
fine-tuned models to generate answers to the questions freely, and evaluate based on exact match. In
this experiment, we use a 7B model. We randomly select a subset of 8000 examples for fine-tuning,
and use the procedure described above to perform counterfactual experiments. We use Adam op-
timizer again, with the same hyperparameters as for the above experiment: b1 0.9, b2 0.999, eps
1e-8, additive weight decay 0.01, but only train for one epoch. The results can be found in the left
panel of Figure 5 as well as in Table 5. We find that EK-FAC influence functions are succesful in
selecting data points that impact downstream accuracy, much more so than randomly removing the
same amount of training data. For most k (all but k = 1000), EK-FAC influence functions also have
a significantly stronger effect on accuracy than TracIn, but the difference is less large. We apply the
exact same procedure to the RACE dataset, except now we keep 10k examples (empirically found
to lead to the least overfitting when fine-tuning). Further, RACE is a multiple-choice dataset, so we
allow the model to generate a single token indicating the choice, and calculate the accuracy. The
results can be seen in Figure 5 and Table 6. Again, the finding is similar; EK-FAC influence func-
tions surface documents that have a stronger effect on accuracy than TracIn for all but one value
of k, and for all values of k than randomly removing documents. There is a large variance in the
results for all methods though, which we attribute to the fact that the model sometimes seems to
overfit to the fine-tuning data. Further, the reason why the difference between TracIn and EK-FAC
influence functions is much larger in the perplexity experiments than in the accuracy experiments
could be attributed to the fact that we only fine-tune for one epoch in the accuracy experiments (as
more cause overfitting). EK-FAC influence functions differ from TracIn in that they estimate second
order information, which becomes more important with more training steps. An interesting avenue
for future work is to do counterfactual re-training experiments like these on a subset of pretraining
data for a 7B model, but this is incredibly computationally expensive.
Although the results of the experiments in this section are an encouraging sign for using EK-FAC
influence functions in estimating causal effect of data on accuracy, it is important to note that they are
limited in several ways. Accuracy is a discrete metric and it is a prior unclear how many documents
need to be removed to flip its value. However, the influence functions we use estimate effect of
removing a single document, and removing multiple documents can have additional effects that are
unaccounted for. This makes removing multiple documents a cruder way to empirically show impact
of influence functions on accuracy, but at the same time it is unavoidable. Therefore, any significant


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Counterfactual re-training accuracies on DROP (free generation of answers). We use three
different methods (random, TracIn, influence functions) to remove k datapoints, and re-train a model
on the resulting dataset. Each number is the mean over five re-training runs with different data
ordering. ⋆ indicates significantly lower than random with a p-value below 0.1 and ⋆⋆ with a p-
value below 0.05. The underlined means are the lowest.

                 k→             500                1000                   1500               2000
            Random        0.61 ± 0.05        0.60 ± 0.03             0.56 ± 0.05        0.57 ± 0.06
            TracIn        0.55 ± 0.03⋆       0.49 ± 0.02⋆⋆           0.44 ± 0.04⋆⋆      0.43 ± 0.06⋆⋆
            IF (ours)     0.51 ± 0.03⋆⋆      0.50 ± 0.04⋆⋆           0.40 ± 0.05⋆⋆      0.38 ± 0.05⋆⋆


(a) Counterfactual retraining experiments on read-             (b) Counterfactual retraining experiments on
ing comprehension questions. We finetuned Cohere               multiple-choice reasoning data. We finetuned Cohere
Command 2 (7B) on a subset of the DROP training                Command 2 (7B) on a subset of the RACE training
set (8k examples) and use three different methods to           set (10k examples) and use three different methods
remove training examples from the training set: ran-           to remove training examples from the training set:
domly, TracIn, and Influence Functions (IF). For each          randomly, TracIn, and Influence Functions (IF). For
number of samples removed we finetune the base                 each number of samples removed we finetune the
model five times with different training data order-           base model five times with different training data
ing, the variance over these runs is represented by the        ordering, the variance over these runs is represented
error bars. Each point in the plot is the average accu-        by the error bars. Each point in the plot is the
racy achieved by the five models after fine-tuning on          average accuracy achieved by the five models after
the augmented dataset. We find that influence func-            fine-tuning on the augmented dataset. We find that
tions can find examples that impact the accuracy sig-          influence functions can find examples that impact the
nificantly more than baselines, although only slightly         accuracy significantly more than baselines, although
more than TracIn.                                              there is some variance in the results.

Figure 5: Counterfactual retraining experiments on reading comprehension benchmark DROP (a)
and the multiple-choice reasoning dataset RACE (b).


causal effect on accuracy over other methods is a good signal, but the absence of a significant effect
does not necessarily mean EK-FAC influence functions do not properly do what they are designed
to do.


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Counterfactual re-training accuracies on RACE (multiple-choice). We use three different
methods (random, TracIn, influence functions) to remove k datapoints, and re-train a model on the
resulting dataset. Each number is the mean over five re-training runs with different data ordering.
⋆ indicates significantly lower than random with a p-value below 0.1 and ⋆⋆ with a p-value below
0.05. The underlined means are the lowest.

                k→         1000             1500             2000             2500
           Random      0.85 ± 0.04     0.83 ± 0.03      0.82 ± 0.04       0.81 ± 0.04
           TracIn      0.84 ± 0.01     0.78 ± 0.03⋆⋆    0.80 ± 0.03       0.79 ± 0.04
           IF (ours)   0.80 ± 0.04⋆    0.76 ± 0.05⋆⋆    0.74 ± 0.04⋆⋆     0.74 ± 0.05⋆


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2     EK-FAC I NFLUENCE F UNCTIONS

The code we use for EK-FAC influence functions at scale is a part of larger internal infrastructure,
and hence cannot be released publicly. However, we base our code on the public GitHub repository
https://github.com/pomonam/kronfluence. We implement estimation of the Hessian
in the same way as in that codebase, except for a few changes to make it tractable, which we discuss
in more detail below. Further, we compare the results produced by our implementation with the
results using the public implementation. We do this by fine-tuning GPT-2 (124M) on Wikitext-2
using internal infrastructure, and calculating influence scores with both code bases. We find that
the results correlate very strongly (with a Pearson’s R of more than 0.99, see A.2.2 below for more
details). Here, we provide details of the design choices and hyperparameters used in our implementa-
tion, as well as the additional approximations to make EK-FAC estimation and influence calculation
tractable at scale.
Query-batching and approximation As mentioned in the main text, we approximate query gradi-
ents using approximate SVD (Halko et al., 2011). We use the default parameters for this algorithm,
which can be found in the Dask documentation (Dask Development Team, 2016).
Sampling from the Pretraining Data. It is intractable to calculate influence for the entire pretrain-
ing data, so we sample a set of 5 million documents. To this end, we loop over the training data as
seen by the models in order, and randomly sample 6 examples from each batch. This ensures that
the pretraining sample we use is both similar to the pretraining distribution in terms of what kind of
data the model sees, as well as when it has encountered the data during pretraining.
Estimating EK-FAC. To estimate the EK-FAC matrices, we sample 100 000 documents from pre-
training in the same manner as described above. We use the same samples to estimate the EK-FAC
for the 7B as for the 35B. For both models, we use a damping factor of 0.1 (see Grosse et al. (2023)
for details on what the damping factor is). Further, part of estimating the EK-FAC is an eigende-
composition on the EK-FAC matrices. We use the same approximation as empirically motivated
in (Grosse et al., 2023), namely block-diagonal approximation. For the 7B, we use 2 blocks, and
for the 35B, we use 4. The block-diagonal approximation is not part of the public codebase, but
simply amounts to dividing the matrices in n blocks (where n is 2 and 4 in our case), zero-ing out
the remaining entries, and taking the eigendecomposition of each block individually. After, these
blocks are patched back together again into the original size matrix, which will be further processed
as in the public codebase.

A.2.1    J USTIFYING A PPROXIMATIONS
In this section, we justify the additional approximations we do on top of those mentioned in Grosse
et al. (2023) by reporting the correlation with the full implementation for a smaller model (124M
parameters). Applying EK-FAC influence functions to models with billions of parameters requires
estimating a multiple of the model parameters. E.g., for the 7B model we estimate around 70B
EK-FAC parameters, and for the 35B model we estimate around 320B parameters. Further, to
calculate the influence scores for a set of 5 million documents we have to calculate the gradient
for 100 queries × 5 million documents, each of which has the same size as all feed-forward layers
in the model itself. We can only afford to loop over the 5 million documents and calculate their
gradients once, so we need to batch the query gradients in memory. This is impossible for the
full gradients and we use SVD to store low-rank approximations instead, like in Grosse et al. (2023).

Details on the experiment. To compare results of using EK-FAC influence functions with different
approximations, we use the same fine-tuned model from Section A.1 to calculate influence scores for
the 4656 training examples (i.e. documents) on the first 32 validation examples (i.e. queries) of the
Wikitext-2 dataset. We repeat this with different types of approximations applied; full SVD on the
query gradients, approximate SVD (Dask Development Team, 2016) on the query gradients, and a
block-diagonal approximation of the EK-FAC matrices before the eigendecomposition (described in
Appendix A of Grosse et al. (2023)) with 2 and 4 blocks. For each level of approximation applied,
this gives us 32 vectors with 4656 scores (one for each query-document pair), and we compare
these to the full implementation without SVD and block diagonal approximations using Pearson’s R
correlation. The correlations reported are the average over all 32 queries, but in the supplement we
provide the correlations for each query for all experiments done below.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In Table 7 we report the correlations of increasingly more approximations w.r.t. a full implementa-
tion. Note that the full implementation also uses approximations, but those are all justified in Grosse
et al. (2023). Here, for completeness, we additionally justify the approximations we use that are
different, namely approximate SVD instead of full SVD, and a block-diagonal approximation with
4 blocks instead of 2. From Table 7, we can see that the approximate SVD algorithm has a neglible
effect on the scores, whereas the block-diagonal approximation has a small effect on the scores.

Approximations                                                                             Pearson R
SVD                                                                                       0.96 ± 0.01
Approximate SVD                                                                           0.96 ± 0.01
Approximate SVD + block diagonal EK-FAC (2 blocks)                                        0.95 ± 0.00
Approximate SVD + block diagonal EK-FAC (4 blocks)                                        0.93 ± 0.00

Table 7: Score correlations of using increasingly more approximations with a full implementation.


A.2.2    F ULL IMPLEMENTATION
We also compare the full implementation scores of our own influence functions implementation
with the scores calculated for the same model and dataset with the public implementation at
https://github.com/pomonam/kronfluence, and confirm the average score correlation
between queries is 0.993 (± 0.003). We add a direct score comparison of both methods for the top
3 documents for each of the 32 queries to the supplemental material. Specifically, for each query we
log the top 3 documents as determined by our internal implementation as well as the external imple-
mentation, showing that they are almost always the same documents, and logging the score given to
that document by each implementation (the supplemental file also contains the score correlation for
each query separately). The average number of documents that appear in both top 50’s determined
by the internal and external implementation is 46.7. The reason for using an internal implementa-
tion nonetheless is that the public implementation is not optimised for usage on large-scale models,
and cannot be used for models above about 1B parameters. We used the internal pretraining library
for implementing influence functions, because part of the infrastructure used for pretraining large
models could be re-used.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: The pipeline for creating rankings of the most influential pretraining documents for a
question-completion pair (query) using influence functions. The documents at the top of the ranking
influence the likelihood of the completion positively, and the bottom negatively. We create rankings
for a set of 40 reasoning, 40 factual, and 20 control queries over 5 million pretraining documents
(2.5B tokens) for two models of different sizes (Cohere’s Command R series, 7B and 35B).


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3    Q UERY SETS

Reasoning query sets. We show an example of the other two types of reasoning present in the
reasoning query sets in Table 8 and 9. The former requires calculating the slope of a line going
through two given points (used for both the 7B and 35B model) and the latter is about solving for x
in a linear equation (only used for the 35B model).

Control query sets. We design two control sets with 10 questions each for both the 7B and 35B
model. These query sets resemble reasoning and factual questions, but do not require actual rea-
soning or factual retrieval. The reason for constructing such query sets is to compare the results
for the factual / reasoning query sets to the corresponding control sets, and comment on whether
the patterns we are seeing also show up for queries that do not require reasoning / retrieval, which
further helps interpretations of the results.
Two factual control examples can be seen in Table 10 and 11, for the 7B and 35B model respectively.
They are designed to match the first factual query superficially (e.g. the same numbers), but they are
instead reading comprehension questions about fictional entities. This means all the model needs to
do to answer the question is retrieve from context (not parameters).

Two of the reasoning control examples for the 7B and 35B respectively can be seen in Table 12
and 13. Again, these resemble reasoning queries in number and style, but do not require any actual
reasoning as the answer is given in the context.

Table 8: Example from the reasoning set that involves calculating the slope of a line going through
two points. We have 20 examples like these on different points. The completion is by the 7B model,
but we use the same questions for the 35B model.

 Reasoning query set (slopes)
 Prompt
 What is the slope of the line passing through the points (93, 28) and (74, 47)?

 Think step-by-step.
 Completion by 7B
 To find the slope of the line passing through the points (93, 28) and (74, 47), we can use the following steps:

 1. Identify the coordinates of the two points:
 - Point A: (93, 28)
 - Point B: (74, 47)

 2. Calculate the difference in x-coordinates between the two points:
 - Difference in x-coordinates: x2 - x1 = 74 - 93 = -19

 3. Calculate the difference in y-coordinates between the two points:
 - Difference in y-coordinates: y2 - y1 = 47 - 28 = 19

 4. Determine the ratio of the difference in y-coordinates to the difference in x-coordinates:
 - Ratio: 19 / -19 = 1 / -1

 5. Multiply the ratio by -1 to reverse the direction of the line:
 - Slope: -1 / 1 = -1

 Therefore, the slope of the line passing through the points (93, 28) and (74, 47) is -1.


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Example from the reasoning set that requires solving for x in a linear equation. We have
twenty other examples like these on different numbers, only for the 35B model. The completion is
by the 35B model.

                        Reasoning query set (linear)
                        Prompt
                        Solve for x: 5x + 21 = 91

                        Think step-by-step.
                        Completion by 35B
                        Here are the steps to solve for x:
                        1. Subtract 21 from both sides of the equation:
                        5x + 21 - 21 = 91 - 21
                        5x = 70

                        2. Divide both sides of the equation by 5 to solve for x:
                        (5x) / 5 = 70 / 5
                        x = 14

                        Therefore, the solution to the equation 5x + 21 = 91 is x = 14.


Table 10: Example from the factual control set that resembles the question about the tallest mountain
in the world from the 7B factual query set (Table 2), but does not require any factual recall. The
completion is by the 7B model.

  Factual control query set
  Prompt
  The planet Zog has multiple mountains, of which the tallest one is called Wirtu which is 29,029 feet tall.
  What is the largest mountain on the planet Zog called and how tall is it?
  Completion by 7B
  The largest mountain on the planet Zog is called Wirtu and it is 29,029 feet tall.


Table 11: Example from the factual control set that resembles the first factual query for the 35B
model superficially, but does not require any factual recall. The completion is by the 35B model.

    Factual control query set
    Prompt
    In a fictional planetary system, there is a supernova remnant and pulsar wind nebula in the centre of
    a constellation of stars called Minotaur called the Goat Nebula.
    What is the supernova remnant and pulsar wind nebula in the constellation Minotaur called?
    Completion by 35B
    In the fictional planetary system, the supernova remnant and pulsar wind nebula in the centre of
    the constellation Minotaur is called the “Goat Nebula”.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Example from the reasoning control set that resembles the slope queries superficially, but
does not require any reasoning. The completion is by the 7B model.

 Reasoning control query set
 Prompt
 The slope of the line is -22. What is the slope of the line?

 Think step-by-step.
 Completion by 7B
 Given that the slope of the line is -22.

 To find the slope of the line, we need to find the change in y-coordinates divided by the change in x-coordinates.

 The slope of the line is -22.

 Therefore, the slope of the line is -22.


Table 13: Example from the reasoning control set that resembles the slope queries superficially, but
does not require any reasoning. The completion is by the 35B model.

     Reasoning control query set
     Prompt
     This line has a slope 6. What is the slope of the aforementioned line?

     Think step-by-step.
     Completion by 35B
     The slope of a line is a measure of the steepness of the line.
     It is defined as the ratio of the change in the y-coordinate to the change in the x-coordinate.

     In this case, the line has a slope of 6. This means that for every 1 unit increase in the x-coordinate,
     the y-coordinate will increase by 6 units.

     It’s important to note that the slope of a line is not limited to positive values and can be negative or
     zero depending on the orientation of the line.


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4   Q UERY KEYWORDS FOR FINDING THE ANSWER

We provide all keywords used to search for the answers for both the 7B and 35B in the supplementary
material to this manuscript, and describe here the procedure for generating keywords, as well as
giving some examples.
For the factual questions, we generated keywords manually for each query, and these can be found
in the supplemental material. For example, for the question “What is the world’s smallest mammal
by body length?” (answer: bumblebee bat), we have the following keywords: bumblebee bat;
bumblebee; bumble; bee; bat; smallest mammal; body length; mammal; smallest; small. This
results in many false positives, e.g. if only the word ‘small’ occurs, which we all check manually for
the answer.
Based on the type of reasoning question, we programatically create keywords for each question. For
example, for the question in Table 9, the keywords are:

[’14’, ’x = 14’, ’5x + 21’, ’91’, ’5x + 21 = 91’, ’21’, ’5’,
’91 - 21’, ’91 - 21 = 70’, ’(91 - 21) / 5’, ’70 / 5’,
’70 / 5 = 14’, ’70’, ’x=14’, ’5x+21’, ’5x+21=91’, ’91-21’,
’91-21=70’, ’(91-21)/5’, ’70/5’, ’70/5=14’,
’(91 - 21) divided by 5’, ’(91-21) divided by 5’,
’(91 minus 21) divided by 5’, ’(91 min 21) divided by 5’,
’70 divided by 5’, ’70 divided by 5 = 14’,
’70 divided by 5 is 14’, ’70 / 5 is 14’, ’70/5 is 14’,
’91 - 21 is 70’, ’91-21 is 70’, ’91 minus 21 is 70’,
’91 min 21 is 70’, ’70 divided by 5 equals 14’,
’70 / 5 equals 14’, ’70/5 equals 14’, ’91 - 21 equals 70’,
’91-21 equals 70’, ’91 minus 21 equals 70’, ’91 min 21 equals 70’,
’5x plus 21’, ’5x plus 21 = 91’, ’5x plus 21 is 91’, ’5x + 21 is 91’,
’91 minus 21’, ’91 min 21’, ’91 minus 21 = 70’, ’91 min 21 = 70’,
’(91 minus 21) / 5’, ’(91 min 21) / 5’]

Note that, because the individual numbers ‘14’, ‘5’, ‘91’, and ‘70’ are part of the keywords, each
document that contains one of these numbers becomes a hit, and we go over all hits manually.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5    P ROMPTS GIVEN TO C OMMAND R+ FOR FINDING THE ANSWER

We use multiple prompts for each different type of reasoning question to allow Command R+ to
find the answer in the top 500 influential documents; prompts to find the answer to the intermediate
reasoning steps, and a prompt for finding the answer to the full question. We provide an example of
each below.
Preamble:


           You are a brilliant AI assistant that is excellent at arithmetic designed to help users
           with data analysis. You will be given an arithmetic query and a document, and
           your task is to determine whether the answer to the question is in the document.


   Prompt for the first step to a two-step arithmetic question
   Question: 4 + 2
   Answer: 4 + 2 = 6


   What also counts as an answer:


   - The calculation is written out in words, or part of a story.
   - The order of operations are changed. E.g. 2 + 4 = 6.
   - Different symbol used for sum/subtract sign. E.g. plus/minus.
   - The calculation is part of another larger calculation. E.g. (4 + 2) * 9 = 6 * 9 or (4 + 2)/12 = 6/12.
   - Different formatting. E.g. (4) + (2) = (6).
   - The calculation is a part of an algebraic formulation. E.g. 4X + 2X = 6X.


   What does not count as an answer:
   - Other numbers are being summed/subtracted. E.g. 5 + 2.
   - Numbers are taken to the other side of the equals sign. E.g. 6 - 2 = 4.


   Document:


   <document >


   Is the answer given in the document? Answer with yes or no. If you answer with yes, indicate where the answer is by copying the part of the document in
   which the answer occurs, ending with an explanation of why that passage contains the answer. Think step-by-step and carefully consider all the different
   ways in which such an answer might be given.


   Prompt for the second step to a two-step arithmetic question
   Question: 6 * 15
   Answer: 90


   What also counts as an answer:


   - The calculation is written out in words, or part of a story.
   - The order of operations are changed. E.g. 15 * 6 = 90.
   - Different symbol used for the multiplier sign. E.g. x or times.
   - The calculation is part of another larger calculation. E.g. (6 * 15) * 9 = 90 * 9 or (6 * 15)/12 = 90/12.
   - Different formatting. E.g. (6) * (15) = (90).
   - The calculation is a part of an algebraic formulation. E.g. 6X * 15X = 90X.


   What does not count as an answer:
   - Other numbers are being multiplied. E.g. 7 * 15.
   - Numbers are taken to the other side of the equals sign. E.g. 6 = 90/15.


   Document:


   <document >


   Is the answer given in the document? Answer with yes or no. If you answer with yes, indicate where the answer is by copying the part of the document in
   which the answer occurs, ending with an explanation of why that passage contains the answer. Think step-by-step and carefully consider all the different
   ways in which such an answer might be given.


                                                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt for step 1 (and 2 is similar) to answer a slope question
   Question: 74 - 73
   Answer: 74 - 73 = 1


   What also counts as an answer:
   - The calculation is written out in words, or part of a story.
   - The calculation is written in terms of a difference or change. E.g. the difference (or change) between 73 and 74 is 1.
   - The order of operations are changed. E.g. 73 - 74 = -1.
   - Different symbol used for the minus sign. E.g. subtracted from.
   - The calculation is part of another larger calculation. E.g. (74 - 73) * 9 = 1 * 9 or (74 - 73)/12 = 1/12.
   - Different formatting. E.g. (74) - (73) = (1).
   - The calculation is a part of an algebraic formulation. E.g. 74X - 73X = 1X.


   What does not count as an answer:
   - Other numbers are being subtracted. E.g. 75 - 73.
   - Numbers are taken to the other side of the equals sign. E.g. 74 = 1 + 73.


   Document:


   <document >


   Is the answer given in the document? Answer with yes or no. If you answer with yes, indicate where the answer is by copying the part of the document in
   which the answer occurs, ending with an explanation of why that passage contains the answer. Think step-by-step and carefully consider all the different
   ways in which such an answer might be given.



   Prompt for step 3 to answer a slope question
   Question: 74 / 1
   Answer: 74 / 1 = 74


   What also counts as an answer:


   - The calculation is written out in words, or part of a story.
   - The signs on the LHS are flipped. E.g. -74 / -1 = 74.
   - Different symbol used for the division sign. E.g. divided by.
   - The calculation is part of another larger calculation. E.g. (74 / 1) * 9 = 74 * 9 or (74 / 1)/12 = 74/12.
   - Different formatting. E.g. (74) / (1) = (74).
   - The calculation is a part of an algebraic formulation. E.g. 74X / 1 = 74X.


   What does not count as an answer:
   - Other numbers are being divided. E.g. 75 / 1.
   - Numbers are taken to the other side of the equals sign. E.g. 74 = 74 * 1.


   Document:


   <document >


   Is the answer given in the document? Answer with yes or no. If you answer with yes, indicate where the answer is by copying the part of the document in
   which the answer occurs, ending with an explanation of why that passage contains the answer. Think step-by-step and carefully consider all the different
   ways in which such an answer might be given.


                                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt for step 1 to answer a linear question
   Question: 32 - 16
   Answer: 16


   What also counts as an answer:
   - The calculation is written out in words, or part of a story.
   - The calculation is written in terms of a difference or change. E.g. the difference (or change) between 32 and 16 is 16.
   - The order of operations are changed. E.g. -16 + 32 = 16.
   - Different representation used for the minus sign. E.g. ’subtracted from’.
   - The calculation is part of another larger calculation. E.g. (32 - 16) * 9 = 16 * 9 or (32 - 16)/12 = 16/12.
   - Different formatting. E.g. (32) - (16) = (16).
   - The calculation is a part of an algebraic formulation. E.g. 32X - 16X = 16X.


   What does not count as an answer:
   - Other numbers are being subtracted. E.g. 33 - 16.
   - Numbers are taken to the other side of the equals sign. E.g. 32 = 16 + 16.


   Document:


   <document >


   Is the answer given in the document? Answer with yes or no. If you answer with yes, indicate where the answer is by copying the part of the document in
   which the answer occurs, ending with an explanation of why that passage contains the answer. Think step-by-step and carefully consider all the different
   ways in which such an answer might be given.


   Prompt for step 2 to answer a linear question
   Question: 16 / 8
   Answer: 16 / 8 = 2


   What also counts as an answer:
   - The calculation is written out in words, or part of a story.
   - The calculation is written in terms of a ratio. E.g. the ratio between 16 and 8 is 2.
   - Different representation used for the division sign. E.g. ’divided by’.
   - The calculation is part of another larger calculation. E.g. (16 / 8) * 9 = 2 * 9 or (16 / 8)/12 = 2/12.
   - Different formatting. E.g. (16) / (8) = (2).
   - The calculation is a part of an algebraic formulation. E.g. 32X / 16X = 2X.


   What does not count as an answer:
   - Other numbers are being divided. E.g. 17 / 8.
   - Numbers are taken to the other side of the equals sign. E.g. 16 = 2 * 16.


   Document:


   <document >


   Is the answer given in the document? Answer with yes or no. If you answer with yes, indicate where the answer is by copying the part of the document in
   which the answer occurs, ending with an explanation of why that passage contains the answer. Think step-by-step and carefully consider all the different
   ways in which such an answer might be given.


                                                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt for the full answer to a linear question
   Question: 8x + 16 = 32
   Answer: 2


   What also counts as an answer:
   - The calculation is written out in words, or part of a story.
   - The calculation is written in terms of a ratio. E.g. the ratio between 16 and 8 is 2.
   - Different representation used for the plus sign or the equals sign. E.g. ’added to’ and ’equals’.
   - A different variable than X is used. E.g. ’t’: 8t + 16 = 32’.
   - The calculation is part of another larger calculation. E.g. (8x + 16 = 32) * 9 = 2 * 9 or (8x + 16 = 32)/12 = 2/12.
   - The solution is written out in steps below each other. E.g.:
   8x + 16 = 32
   8x = 2
   x = 0.


   - The calculation is a part of an algebraic formulation. E.g.:
   5 * (8x + 16) = 5 * 32
   5 * x = 5 * 2.


   What does not count as an answer:
   - Other numbers are being used. E.g. 9x + 16 = 32.


   Document:


   <document >


   Is the answer given in the document? Answer with yes or no. If you answer with yes, indicate where the answer is by copying the part of the document in
   which the answer occurs, ending with an explanation of why that passage contains the answer. Think step-by-step and carefully consider all the different
   ways in which such an answer might be given.


                                                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.6    P ROMPTS GIVEN TO C OMMAND R+ FOR CHARACTERISING THE RELATIONSHIP
       BETWEEN THE QUERY AND THE DOCUMENT

We combine all reasoning queries in pairs with their top 500 most influential documents, and prompt
Command R+ to characterise the relationship. For all types of reasoning, we use the same preamble:

            You are a brilliant AI assistant that is excellent at arithmetic designed to help
            users with data analysis. You will be given an arithmetic query and a document,
            and your task is to characterise the document by choosing keywords from a given
            set that best describe how the document relates to the question.

For each type of reasoning, we craft a prompt that allows Command R+ to choose multiple keywords
for each query-document pair in the top 500 documents. We provide each below.
   Prompt for arithmetic questions
   Start of Query:


   <query>


   End of Query


   Start of Document


   <document>


   End of Document


   How is the document related to the query?


   Choose from the following keywords:


   Similar arithmetic operations on similar numbers (e.g. the numbers are similar in magnitude or the numbers are the same)
   Similar arithmetic operations (on other types of numbers, e.g. much larger or smaller)
   Reasoning traces (multiple reasoning steps are explicitly given in the document explaining how one gets to an answer)
   Other types of maths
   Code that contains arithmetic
   Code that concerns other types of math
   Code that concerns no math/arithmetic
   Text about math/arithmetic (no other relation to the query than that the text is about math, text does not perform math/arithmetic)
   Superficial similarities (there is no real relation, but loosely related topics occur, like the text contains words related to other parts of math, like algebra)
   Similar formatting (question/answer pair about other topics than math)
   Similar formatting (other)
   Other (pick own keyword)


   Explain your answer for each keyword by quoting from the query and document and describing why they are similar. Keep in mind that the document
   might be in another language than English. If you pick any of the code keywords, add the programming languages in brackets (e.g. ‘Code that contains
   arithmetic (Python, LaTeX)’). If the relation between the query and the document is not described by any of the given keywords, choose ‘other’ and
   pick your own keyword that describes the document. Otherwise, if the query is not related to the document, state ‘no relation’ and describe why. Give
   your answer in the form of a semicolon-separated list of keywords, and add an explanation below separated by newlines Give your answer in the form
   of a semicolon-separated list of keywords, and add an explanation below separated by newlines (e.g. ‘keyword 1; keyword 2; keyword 3 (Python)
   [explanation]’).


                                                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt for slope questions
   Start of Query:


   <query>


   End of Query


   Start of Document


   <document>


   End of Document


   How is the document related to the query?


   Choose from the following keywords:


   Similar arithmetic operations on similar numbers (e.g. the numbers are similar in magnitude or the numbers are the same)
   Similar arithmetic operations (on other types of numbers, e.g. much larger or smaller)
   Reasoning traces (multiple reasoning steps are explicitly given in the document explaining how one gets to an answer)
   Other types of maths
   Code that contains arithmetic
   Code that calculates the slope between two numbers
   Math that calculates the slope between two numbers
   Code that calculates the slope of an equation
   Math that calculates the slope of an equation
   Code that concerns other types of math
   Code that concerns no math/arithmetic
   Text about math/arithmetic (no other relation to the query than that the text is about math, text does not perform math/arithmetic)
   Superficial similarities (there is no real relation, but loosely related topics occur, like the text contains words related to other parts of math, like algebra)
   Similar formatting (question/answer pair about other topics than math)
   Similar formatting (other)
   Other (pick own keyword)


   Explain your answer for each keyword by quoting from the query and document and describing why they are similar. Keep in mind that the document
   might be in another language than English. If you pick any of the code keywords, add the programming languages in brackets (e.g. ‘Code that contains
   arithmetic (Python, LaTeX)’). If the relation between the query and the document is not described by any of the given keywords, choose ‘other’ and pick
   your own keyword that describes the document. Otherwise, if the query is not related to the document, state ‘no relation’ and describe why. Give your
   answer in the form of a semicolon-separated list of keywords, and add an explanation below separated by newlines (e.g. ‘keyword 1; keyword 2; keyword
   3 (Python) [explanation]’).


                                                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Prompt for linear questions
   Start of Query:


   <query>


   End of Query


   Start of Document


   <document>


   End of Document


   How is the document related to the query?


   Choose from the following keywords:


   Code that solves a linear equation for a variable (of the form ax + b = c or ax - b = c)
   Code that solves a linear equation with multiple variables for one or both variables (e.g. ax + by = c)
   Code that solves a linear equation of another form than ax + b = c or ax - b = c
   Math that solves a linear equation for a variable (of the form ax + b = c or ax - b = c)
   Math that solves an equation with multiple variables for one or both variables (e.g. ax + by = c)
   Math that contains linear equations of another form than ax + b = c or ax - b = c
   Math that contains linear equations but they are not solved (of the form ax + b = c or ax - b = c)
   Math that contains linear equations but they are not solved (of another form than ax + b = c or ax - b = c)
   Similar algebraic operations on similar numbers (e.g. the numbers are similar in magnitude or the numbers are the same)
   Similar algebraic operations (on other types of numbers, e.g. much larger or smaller)
   Other forms of algebra
   Arithmetic operations
   Other types of maths
   Code that contains arithmetic
   Code that concerns other types of math
   Code that concerns no math/algebra
   Text about math/algebra (no other relation to the query than that the text is about math, text does not perform math/algebra)
   Reasoning traces (multiple reasoning steps are explicitly given in the document explaining how one gets to an answer)
   Superficial similarities (there is no real relation, but loosely related topics occur, like the text contains words related to other parts of math, like arithmetic)
   Similar formatting (question/answer pair about other topics than math)
   Similar formatting (other)
   Other (pick own keyword)


   Explain your answer for each keyword by quoting from the query and document and describing why they are similar. Keep in mind that the document
   might be in another language than English. If you pick any of the code keywords, add the programming languages in brackets (e.g. ‘Code that contains
   arithmetic (Python, LaTeX)’) If the relation between the query and the document is not described by any of the given keywords, choose ‘other’ and pick
   your own keyword that describes the document. Otherwise, if the query is not related to the document, state ‘no relation’ and describe why. Give your
   answer in the form of a semicolon-separated list of keywords, and add an explanation below separated by newlines (e.g. ‘keyword 1; keyword 2; keyword
   3 (Python) [explanation]’). If you pick a keyword about solving a linear equation, add the linear equation in the explanation.


                                                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.7   F URTHER DISCUSSION OF LIMITATIONS

More broadly, our work suffers from the same limitations any work does that uses EK-FAC in-
fluence functions; we do many approximations to estimate the counterfactual and only take into
account MLP parameters. This latter decision is because EK-FAC influence functions are not prop-
erly defined for the attention layers (Grosse et al., 2023), although we do look at the dense layers
used within them. We list the assumptions and approximations here:

       • First-order Taylor approximation to the PBRF.
       • Assume different layers of MLPs are independent, making the Gauss-Newton Hessian
         block-diagonal.
       • Assume activations are independent of pre-activation pseudo-gradients.
       • Estimate the approximation to the Fisher Information Matrix or equivalently the Gauss-
         Newton Hessian by sampling from the empirical data distribution / model output distribu-
         tion, because it’s an expectation over that distribution (MC estimation).
       • Block-diagonal approximation of the eigenvector matrices within each layer.
       • Low-rank approximation of query gradients.
       • Assume EK-FAC for SFT stage is identity (Bae et al., 2024).

All these approximations are verified and justified in Grosse et al. (2023) and (Bae et al., 2024), and
the reader is referred there for a more in-depth analysis.
Our empirical results showing that nonetheless influence functions surface documents that are
causally related to accuracy in Appendix A.1 should alleviate some of these concerns, but not all.


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.8     A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR THE QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS

A.8.1    D ETAILS ON ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS IN PRETRAINING DATA
In the main text, we find the answer to factual questions relatively often compared to the answer
to reasoning questions. In this section, we comment on the possibility that the answer to reasoning
questions are simply not part of the pretraining sample of 5 million documents we look at, as well
as present examples of documents with answers to queries. Recall that all reasoning tasks require
multiple steps, and the model outputs reasoning traces to get to the final answer. This means that if
the model is retrieving the answers, it should retrieve answers to all the reasoning steps. On top of
the search in the main paper in Section 5.2, we search for answers to the reasoning steps and factual
questions in a random subset of the 5M pretraining documents. For the 7B reasoning questions, we
find 43 documents containing answers to reasoning steps, of which only 9 show up in the top 0.02%
of the data. Of these 9, 4 documents together contain the 2 answers found for the 7B arithmetic
queries in the main text. The remaining 5 are answers to single reasoning steps that do not combine
to a full answer. By contrast, we find the full answer to factual questions in 73 documents, of
which 35 show up in the top 0.02% of the data. For the 35B, we find 7 documents with answers to
reasoning steps, of which 4 show up in the top 0.02% (none combining to a full answer). For the
factual questions, we find 17 documents with answers, of which 15 show up in the top 0.02%. In
terms of full answers showing up in the top 0.02%, we find one additional full answer on top of the
ones we found in the main text for the 7B reasoning questions, spread over two documents with rank
896542 and 4997351 of 5 million respectively (i.e. highly un- or negatively influential). For the 35B
we do not find full answers to reasoning queries at all. We provide many documents with answers
to factual and reasoning queries found in the top 0.02% in the supplemental material as well as one
example per reasoning step answer we find (e.g. if we find the answer to 6 − 4 = 2 four times, we
show one example in the supplement). We highlight here some examples from the larger pretraining
sample for illustration.
Examples of pretraining data with answers.
For factual questions, it happens relatively frequently that the answer to the question shows up as
highly influential in multiple documents of the top 10 documents. For example, for the factual
question in Table 2 (“What is the tallest mountain in the world and how tall is it?”), the answer
shows up at ranks 1, 4, 6, and 7. The document at rank 1 (the most positively influential document),
is the following, which has the same question and the answer (question 5 below, underlined):


                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Factual query

       What is the tallest mountain in the world and how tall is it?

       Completion by 7B

       The tallest mountain in the world is Mount Everest, which is located between Nepal
       and Tibet. The height of Mount Everest is 8,849 meters (29,029 feet) above sea level.


       Rank 1 document
       Write some general trivia questions and answers. Here are some general trivia
       questions and answers:

       1. What is the longest word in the English language?

       Answer: The longest word in the English language is ”pneumonoultramicroscopic-
       silicovolcanoconiosis”, which is a type of lung disease.

       2. How many bones are in the human body?

       Answer: There are 206 bones in the human body.

       3. What is the largest ocean in the world?

       Answer: The largest ocean in the world is the Pacific Ocean, which covers approxi-
       mately one-third of the Earth’s surface.

       4. What is the longest river in the world?

       Answer: The longest river in the world is the Nile River, which is 6,650 kilometers
       (4,130 miles) long.

       5. What is the highest mountain in the world?

       Answer: The highest mountain in the world is Mount Everest,
       which is 8,848 meters (29,029 feet) high.

       6. What is the most common element in the human body?

       Answer: The most common element in the human body is oxygen, which makes up
       approximately 65% of the human body’s mass.

       ... redacted


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Another document has the answer to part of an arithmetic query for the 7B (“Calculate the answer:
(5 - 3) * 12. Think step-by-step.”), namely 5 - 3 = 2 (underlined below, note that one needs to
understand rules to writing arithmetic to figure the answer out):


       Reasoning query (arithmetic)

       Calculate the answer: (5 - 3) * 12

       Think step-by-step.

       Completion by 7B

       First, let’s evaluate the expression inside the parentheses:
       5-3=2

       Now, let’s multiply the result by 12:
       2 * 12 = 24

       Therefore, the answer is 24.


       Rank 2 document
       shown in numbers 7, 9 and 10.
       PEMDAS Rules Practice 1 Solutions
       1.
       Solution:
       Multiply: 2 x 3 + 4 x 6 = 6 + 24
       Add: 6 + 24 = 30
       Answer: 30
       2.
       Solution:
       Multiply:
       Divide:
       Add:
       Answer: 0
       3.
       Solution:
       Parenthesis: 4 + (6 – 2)2 + 1 = 4 + 42 + 1
       Exponent: 4 + 42 + 1 = 4 + 16 + 1
       Add: 4 + 16 + 1 = 21
       Answer: 21
       4.
       Solution:
       Parenthesis: 8(6 – 2) ÷ 2(5 – 3) = 8(4) ÷ 2(2)
       Multiply: 8(4) ÷ 2(2) = 32 ÷ 2(2)*
       Divide: 32 ÷ 2(2)= 16(2)
       Multiply: 16(2) = 32
       Answer: 32
       *This is the case mentioned in the PEMDAS Rules that when multiplication and divi-
       sion are performed consecutively (without any other operations or grouping symbols
       in between), the perform the operations from the left hand side to the right hand side.
       ... redacted


Interestingly, this document shows up in the top 10 documents for 11 of 20 arithmetic queries. By
contrast, the factual answer document shown before shows up in the top 10 for 4 of 40 queries (we


                                                 37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


have another query that asks for the largest ocean in the world, for which this document also has the
answer).
To show that answers to more “niche” questions also show up, consider this document that contains
the answer to the question “What is the common name for the larva of a housefly?” (answer:
maggot, underlined below):



        Factual query

        What is the common name for the larva of a housefly?

        Completion by 35B

        The common name for the larva of a housefly is a maggot.


        Rank 6 document
        Common House Fly
        Flies are easily recognized and are universally annoying. To say they are unap-
        pealing is an understatement. Flies enjoy spending time on decaying organic filth,
        including rotting meat and feces. They then manage to enter your home and land on
        your kitchen counters and any uncovered food. House flies do more than just buzz
        around and steal your food. They can transfer over 65 diseases including cholera,
        dysentery, poliomyelitis, and tuberculosis. Flies accumulate nasty pathogens when
        they rest on sewers, trash, feces, and any other moist or decaying material.
        Flies lay their eggs on food (fruit in your fruit bowl), other animals, and even rotting
        flesh. When the eggs hatch, the tiny rice-like larvae are called maggots. Few other
        bugs provoke nausea and an overall disgust like tiny, squirming maggots. There are
        a number of ways to eliminate flies and their larvae from your home. The most com-
        mon practices include using sticky fly traps, ultra-violet lights, and baited traps. Fly
        swatters are effective when trying to get rid of the lone fly. A timely smack from a
        dish towel can also be employed.
        There are simple daily practices that will help keep flies from taking over your house.
        Store food in sealed containers, wipe crumbs off the counters, and don’t leave food
        out. Grass clippings, garbage, and decaying matter will also attract flies, so get rid of
        these items immediately. Keep your trash cans tightly covered and clean them on a
        man-made surface where the run-off can’t seep into the soil. Whenever possible, use
        door and window screens. This will help keep flies from entering your home. How-
        ever, flies can find holes and gaps so remember to check your screens occasionally
        and ensure they are impenetrable. Flies can also find openings on pipes or conduits
        that lead inside. As a means of prevention, caulk those areas that channel into your
        home.
        At ZipZap Termite & Pest Control, we know how pesky the persistent buzzing of
        the house fly can be. With kids running in and out, it is near impossible to keep
        flies from getting in. Backyard parties are hard to enjoy when you’ve got house flies
        buzzing around and landing on your food. If you feel you have an overwhelming
        number of flies


This document has rank 6 for the relevant query, and never shows up in the top 10 for other queries.
Below, we show a document containing the answer to the reasoning step 5 + 4 = 9, required for one
of the arithmetic queries for the 7B model (“Calculate the answer: (5 + 4) * 2. Think step-by-step.”),
which does not show up in the top 0.02%.


                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Reasoning query (arithmetic)

       Calculate the answer: (5 + 4) * 2

       Think step-by-step.

       Completion by 7B

       First, let’s evaluate the expression inside the parentheses:
       5+4=9

       Now, let’s move on to the next step:
       9 * 2 = 18

       Therefore, the answer to the given expression is 18.



       Rank 2140 document
       For example:
       n=1 = 1+2=3
       n=2 = 1+4=5, 2x3=6
       n=3 = 4+5=9, 1+7=8, 2x3=6

       The question is, does a solution exist for every n?
       I tried writing a basic program and it becomes too slow after n = 14. Here are the
       solutions I have so far:
       1 [‘1+2=3’]
       2 [‘2*3=6’, ‘1+4=5’]
       3 [‘4+5=9’, ‘1+7=8’, ‘2*3=6’]
       4 [‘3+6=9’, ‘1+10=11’, ‘4+8=12’, ‘2+5=7’]
       5 [‘2+8=10’, ‘3+6=9’, ‘1+13=14’, ‘5+7=12’, ‘11+4=15’]
       6 [‘3*5=15’, ‘2+8=10’, ‘4+14=18’, ‘6+11=17’, ‘7+9=16’, ‘1+12=13’]
       7 [‘6+12=18’, ‘3*5=15’, ‘7+10=17’, ‘1+20=21’, ‘4+9=13’, ‘2+14=16’, ‘8+11=19’]
       8 [‘8+14=22’, ‘6+12=18’, ‘7+10=17’, ‘2+19=21’, ‘1+15=16’, ‘11+13=24’,
       ‘4+5=9’, ‘3+20=23’]
       9 [‘6+19=25’, ‘8+14=22’, ‘4+13=17’, ‘2+18=20’, ‘1+26=27’, ‘3+7=10’,
       ‘9+15=24’, ‘5+16=21’, ‘11+12=23’]
       10 [‘6+19=25’, ’



This document has rank 2140 for the relevant query.


                                                 39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.8.2   C ROSS - LINGUAL TRANSFER
Additional finding: The answer to the factual question sometimes shows up in non-English lan-
guages.
Interestingly, we observe some crosslingual transfer for the factual questions. For example, for the
question about the tallest mountain in the world (Table 2), the answer shows up in Portuguese:
         A americana Samantha Larson, de 19 anos, se tornou nesta sexta-feira a mulher es-
         trangeira mais jovem a conquistar o Monte Everest, segundo nota oficial divulgada pelo
         Ministério de Turismo do Nepal. A montanha, de 8.848m, é a mais alta do mundo e se
         encontra na fronteira entre o Nepal e Tibet.

Which translates to:
         American Samantha Larson, 19, became the youngest foreign woman to conquer Mount
         Everest on Friday, according to an official statement released by Nepal’s Ministry of
         Tourism. The 8,848m mountain is the highest in the world and is located on the border
         between Nepal and Tibet.

We observe more crosslingual transfer for questions, for example for the question “What is the
capital of Belgium?” the answer shows in up in French and Spanish. We show the French document
here:

         Le Premier ministre belge Yves Leterme a assuré ce mercredi qu’il resterait en place et
         mènerait à bien la réforme institutionnelle entre les régions, malgré les profondes divi-
         sions entre Flamands et Wallons qui menacent l’unité du pays.
         ...
         Les francophones redoutent pour leur part une réduction des budgets accordés à la
         Wallonie, région la plus pauvre du pays, et à la capitale bilingue, Bruxelles. Ils esti-
         ment également que les régions se sont vu transférer depuis les années 1980 assez de
         compétences fédérales, et soupçonnent les néerlandophones de chercher à faire sécession
         de la Belgique afin de pouvoir déclarer l’indépendance de la Flandre.

Which translates to:

         Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme assured on Wednesday that he would stay in office
         and carry out the institutional reform between the regions, despite the deep divisions be-
         tween Flemish and Walloons that threaten the unity of the country.
         ...
         The French speakers, for their part, fear a reduction in the budgets granted to Wallonia,
         the poorest region of the country, and to the bilingual capital, Brussels. They also believe
         that the regions have been transferred enough federal powers since the 1980s, and suspect
         that the Dutch-speaking countries are seeking to secede from Belgium in order to be able
         to declare the independence of Flanders.

Note that both these quotes are snippets from otherwise larger documents. We did not translate all
documents and hence only found cases of crosslingual transfer if there happened to be keyword
overlap. We show a few here, but have found the answer to factual questions through keyword
overlap with non-English documents 8 times for the 7B model and 4 times for the 35B model. Note
that because this is only based on circumstantial keyword overlap, we likely missed most cases of
cross-lingual transfer, and therefore cannot assign any meaning to the fact that it happened less for
the 35B than the 7B. It would be interesting to focus on cross-lingual transfer in future work.


                                                      40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.8.3    C HARACTERISE RELATION TOP DOCUMENTS TO QUERY
Finding 4: why documents are influential for reasoning. We prompt Command R+ to characterise
the relationship between the top 500 documents and each query (see prompts in Appendix A.6). We
add ‘reasoning traces’ as a potential keyword in the prompt, but after inspecting the results we find
the model uses that keyword for almost any document, and we remove those results. We report the
raw counts of each keyword occurring in the tables below.

        Arithmetic (7B)                                                               Count
        Other types of maths                                                           5765
        Similar arithmetic operations on other numbers (e.g. much larger/smaller)      4691
        Code that contains arithmetic                                                  4038
        Text about math/arithmetic                                                     3202
        Code that concerns other types of math                                         2554
        Similar arithmetic operations on similar numbers                               2246
        Similar formatting                                                             2223
        Superficial similarities                                                       1391
        Code that concerns no math/arithmetic                                           277

Table 14: Raw counts of the amount of times Command R+ assigns a certain keyword to a query-
document pair to characterise its relation, for the arithmetic (7B) queries.


        Slopes (7B)                                                                    Count
        Other types of maths                                                           10787
        Similar arithmetic operations on similar numbers                                7312
        Code that contains arithmetic                                                   5035
        Similar formatting                                                              4675
        Text that explains in words how to calculate the slope of an equation           3911
        Code that concerns other types of math                                          3577
        Text about math/arithmetic                                                      3323
        Text that explains in words how to calculate the slope between two numbers      2959
        Math that calculates the slope of an equation                                   2921
        Math that calculates the slope between two numbers                              2490
        Superficial similarities                                                        2222
        Text that mentions the slope but does not explain how to calculate it           1677
        Code that calculates the slope between two numbers                              1633
        Code that calculates the slope of an equation                                   1110
        Code that concerns no math/arithmetic                                            263
        Other                                                                             15

Table 15: Raw counts of the amount of times Command R+ assigns a certain keyword to a query-
document pair to characterise its relation, for the slopes (7B) queries.


                                                 41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Slopes (35B)                                                                    Count
      Other types of maths                                                                11104
      Similar arithmetic operations on similar numbers                                     8340
      Code that contains arithmetic                                                        4617
      Similar formatting                                                                   4141
      Text that explains in words how to calculate the slope of an equation                3869
      Text about math/arithmetic                                                           3845
      Math that calculates the slope of an equation                                        3745
      Math that calculates the slope between two numbers                                   3533
      Code that concerns other types of math                                               3192
      Text that explains in words how to calculate the slope between two numbers           2747
      Superficial similarities                                                             2291
      Text that mentions the slope but does not explain how to calculate it                1936
      Code that calculates the slope between two numbers                                   1150
      Code that calculates the slope of an equation                                         865
      Code that concerns no math/arithmetic                                                 121
      Other                                                                                  12
      Similar arithmetic operations on other numbers (e.g. much larger/smaller)               1

Table 16: Raw counts of the amount of times Command R+ assigns a certain keyword to a query-
document pair to characterise its relation, for the slopes (35B) queries.


   Linear (35B)                                                                             Count
   Math that contains linear equations but they are not solved                              13434
   Similar algebraic operations on similar numbers                                          10717
   Similar formatting                                                                        5533
   Math that solves a linear equation for a variable                                         2415
   Other forms of algebra                                                                    2234
   Arithmetic operations                                                                     2057
   Code that contains arithmetic                                                             1417
   Other types of maths                                                                      1390
   Text about math/algebra                                                                   1146
   Code that solves a linear equation of another form than ax + b = c or ax - b = c          1109
   Superficial similarities                                                                  1105
   Code that concerns other types of math                                                     949
   Code that concerns no math/algebra                                                         560
   Code that solves a linear equation for a variable                                          475
   Math that solves an equation with multiple variables for one or both variables             172
   Math that contains linear equations of another form than ax + b = c or ax - b = c          156
   Code that solves a linear equation with multiple variables for one or both variables       110
   Other                                                                                        1

Table 17: Raw counts of the amount of times Command R+ assigns a certain keyword to a query-
document pair to characterise its relation, for the linear (35B) queries.


                                                42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: For the reasoning and factual sets, we compare the amount of documents from a certain
source dataset that show up in the top portions of the rankings to the amount you would expect to
show up if you randomly sample from the pretraining distribution (indicated by ‘Training distribu-
tion’ in the figure). The top two plots are for the 7B, and the bottom for the 35B. We find that data
from Wikipedia and Math & Trivia are important for the factual questions for both models, for the
reasoning questions Math & Trivia, StackExchange, Code, and ArXiv data is important. In all cases,
the multipliers tend to the training distribution for higher k.


A.8.4   S OURCE DATASET ANALYSIS

Finding 5: code is heavily overrepresened for reasoning both for the top and bottom portions
of the ranking.
For each source dataset, we report the multiplier w.r.t. the training distribution. This means that if
the top k documents are randomly sampled from pretraining, the multipliers will be one, whereas
if they are above or below one, that source dataset is either over- or underrepresented in the most
influential documents. The full results are presented in Figure 7, and we discuss the most interesting
deviations from the pretraining distribution here. For the factual questions, the most overrepresented
source datasets for both the 7B and 35B are Math & Trivia (multiplier of 27 and 16 for k = 50
respectively) and Wikipedia (multipliers of 5 and 6 respectively). For the reasoning questions, the
most overrepresented datasets are StackExchange and Math & Trivia (with 50 and 24 als multipliers
for the 7B, and 62 and 21 for the 35B). Interestingly, for both the 7B and the 35B, code data is
important for the influential documents. Besides StackExchange, for the medium-influential portion
of the rankings (between k = 5000 and k = 50000), more code data becomes influential (with
multipliers around 2, compared to 0.5 for the factual questions at that same part of the ranking).
This is conventional wisdom among practitioners (most LLMs designers use some percentage of
code data in pretraining now, e.g. Touvron et al. (2023)), and recent work has empirically found
code to be important for reasoning performance (Aryabumi et al., 2024). However, the question
of why code data is important for reasoning is still open. Below, in Appendix A.8.5, we further
confirm that code is important for reasoning by not only relying on the fact that these documents
come from a code dataset, but actually classifying their contents. In Figure 8 we present the same
plot for the bottom portion of the ranking, showing the findings are similar. Further, in Figure 9
and 10 we respectively show the same results for the top and bottom portion of the rankings for the


                                                 43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: For the reasoning and factual sets, We compare the amount of documents from a certain
source dataset that show up in the bottom portions of the rankings to the amount you would expect
to show up if you randomly sample from the pretraining distribution (indicated by ‘Training distri-
bution’ in the figure). The top two plots are for the 7B, and the bottom for the 35B. We find the
patterns are almost identical to those shown for the top portions of the ranking: data from Wikipedia
and Math & Trivia are important for the factual questions for both models, for the reasoning ques-
tions Math & Trivia, StackExchange, Code, and ArXiv data is important. In all cases, the multipliers
tend to the training distribution for higher k.


control queries. Again, the results look similar (code and StackExchange is also overrepresented for
the reasoning control queries), but arXiv is less overrepresented for reasoning control and wiki is
less overrepresented for factual control answering.


                                                 44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: For the query control sets, we also compare the amount of documents from a certain source
dataset that show up in the top portions of the rankings to the amount you would expect to show up
if you randomly sample from the pretraining distribution (indicated by ‘Training distribution’ in the
figure). The top two plots are for the 7B, and the bottom for the 35B. We find that code is still
overrepresented, but arXiv as source is less overrepresented for the top portions of the reasoning
control set than for the reasoning set.


                                                 45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: For the query control sets, we also compare the amount of documents from a certain
source dataset that show up in the bottom portions of the rankings to the amount you would expect
to show up if you randomly sample from the pretraining distribution (indicated by ‘Training distri-
bution’ in the figure). The top two plots are for the 7B, and the bottom for the 35B. We find that it
again looks similar to the source distribution for the top of the rankings for the query control sets.


                                                 46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.8.5             C ONTENT ANALYSIS OF RELEVANT DOCUMENTS
We provide further insights into the characteristics of influential documents on reasoning queries. To
do so, we compute capability categories of the n = 500 most frequently occurring documents among
the k = 5000 most (top) or least (bottom) influential documents for the reasoning queries (for the
7B model), and compare these to a randomly sampled set of 500 documents (we repeat the sampling
process three times and provide mean and standard deviation scores on the detected capabilities).
Results are shown in Figure 11. We can see that the “code” category represents the vast majority
of most and least influential documents, whereas for the random subsets the fraction of code-related
documents is relatively small. This provides further evidence that code-related documents strongly
influence model performance on reasoning tasks.

                                    [7B] Category Distribution Across Different Datasets
            400                                                                                             n=500 (random)
                                                                                                            k=5000 (bottom)
                                                                                                            k=5000 (top)
            350

            300

            250
Frequency


            200

            150

            100

             50

              0
                       de


                                                                               t
                                              n


                                                                                                       ts
                                                                            ex
                                              tio


                                                                                                    ac
                       co


                                                                           d_t
                                           era


                                                                                                   d_f
                                                                       de
                                         en


                                                                                                _an
                                                                      un
                                      e_g


                                                                                              ing
                                                                     gro
                                        v


                                                                                              son
                                    ati
                                   cre


                                                          Category                         rea


Figure 11: Comparison of capability categories identified for the most and least influential docu-
ments for the reasoning queries, as well as for a random subset of sampled documents. We repeat
the random sampling three times and report mean scores with standard deviations indicated.


                                                         47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.9     A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR THE QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS

A.9.1    C ORRELATION ANALYSIS


Figure 12: The correlation between the influence scores of all 5 million documents for pairs of
queries. All queries are on the x- and y-axis, with the first 40 belonging to the factual set, the next
40 to the reasoning set (arithmetic and slopes for the 7B, and linear and slopes for the 35B), the
following 10 to the factual control set, and the last 10 to the reasoning control set. The take-away is
that there is only a signficant correlation between queries of the same reasoning type, most strongly
so for the 35B slopes queries.


Figure 13: The average correlations between the influences of all documents for queries of a specific
type grouped. We leave out any query combinations where the correlation is not significant and any
combination where the query on the x- and y-axis is the same query. We again observe that there is
only a correlation of influence for queries of the same reasoning type.

Additional results finding 1 (correlation between reasoning queries of the same type).
In the main text, we find that there is a correlation between the influence scores for the documents
for different queries that underlie the same type of reasoning question (e.g. questions that all require
calculating the slope but for different numbers). One other explanation for this result could be the


                                                  48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


fact that all these queries are superficially more similar to each other than the factual questions,
and that this is the reason the influence correlates. To test this hypothesis, we use the 10 control
queries for both the factual questions and the reasoning questions that are superficially similar, but
do not require factual retrieval or reasoning to get to the solution (see Appendix A.3 for examples
from each set). Figure 12 shows all query-query correlations for the 100 queries we look at, ordered
as follows: 40 factual queries, 40 reasoning (of which 20 are arithmetic and 20 slopes questions
for the 7B, and 20 linear equation and 20 slopes questions for the 35B), 10 factual control, and 10
reasoning control queries. We see that there is only a significant correlation between queries of the
same reasoning type, which we summarise in Figure 13 by grouping queries of the same type and
averaging the correlations.
To get a sense of what the control questions look like, we show a side-by-side comparison of a
slopes query (top) and the control query that is meant to resemble it (bottom) below. The influences

Table 18: Two query examples, of which one is from the reasoning set (slopes) and the other from
the reasoning control set that resembles the slope queries superficially, but does not require any
reasoning. The completions are by the 7B model.

 Reasoning and Reasoning Control Query Set (7B)
 Slopes (original prompt)
 What is the slope of the line passing through the points (79, 47) and (80, 25)?

 Think step-by-step.
 Completion
 To find the slope of the line passing through the points (79, 47) and (80, 25), we can use the following steps:

 1. Identify the coordinates of the two points:
 - Point A: (79, 47)
 - Point B: (80, 25)

 2. Calculate the difference in x-coordinates between the two points:
 - Point A x-coordinate: 79
 - Point B x-coordinate: 80 ... redacted completion.
 Slopes (control prompt)
 The slope of the line is -22. What is the slope of the line?

 Think step-by-step.
 Completion
 Given that the slope of the line is -22.

 To find the slope of the line, we need to find the change in y-coordinates divided by the change in x-coordinates.

 The slope of the line is -22.

 Therefore, the slope of the line is -22.


for this query correlate with the influences for the slope questions on average with a Pearson’s
R of 0.05, which is much smaller than the 0.32 average correlation between the influences found
for the different slope reasoning questions by the 7B model. Below, we perform a more detailed
qualitative analysis of the query combinations and what drives their correlations, but first we discuss
the quantitative result.
As mentioned, we have 10 factual and 10 reasoning control questions for both models, and show
the full correlation matrices below in Figure 12 (per query) and Figure 13 (averaged per group).
We observe that the correlations between queries from the control sets and other query sets for the
35B is always between 0.05 and 0.10, which indicates that there can be a score correlation of at
least 0.10 for other things than genuine reasoning (e.g. formatting, or topic). Further, the within-
group correlations of the reasoning control set sometimes go as high as 0.38 (although the average


                                                       49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is 0.06 for the 7B and 0.10 for the 35B). For comparison, the average linear-linear score correlation
for the 35B is 0.16, and not many of the correlations that make up this average are higher than
the correlations in the reasoning control sets. To get a sense of how different the correlations are
in magnitude between the reasoning questions and the control questions, we calculate the highest
correlation of a query from a specific reasoning type with any other query that does not concern
reasoning, and count the amount of reasoning query-query combinations for which the correlation
is higher. For example, the maximum correlation we find between any slope question for the 35B
and any other query that is not a slope question is 0.30 Pearson’s R. If we discard all slope query
combinations that are below 0.30 we are left with 138 of 190 significant combinations that are higher,
ranging up to 0.96 Pearson’s R (note that each reasoning group has 20 queries, and all combinations
are 20 ∗ 19/2 = 190). For the linear equation queries by contrast, there are only 34 of 190 query-
query combinations within this group that have a correlation higher than the highest correlation
with the control queries, ranging up to 0.95 Pearson’s R. For the 7B, 84 of 190 arithmetic query
combinations have a higher correlation than the control correlations, ranging up to 0.96 Pearson’s
R, and 120 of 190 slopes query combinations, ranging up to 0.88. We therefore conclude that the
correlations between the queries for the linear equations can mainly be explained by other, more
superficial things than procedural knowledge, and connect this finding to the fact that the model
is less robustly able to solve linear equations. The within-group correlations of the factual set are
much lower, and for the 7B we only find 5 of 780 correlations that are higher than the maximum
correlation of a factual query with another query group, ranging to 0.63 Pearson’s R (we show the
queries with the highest correlation below). For the 35B, we find no correlations for factual queries
higher than the maximum correlation with another group.
We release all 100 ∗ 100 query-query correlations in the supplemental material (on which Figure
12 is based), and we highlight a few examples here to get a sense of what is driving higher or
lower correlations. We mostly do not find a correlation between the influence scores for different
factual questions (on average the correlation is 0.06 for the 7B and 0.03 for the 35B), but we show
the highest correlation found between two factual queries below in Table 19. For this particular
example, the correlation seems driven by the fact that they are both “what”-questions with very
short completions using quotation marks. By contrast, a similar style query-completion pair for the
35B shows almost no correlation (Table 20). For the factual control set (the average correlation
is 0.04 for the 7B and 0.08 for the 35B, but we also show a factual control correlation below for
completeness. Table 11 shows a factual query and a matched factual control example for the 35B
model. The correlation between this control query and the factual query it matches is -0.03.

Table 19: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences is
0.63, both from the factual set of the 7B model. We observe that the main similarity between these
queries is that they both concern short “what” questions, and the completions both are short answers
with quotes used.

                        Factual Query Set (7B)
                        Factual prompt 1
                        What is the symbol for gold on the periodic table?
                        Completion to factual prompt 1
                        The symbol for gold on the periodic table is “Au”.
                        Factual prompt 2
                        What is the common name for the larva of a housefly?
                        Completion to factual prompt 2
                        The common name for the larva of a housefly is “maggot”


See Table 22 below for a representative high correlation example for the 35B slopes questions (Pear-
son’s R of 0.89):
We see that the numbers for the questions are different, but the steps to get to the answer are the
same and formatted similarly. We generally observe that a combination of different numbers used
in the same procedure and similarly formatted reasoning steps results in higher correlation. Another


                                                   50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 20: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences is
0.08, both from the factual set of the 35B model. We observe that the main similarity between these
queries is that they both concern short “what” questions, and the completions both are relatively
short answers with quotes used.

 Factual Query Set (35B)
 Factual prompt 1
 What is the name of the main antagonist in the Shakespeare play “Othello”?
 Completion to factual prompt 1
 The main antagonist in Shakespeare’s play “Othello” is Iago, Othello’s standard-bearer.
 Iago is a manipulative and deceitful character who orchestrates the tragedy in the play.
 Factual prompt 2
 What is the name of the smallest member of the camel family?
 Completion to factual prompt 2
 The smallest member of the camel family is called a “dromedary”.
 Dromedaries are easily recognizable by their single hump. They are native to North Africa and the Middle East.


Table 21: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences is
-0.03, one from the factual set (top), and one from the factual control set (bottom). We observe that
although the formatting is similar, and there are some overlapping concepts, there is no correlation
between the document influences.

    Factual and Control Query Set (35B)
    Factual prompt
    What is the supernova remnant and pulsar wind nebula in the constellation of Taurus called?
    Completion to factual prompt
    The supernova remnant and pulsar wind nebula in the constellation Taurus is called the Crab Nebula.
    Factual control prompt
    In a fictional planetary system, there is a supernova remnant and pulsar wind nebula in the centre of
    a constellation of stars called Minotaur called the Goat Nebula.
    What is the supernova remnant and pulsar wind nebula in the constellation Minotaur called?
    Completion to factual control prompt
    In the fictional planetary system, the supernova remnant and pulsar wind nebula
    in the centre of the constellation Minotaur is called the “Goat Nebula”.



example is shown in Table 23 below for a query combination that gets a lower correlation (0.55),
but has the same answer (-22). The relatively lower correlation here seems driven by the different
formatting of the completion (less new lines). This indicates that part of the correlations are driven
by superficial similarities such as completion formatting.
For comparison, Table 24 shows a pair of control queries for which the prompt and completion are
also very similarly formatted, and the correlation is 0.38 (which is the highest correlation we find
using a control query).
However, superficial formatting cannot be the full picture, as we show in Table 25, where the cor-
relation is 0.35 but the completions are very dissimilar. For this particular query, it seems that it’s
not the positive scores that explain the correlation (Pearson’s R of about 0.2), but rather the negative
scores (Pearson’s R of 0.44). Perhaps some of the correlation can be explained by documents that
are generally negatively influential for the types of completions the models generate here.
Finally, in Table 26 and 27 we show two relatively high correlation examples for the arithmetic
queries, again indicating that both underlying operations as well as formatting drive correlations.


                                                     51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 22: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences
is 0.89, both from the reasoning query set concerning calculating slopes. We observe that, although
the reasoning is applied to different numbers, the steps follow an identical pattern. In fact, the only
difference between the two queries, including completions, is the numbers used.

           Reasoning Query Set (35B)
           Slopes (prompt 1)
           What is the slope of the line passing through the points (94, 62) and (95, 19)?

           Think step-by-step.
           Completion to prompt 1
           The slope of a line passing through two points is calculated using the formula:

           Slope = (change in y) / (change in x)

           In this case, we have the points (94, 62) and (95, 19).

           Substituting the values into the formula, we have:

           Slope = (19 - 62) / (95 - 94)

           Slope = (-43) / (1)

           Slope = -43

           Therefore, the slope of the line passing through the points (94, 62) and (95, 19) is -43.
           Slopes (prompt 2)
           What is the slope of the line passing through the points (90, 20) and (94, 64)?

           Think step-by-step.
           Completion to prompt 2
           The slope of a line passing through two points is calculated using the formula:

           Slope = (change in y) / (change in x)

           In this case, we have the points (90, 20) and (94, 64).

           Substituting the values into the formula, we have:

           Slope = (64 - 20) / (94 - 90)

           Slope = (44 / 4)

           Slope = 11

           Therefore, the slope of the line passing through the points (90, 20) and (94, 64) is 11


Taken together, it seems like correlations can be driven by underlying procedures, formatting of the
completion, and other more general things (like “what”-questions in Table 19 and 25). We generally
find the highest correlations when procedures and formatting of completions coincide (of which two
examples are given in Table 22 and 27). The magnitude of these correlations indicate that almost all
of the influence of the 5 million documents in similar for such queries. One interesting possibility
is that the query information surrounding the actual numbers generated (which do not seem to drive
correlation much at all) is determined by the attention layers (which, besides the dense parameters
contained in them, we ignore in this work), connecting potentially to literature attributing reasoning
operations to attention heads. An interesting avenue for future work would be investigating this
further.


                                                      52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 23: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences
is 0.55, both from the reasoning query set concerning calculating the slope. We observe that the
second completion is structured very similarly to the first, except it has less new lines.

         Reasoning Query Set (7B)
         Slopes (prompt 1)
         What is the slope of the line passing through the points (62, 31) and (61, 53)?

         Think step-by-step.
         Completion


         The slope of a line passing through two points is calculated using the formula:

         Slope = (change in y) / (change in x)

         In this case, we have the points (62, 31) and (61, 53).

         Substituting the values into the formula, we have:

         Slope = (31 - 53) / (62 - 61)

         Slope = (-22) / (1)

         Slope = -22

         Therefore, the slope of the line passing through the points (62, 31) and (61, 53) is -22
         Slopes (prompt 2)
         What is the slope of the line passing through the points (79, 47) and (80, 25)?

         Think step-by-step.
         Completion The slope of a line passing through two points is calculated using the formula:
         Slope = (change in y) / (change in x)

         In this case, we have the points (79, 47) and (80, 25).

         Substituting the values into the formula, we have:
         Slope = (25 - 47) / (80 - 79)
         Slope = (-22) / (1)
         Slope = -22

         Therefore, the slope of the line passing through the points (79, 47) and (80, 25) is -22.


7B vs 35B
An additional finding that is not central to the research question in this work, but is nonetheless
interesting, is that there is almost no correlation between the influence scores of the two different
models. We have 36 queries that share the same prompt for the 7B and 35B (16 factual questions,
and 20 slopes reasoning questions) and we can calculate the Pearson’s R of the queries with matched
prompts (i.e. 36 combinations). The average correlation of influence scores is 0.02 Pearson’s R (if
we only look at the slopes questions the average correlation is 0.03). The maximum correlation
we find is 0.19, for the question “What is the capital of Belgium?”, which we know from above is
not a comparatively high score correlation. Interestingly, for this query, both models produced the
exact same completion, and still the correlation is comparatively low. All other query combinations
correlate with a Pearson’s R below 0.11. This connects to a finding from Grosse et al. (2023) (larger
models rely on data that is more abstractly related to the prompt): the 35B model relies on very
different pretraining data than the 7B, and the same pretraining documents influence completions
for the same prompt very differently.


                                                      53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 24: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences
is 0.38, both from the reasoning control set for the 7B model. We observe that the formatting is very
similar, but the correlation is still lower than for the reasoning queries above.

             Reasoning Control Query Set (7B)
             Reasoning Control (prompt 1)
             Find the answer: There are 21 kids in the bus. How many kids are in the bus?

             Think step-by-step.
             Completion
             There are 21 kids in the bus.
             Reasoning Control (prompt 2)
             Find the answer: There are 132 marbles in a jar. How many marbles are in the jar?

             Think step-by-step.
             Completion
             There are 132 marbles in the jar.


Table 25: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences
is 0.35, both from the reasoning control set for the 35B model. We observe that their completions
are very different, indicating that it can not only be superficial similarities that drive correlations.

     Reasoning Control Query Set (35B)
     Reasoning control (prompt 1)
     This line has a slope 6. What is the slope of the aforementioned line?

     Think step-by-step.
     Completion
     The slope of a line is a measure of the steepness of the line.
     It is defined as the ratio of the change in the y-coordinate to the change in the x-coordinate.

     In this case, the line has a slope of 6. This means that for every 1 unit increase in the x-coordinate,
     the y-coordinate will increase by 6 units.

     It’s important to note that the slope of a line is not limited to positive values and
     can be negative or zero depending on the orientation of the line

     Reasoning control (prompt 2)
     Find the answer: there are two bananas on a tree, how many bananas are on the tree?

     Think step-by-step.
     Completion
     There are two bananas on the tree.


                                                       54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 26: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences
is 0.49, both from the reasoning query set concerning two-step arithmetic. We observe that one of
the operations required is overlapping (+ 6), and the completion is somewhat similarly formatted but
not fully.

          Reasoning Query Set (7B)
          Arithmetic (prompt 1)
          Calculate the answer: (5 + 6) * 10

          Think step-by-step.
          Completion
          First, let’s evaluate the expression inside the parentheses:
          5 + 6 = 11

          Now, let’s multiply the result by 10:
          11 * 10 = 110

          Therefore, the answer is 110
          Arithmetic (prompt 2)
          Calculate the answer: (6 + 10) * 6

          Think step-by-step.
          Completion
          First, let’s evaluate the expression inside the parentheses:
          6 + 10 = 16

          Now, let’s calculate the result of multiplying the expression inside the parentheses by 6:
          16 * 6 = 96

          Therefore, the answer to the expression is 96


                                                      55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 27: Two query examples for which the Pearson’s R correlation of their document influences is
0.94, both from the reasoning query set concerning two-step arithmetic. We observe that not only is
the completion very similarly formatted, but one of the operations overlaps (multiplying something
by 2).

                       Reasoning Query Set (7B)
                       Arithmetic (prompt 1)
                       Calculate the answer: (5 - 3) * 12

                       Think step-by-step.
                       Completion
                       First, let’s evaluate the expression inside the parentheses:
                       5-3=2

                       Now, let’s multiply the result by 12:
                       2 * 12 = 24

                       Therefore, the answer is 24
                       Arithmetic (prompt 2)
                       Calculate the answer: (4 - 2) * 15

                       Think step-by-step.
                       Completion
                       First, let’s evaluate the expression inside the parentheses:
                       4-2=2

                       Now, let’s multiply the result by 15:
                       2 * 15 = 30

                       Therefore, the answer is 30


                                                   56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.9.2    M AGNITUDE OF INFLUENCE
Additional results finding 2 (magnitude of influence is much lower and less volatile for reason-
ing questions).
In the main paper, we find that the influence of documents at the same rank for factual questions is
much more volatile than for reasoning questions. We mention that one explanation for this might be
that the queries for the 35B model are much more niche, and therefore the relevant documents much
more infrequent. To test this hypothesis, we plot the same results for only the overlapping queries
(those that are part of both query sets for the 7B and 35B) in Figure 14. We find that the magnitude
and variance is still larger for the 35B model than for the 7B model, indicating that the influence of
influential documents for the factual and reasoning questions by the 35B can be much larger than for
the 7B model. Further, in Figure 15 we show that the results look similar for the negative portions
of the ranking (where we flip the influence scores from negative to positive).


Figure 14: The total influence per nat of query completion information for different portions of the
positive ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. In this case, we only plot
queries that are present in the query sets for both models. This means the prompt is the same, but
the completion is be different. The pattern is very similar as the observed pattern for the top of the
ranking.


Figure 15: The total influence per nat of query completion information for different portions of the
negative ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We again only plot queries
that are present in the query sets for both models. In this case, the k-th percentile contains the top k
% of most negatively influential documents. The pattern is very similar as the observed pattern for
the top of the ranking.

Finally, in Figure 16 and Figure 17 we plot the same metric for all queries for the top and bot-
tom parts of the rankings respectively, now including the 10 control set queries of the factual and


                                                  57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: The total influence per nat of query completion information for different portions of
the positive ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We plot all queries,
including the query control sets for both factual and reasoning, which contain 10 queries each.


Figure 17: The total influence per nat of query completion information for different portions of
the negative ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We plot all queries,
including the query control sets for both factual and reasoning, which contain 10 queries each.


reasoning control set. As shown in Appendix A.3, we use 10 control queries for each set to investi-
gate whether results hold similarly for queries that superficially look similar as the factual/reasoning
questions, but that do not require factual retrieval or reasoning respectively. We observe that the
control sets both show much higher variance and magnitude than the reasoning queries as well, for
the positive and negative portions of the ranking. For completeness, we show the same result with
the number of documents on the x-axis instead of percentiles in Figure 18 and Figure 19, to show
that the results are similar if we take into account that the 20-th percentile of documents for each
query contains a different amount of documents k.


                                                  58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: The total influence per nat of query completion information for different number of
documents k of the positive ranking, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We plot all queries,
including the query control sets for both factual and reasoning, which contain 10 queries each.


Figure 19: The total influence per nat of query completion information for different number of
documents k of the negative ranking, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We plot all queries,
including the query control sets for both factual and reasoning, which contain 10 queries each.


                                                59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.9.3   I NFLUENCE SPREAD : POWER LAWS


Figure 20: The ranked influence scores per query nat for each query shown separately in log-log
space. We observe; the results follow power laws (linear in log-log space), everything is shifted up
for the 35B model (right), generally the scores for the reasoning documents are lower for the 7B
model, and for the 35B model there is less variance in magnitude of influence for reasoning queries
than for factual queries, and more often than not the influence scores are lower than for factual
questions.


Figure 21: The ranked influence scores per query nat for each query shown separately in log-log
space again, but now also showing the control queries. We observe that also for the control queries
the influence is much more volatile than for reasoning questions, and on average the magnitude is
higher.

In this section, we look at the power laws induced by the top portions of the rankings. We can fit
linear functions to the rankings in log-log space, and analyse the slopes to comment on the sparsity
of the rankings (i.e. how many documents do models rely on for a completion). Specifically, we
perform linear regression on the log-log top 500 rankings of each query, and report the slopes in
Table 28.
After qualitatively inspecting the queries for the 35B model with the steepest slope, we believe an
explanation for this result may be ‘noise’ in the influence scores. For example, the query with the
steepest slope (α = −0.45) has as the most influential document a document that is seemingly
entirely unrelated to the query. Namely, the query asks the question “What is the slope of the
line passing through the points (41, 23) and (18, 92)? Think step-by-step.”, and the top influential


                                                60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 28: Slopes of the fitted functions to the top 500 documents in the influence rankings in log-log
space, separated by query set and whether the model gets the question right or wrong. ⋆ indicates
the significance of an independent T-test performed between the slopes of the factual vs. reasoning
queries, where ⋆ indicates a p-value below 0.1 and ⋆⋆ below 0.05.

                          7B (Correct)       7B (Incorrect)   35B (Correct)       35B (Incorrect)
                                         ⋆                                   ⋆⋆
        Reasoning (α)     −0.36 ± 0.03       −0.33 ± 0.02     −0.36 ± 0.04        −0.38 ± 0.04⋆
        Factual (α)       −0.34 ± 0.03       −0.34 ± 0.04     −0.32 ± 0.05        −0.34 ± 0.04



document is a snippet about the lunar eclipses and when and where they can be viewed which does
not have high N-gram overlap with the query either:

         December 8, 1946 — Total Lunar Eclipse — Rawaki, Phoenix Islands, Kiribati
         Max view in Rawaki
         Sunday, December 8, 1946 at 5:01 AM
         Global Type: Total Lunar Eclipse
         Rawaki: Partial Lunar Eclipse
         Began: Sun, Dec 8, 1946 at 3:13 AM
         Maximum: Sun, Dec 8, 1946 at 5:01 AM
         Ended: Sun, Dec 8, 1946 at 8:22 AM
         Duration: 5 hours, 10 minutes
         December 8, 1946 — Total Lunar Eclipse — Rawaki
         You are using an outdated browser, to view the animation please update or switch
         to a modern browser. Alternatively you can view the old animation by clicking
         here.
         Animation: How the Partial Lunar Eclipse Looked
         The total phase of this lunar eclipse was not visible in Rawaki, but it could be
         observed there as a partial lunar eclipse.
         More about the December 8, 1946 — Total Lunar Eclipse
         Phases and local times of this eclipse
         Eclipses visible in Rawaki
         All eclipses worldwide, from 1900 to 2100


This is the only query for which we observe an unrelated top 1 document, but for the 35B model we
qualitatively observed seemingly irrelevant documents in the rankings more often (in the 7B we did
not observe this). This connects to a finding from literature that for large models influence functions
sometimes surface documents with high gradient norms that are unrelated to the query (Barshan
et al., 2020; Grosse et al., 2023; Choe et al., 2024). As Grosse et al. (2023) note, it is currently
unclear whether this is true noise, or whether these are genuinely influential for the completions.
Regardless, it seems like noise cannot easily explain the difference between the factual and slopes
queries, as one would expect noise to show up equally everywhere.
Another way to visualise this result is to plot the percentage of total influence contained in different
parts of the top ranking, which we do in Figure 22 below. The results in this plot show that for the
top-k percentile of most positively influential documents, the total percentage of positive influence is
much higher than k (e.g. 20% of the total positive influence is contained in the top 5% of documents).
Here, it is clear that on average, for the 35B model the total amount of influence contained in the
top-k percentile increases faster for reasoning questions than for factual questions, indicating that
a larger portion of the total positive influence is contained in the top portions of the rankings. In
Figure 23 we show the same result holds if we include the control queries. As Grosse et al. (2023),
it is not clear whether this is a sensible result to show because for each query we are dividing the
total influence at each k by the sum of positive influence for that query (perhaps a large part of the
positive influence gets cancelled out by negative influence), but we show the result here nonetheless
for completeness. We know from the absolute results of the total influence at different portions of
the ranking that each percentage of total influence at the top-k percentile a much lower value in
absolute terms for reasoning than for the factual questions. If the relative result does not turn out to
be noise, it is the case that of the total influence, a higher percentage is contained in the top portions


                                                   61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of the rankings for reasoning questions than for factual questions. Taken together with the fact that
the absolute influence is often much higher for factual questions, this indicates that the model relies
on more highly influential documents for factual retrieval than for reasoning. This could indicate
that there are more highly relevant factual documents further down the ranking, which makes sense
given the fact that the pretraining distribution is dominated by websources and news, which are more
likely to contain relevant information for factual question answering than for reasoning. Further,
it connects to the finding from literature that models need to see examples often before text gets
memorised (Chowdhery et al., 2022).


Figure 22: The percentage of total influence per nat of query completion information for different
portions of the positive ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We plot
only non-control queries.


Figure 23: The percentage of total influence per nat of query completion information for different
portions of the positive ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We plot
all queries, including the query control sets for both factual and reasoning, which contain 10 queries
each.

Again, the picture looks similar for the negative portions of the ranking, shown for completeness
below in Figure 24 and 25.


                                                  62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 24: The percentage of total influence per nat of query completion information for different
portions of the negative ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We plot
only non-control queries.


Figure 25: The percentage of total influence per nat of query completion information for different
portions of the negative ranking over documents, left for the 7B model, right for the 35B. We plot
all queries, including the query control sets for both factual and reasoning, which contain 10 queries
each.


                                                 63
