Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


High-dimensional Analysis of Knowledge Distillation:
Weak-to-Strong Generalization and Scaling Laws
                     M. Emrullah IldizвҲ—     Halil Alperen GozetenвҲ—      Ege Onur Taga
                                       University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
                                {eildiz, alperen, egetaga}@umich.edu


            Marco MondelliвҖ                                             Samet OymakвҖ 
            Institute of Science and Technology Austria                University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
            marco.mondelli@ist.ac.at                                   oymak@umich.edu



                                                       Abstract
             A growing number of machine learning scenarios rely on knowledge distillation where
             one uses the output of a surrogate model as labels to supervise the training of a target
             model. In this work, we provide a sharp characterization of this process for ridgeless,
             high-dimensional regression, under two settings: (i) model shift, where the surrogate model
             is arbitrary, and (ii) distribution shift, where the surrogate model is the solution of empirical
             risk minimization with out-of-distribution data. In both cases, we characterize the precise
             risk of the target model through non-asymptotic bounds in terms of sample size and data
             distribution under mild conditions. As a consequence, we identify the form of the optimal
             surrogate model, which reveals the benefits and limitations of discarding weak features in
             a data-dependent fashion. In the context of weak-to-strong (W2S) generalization, this has
             the interpretation that (i) W2S training, with the surrogate as the weak model, can provably
             outperform training with strong labels under the same data budget, but (ii) it is unable to
             improve the data scaling law. We validate our results on numerical experiments both on
             ridgeless regression and on neural network architectures.


1       Introduction
The increasing number and diversity of machine learning models has motivated the development of techniques
that leverage the output of one model to train a different one вҖ“ a process known as knowledge distillation
(Hinton et al., 2015). Variations of this approach include generating synthetic data from powerful language
models (Wang et al., 2023; Gunasekar et al., 2023; Abdin et al., 2024), weak-to-strong generalization to
obtain stronger models under weak supervision (Burns et al., 2023), and filtering/curating ML datasets via a
smaller model to train a larger model (Fang et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024b). The diversity of these applications
motivates a deeper understanding of the statistical properties and limits of the distillation process.
In this work, we focus on the scenario where a target/student model is trained on the labels of a surrogate/teacher
model. Let Dt denote the target distribution, (xi , yi )ni=1 be sampled i.i.d. from this distribution, and p denote the
dimension of the features xi . Given a surrogate model s, we create the synthetic labels yis = s(xi ) and obtain
the target model by minimizing the empirical risk, i.e.,
                                                               n
                                                           1X s
                                         fЛҶ = arg min             в„“(yi , f (xi )),                                  (1)
                                                    f вҲҲF n
                                                              i=1

where F denotes the hypothesis class and в„“ the loss function. This procedure motivates a few fundamental
questions regarding (1): (i) What is the excess risk of fЛҶ compared to that of the minimizer of the population
    вҲ—
        Equal Contribution
    вҖ 
        Equal Advising


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            0.16               Target Risk
                             i =1
                             2                                                                 Empirical Target Risk
    4               i=1                                                     0.14               Optimal Masked Surrogate-to-Target Risk
                                                                                               Empirical Optimal Masked Surrogate-to-Target Risk
                               True *                                       0.12               Optimal Surrogate-to-Target Risk
    3                          Optimal Masked Surrogate Model               0.10               Empirical Optimal Surrogate-to-Target Risk


                                                                Test Risk
                               Optimal Surrogate Model
                                                                            0.08
i


    2
                                                                            0.06
    1                                                                       0.04
                                                                            0.02
    0                                                                       0.00
        0       100        200       300       400      500                        50   100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
            Index i (ordered in decreasing eigenvalues)                                         Sample Size (n)
        (a) Ground-truth and surrogate model weights                               (b) Test risks as a function of sample size

Figure 1: Structure and performance of optimal surrogate models. (a): We compare the weights of the optimal
surrogate model (green) with the ground-truth (blue). This reveals a transition from amplification to shrinkage
as we move from principal to tail eigenvalues. The yellow curve displays the optimal 0-1 masking of the
ground-truth where we either keep or discard a feature. (b): Associated test risks as a function of sample size.
The theoretical bounds (full lines) match the experiments (markers). Setting: The feature size is p = 500; the
sample size is n = 200 in (a) and variable in (b); the feature covariance follows the power-law structure О»i = iвҲ’2 ,
О»i ОІ2i = iвҲ’1.5 ; О¶i is the covariance statistics (see Corollary 1) governing the optimal surrogateвҖҷs structure.
risk fвӢҶ = arg min f вҲҲF E(x,y)вҲјDt [в„“(y, f (x))]? (ii) What is the optimal surrogate model s that minimizes such
excess risk? (iii) Can the optimal s strictly outperform using true labels yi or setting s = fвӢҶ in (1)? Furthermore,
in practice, s itself is the outcome of an empirical risk minimization (ERM) procedure. Specifically, let D s be
the surrogate distribution, ( xМғi , yМғi )m
                                         i=1 be sampled i.i.d. from D s (having feature dimension p), and assume
                                                                  m
                                                              1X
                                                 s = arg min         в„“(yМғi , f ( xМғi )),                         (2)
                                                         f вҲҲS m
                                                                 i=1
where S denotes the surrogate hypothesis class. Thus, as a final (and more challenging question), one may ask:
(iv) How do the sample sizes n, m and the data distributions Dt , D s affect the performance of fЛҶ?
Main contributions. We address these questions in the context of high-dimensional ridgeless regression,
where F , S are the class of linear models and в„“ is the quadratic loss. We provide a sharp non-asymptotic
characterization of the test risk of fЛҶ in two core settings:

        1. The surrogate s is provided and we solve fЛҶ via (1), which addresses the first three questions above;
        2. fЛҶ is obtained via two stages of ERM, i.e., (2) followed by (1), which addresses the last question.
We focus on the regime where the sample sizes n, m and the feature dimension p are all proportional and also
allow for a distribution shift between Dt and D s , which correspond to the two ERM stages. Our theoretical
guarantees in Section 3 precisely characterize the regression coefficients ОІ s of the optimal surrogate model
in terms of the corresponding coefficients ОІвӢҶ of the population risk minimizer fвӢҶ and the feature covariance.
This is depicted in Figure 1a where ОІвӢҶ and ОІ s are displayed by blue and green curves, respectively. This
unveils a remarkable phenomenology in the process of knowledge distillation, that can be described as follows.
Define the per-feature вҖҳgainвҖҷ of the optimal surrogate as gain = ОІ s /ОІвӢҶ where the division is entrywise, which
corresponds to the ratio between green and blue curves. We show that the gain vector is entirely controlled by
                                              p
the covariance statistics, denoted by (О¶i )i=1  , that summarize the role of feature covariance and finite sample
size n in the test risk. There is a well-defined transition point, О¶i = 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ in Fig. 1a, where the gain passes from
strict amplification (gaini > 1) to strict shrinkage (gaini < 1) as we move from principal eigendirections to
tail. Our theory also clarifies when we are better off discarding the weak features. The yellow curve shows the
optimal surrogate when ОІ s is restricted to be a 0-1 mask on the entries of ОІвӢҶ so that the surrogate has the direct
interpretation of feature pruning. We show that beyond the transition point О¶i2 = 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ, truncating the weak
features that lie on the tail of the spectrum is strictly beneficial to distillation. This masked surrogate model
can be viewed as a weak supervisor as it contains strictly fewer features compared to the target, revealing a
success mechanism for weak-to-strong supervision.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notably, as the sample size n decreases, the optimal surrogate provably becomes sparser (transition points
shift to the left) under a power-law decay covariance model. In Section 4, under this power-law model, we
also quantify the performance gain that arises from the optimal surrogate and show that while the surrogate
can strictly improve the test risk, it does not alter the exponent of the scaling law. This is depicted in Figure
1b where the surrogate risks are smaller but behave similarly to the ground-truth. Finally, in Section 5, we
study the more intricate problem of two-stage ERM ((2) followed by (1)) and establish a non-asymptotic
risk characterization that precisely captures the influences of the sample sizes m, n and of the surrogate/target
covariance matrices.

1.1   Related work

Our work relates to the topics of high-dimensional learning, distribution shift, scaling laws, and distillation.
High-dimensional risk characterization. There is a large body of literature dedicated to the study of linear
regression in over- and under-parameterized regimes. Via random matrix theory tools, one can precisely
study the test risk and various associated phenomena, such as benign overfitting (Bartlett et al., 2020) or
double descent (Belkin et al., 2019). Specifically, asymptotic and non-asymptotic risk characterizations for the
minimum в„“2 -norm interpolator (i.e., ridgeless regression with p вүҘ n) have been provided in a recent line of
work (Hastie et al., 2020; Cheng & Montanari, 2024; Han & Xu, 2023; Wu & Xu, 2020; Richards et al., 2021;
Loureiro et al., 2022).
While the standard ERM formulation is well studied, the analysis of the distillation problem necessitates a fine-
grained characterization of the ERM process. A series of papers (Chang et al., 2021; Montanari et al., 2023;
Han & Xu, 2023) utilize Gaussian process theory (Thrampoulidis et al., 2015) to characterize the distribution
of ridgeless estimators. Our theory builds on these to precisely characterize the distillation performance by
(i) accounting for model and covariate shift and (ii) tracking the distribution across the two-stage problem
where (2) is followed by (1). Our setting strictly subsumes the problem of characterizing the test risk under
distribution shift, which relates to the recent papers (Patil et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023;
Mallinar et al., 2024). A distinguishing feature of our work is that we precisely characterize the optimal
surrogate model that minimizes the downstream target risk, as highlighted in Figure 1.
Distillation and weak-to-strong generalization. Mobahi et al. (2020) provide a theoretical analysis of self-
distillation, whereas Menon et al. (2020); Nagarajan et al. (2023); Harutyunyan et al. (2023) study knowledge
distillation in a teacher-student setting. A related problem is self-training which relies on progressively
generating pseudo-labels for unlabeled data (Frei et al., 2022; Oymak & Gulcu, 2021; Wei et al., 2022b).
While these works consider low-dimensional settings or provide loose bounds, our study provides a sharp
analysis of ridgeless over-parameterized regression. Closer to us, Jain et al. (2024) investigate the benefit of
surrogate data by employing both real and surrogate data in a single step of ERM, but the analysis is limited
to isotropic covariance. Kolossov et al. (2023) consider the problem of surrogate-based data selection. Finally,
Charikar et al. (2024); Lang et al. (2024) aim to demystify weak-to-strong generalization by formalizing the
intuition that W2S generalization occurs when the strong model avoids fitting the mistakes of the weak teacher.
In contrast, our theory reveals that the strong student can benignly overfit the weak teacher, and in fact, a
carefully crafted weak teacher provably outperforms strong labels, see again Figure 1.
Scaling laws. The dependence of the performance on the available statistical and computational resources is
often empirically well-captured by a power-law (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020). This experimental
evidence has led to a flurry of theoretical work aimed at characterizing the emergence of scaling laws, mostly
focusing on linear regression (Spigler et al., 2020; Simon et al., 2023; Bahri et al., 2024; Paquette et al., 2024;
Bordelon et al., 2024b; Lin et al., 2024a; Maloney et al., 2022). Bordelon et al. (2024a) analyze a random
feature model trained with gradient descent via dynamical mean field theory. Jain et al. (2024) consider scaling
laws with surrogate data, whereas Sorscher et al. (2022) study the benefits of data pruning.

2     Problem setup
Notation. Let [p] denote the set {1, В· В· В· , p} for an integer p вүҘ 1. We use lower-case and upper-case bold
letters (e.g., x, X) to represent vectors and matrices, respectively; xi denotes the i-th entry of the vector x, XвҖ 
the pseudo-inverse of the matrix X, and tr (X) the trace of X. For further notations, please see Table 1.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We consider a two-stage linear learning problem. In the first stage, pairs of labels and input features from the
distribution D s are used to produce an estimate of the ground-truth parameter, which is then used to generate
labels along with input features from a different distribution Dt . The second stage uses these generated labels
to obtain the final estimate of the ground-truth parameter. The models trained in the first and second stages are
referred to as surrogate and target models, respectively.
Stage 1: Surrogate model. We consider a data distribution ( xМғ, yМғ) вҲј D s following the linear model yМғ = xМғвҠӨ ОІвӢҶ +zМғ,
where ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ R p , xМғ вҲј N(0, ОЈ s ) and zМғ вҲј N(0, Пғ2s ) is independent of xМғ. Let {( xМғi , yМғi )m
                                                                                             i=1 } be the dataset for the
surrogate model drawn i.i.d. from D s . We analyze both under- and over-parametrized settings: in the former,
we estimate ОІвӢҶ by minimizing the quadratic loss; in the latter, we estimate ОІвӢҶ as the minimum norm interpolator.
As a result, the estimator of the surrogate model can be written as follows:
                                                  arg minОІ вҲҘyМғ вҲ’ XМғОІвҲҘ22 ,
                                                (
                                                                               if m вүҘ p,
                          ОІ s = Est( XМғ, yМғ) :=                                                                        (3)
                                                  arg minОІ {вҲҘОІвҲҘ2 : XМғОІ = yМғ},  if m < p,
where XМғ = [ xМғвҠӨ1 , . . . , xМғвҠӨm ]вҠӨ вҲҲ RmГ—p and yМғ = [y1 , . . . , ym ]вҠӨ вҲҲ Rm .
Stage 2: Target model. Given ОІ s вҲҲ R p , we consider another data distribution (x, y s ) вҲј Dt (ОІ s ) following the
linear model y s = xвҠӨ ОІ s + z, where x вҲј N(0, ОЈt ) and z вҲј N(0, Пғ2t ). Let {(xi , yis )ni=1 } be the dataset for the target
model drawn i.i.d. from Dt (ОІ s ). As for the surrogate model, the estimator for the target model is defined as
                                                ОІ s2t = Est(X, y s ),                                                   (4)
where X = [xвҠӨ1 , . . . , xвҠӨn ]вҠӨ вҲҲ RnГ—p and y s = [y1s , . . . , yns ]вҠӨ вҲҲ Rn . Our analysis will generally apply to an arbitrary
ОІ s choice and will not require it to be the outcome of (3). Finally, we define the excess (population) risk for a
given estimator ОІМӮ вҲҲ R p as
                                R(ОІМӮ) := E(x,y)вҲјDt (ОІвӢҶ ) [(y вҲ’ xвҠӨ ОІМӮ)2 ] вҲ’ Пғ2t = вҲҘОЈ1/2
                                                                                   t (ОІМӮ вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 .
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                           (5)

Throughout the paper, we compare the surrogate-to-target model with two different reference models.
Reference 1: Standard target model. We study the generalization performance of ОІ s2t with respect to the
standard target model, which has access to the ground-truth parameter through labeling. Specifically, consider
the dataset {(xi , yi )ni=1 } drawn i.i.d. from Dt (ОІвӢҶ ); then, the estimation is
                                                           ОІt := Est(X, y),                                                (6)
where X = [xвҠӨ1 , . . . , xвҠӨn ]вҠӨ вҲҲ RnГ—p and y = [y1 , . . . , yn ]вҠӨ вҲҲ Rn . We compare the excess risks of the surrogate-to-
target model R(ОІ s2t ) with that of the standard target model R(ОІt ).
Reference 2: Covariance shift model (Mallinar et al., 2024; Patil et al., 2024). Given ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ R p , let
{(xi , yi )ni=1 } be a dataset drawn i.i.d. from Dcs
                                                   s , where xi вҲј N(0, ОЈ s ), zi вҲј N(0, Пғt ), and yi = xt ОІвӢҶ + zi ;
                                                                                            2               вҠӨ

then, using the same notation X = [xвҠӨ1 , . . . , xвҠӨn ]вҠӨ вҲҲ RnГ—p and y = [y1 , . . . , yn ]вҠӨ вҲҲ Rn , the estimation is
ОІМӮcs := Est(X, y). The test risk of ОІМӮcs is calculated under covariance shift. Let (x, y) вҲј Dt be a distribution such
that x вҲј N(0, ОЈt ), z вҲј N(0, Пғ2t ), and y = xвҠӨ ОІвӢҶ + z. Then, the excess transfer risk is
                                             R(ОІМӮcs ) := E(x,y)вҲјDt [(y вҲ’ xвҠӨ ОІМӮ)2 ] вҲ’ Пғ2t .
We discuss the equivalence between the surrogate-to-target model and the covariance shift model in Section 3.

3    Analysis for model shift
We start by examining the behavior of the surrogate-to-target model when there is a model shift ОІ s , ОІвӢҶ . First,
we provide a non-asymptotic bound on the risk conditioned on ОІ s , and then we optimize this quantity with
respect to ОІ s (finding also a closed-form expression of the corresponding optimal value of ОІ s ). In addition, we
build a connection between our surrogate-to-target model and knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), as
well as weak-to-strong generalization (Burns et al., 2023). Finally, we extend our analysis to ridge regression
in Appendix A.1.
We note that when ОІ s = ОІвӢҶ , the calculations in this section simplify to the non-asymptotic risk characterization
of the minimum в„“2 -norm interpolator, recently studied by Hastie et al. (2020); Cheng & Montanari (2024);
Han & Xu (2023). When ОІ s , ОІвӢҶ , the problem is instead equivalent to covariance shift in transfer learning, as
formalized by the following observation whose proof is deferred to Appendix A.


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Observation 1. The model shift in the surrogate-to-target model is equivalent to the covariance shift model
(Mallinar et al., 2024). Formally, given any ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ R p and any jointly diagonalizable covariance matrices
ОЈ s , ОЈt вҲҲ R pГ—p , there exists a unique ОІ s вҲҲ R p such that the risk of the surrogate-to-target problem R(ОІ s2t ) with
(ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s , ОЈt ) is equivalent to the risk of the covariance shift model Rcs (ОІМӮ) with (ОІвӢҶ , ОЈ s , ОЈt ).

The joint diagonalizability of ОЈ s and ОЈt is also required by Mallinar et al. (2024) (see their Assumption 2.1),
where upper and lower bounds for the bias and variance are provided by adapting results from (Bartlett et al.,
2020; Tsigler & Bartlett, 2022). In contrast, our approach utilizes the non-asymptotic characterization of
the в„“2 -norm interpolator by Han & Xu (2023). This allows us to directly characterize the non-asymptotic
risk (instead of giving upper and lower bounds, as in (Mallinar et al., 2024)) and, thus, to obtain the optimal
surrogate parameter ОІ s . We begin by defining the asymptotic risk of the surrogate-to-target model, given the
surrogate parameter ОІ s , in the proportional regime where p, n вҶ’
                                                                вҲ’ вҲһ and the ratio Оәt = p/n > 1 is kept fixed.
Definition 1. Let Оәt = p/n > 1 and П„t вҲҲ R be the unique solution of the following equation
                                                 1
                                          ОәtвҲ’1 = tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt .                                       (7)
                                                  p
                                                        g
Let Оё1 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt and Оё2 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                    t   вҲҡt where gt вҲј N(0, I p ). Now, define the asymptotic
                                                          p
characterization of the minimum в„“2 -norm interpolator and the function Оіt : R p вҶ’ вҲ’ R as the following fixed
point equation based on the asymptotic risk
                                        XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt ) := Оё1 ОІ s + Оіt (ОІ s )Оё2 ,                          (8)
                                           t t

                                                      Оіt2 (ОІ s ) := Оәt Пғ2t + RМ„Оәs2t
                                                                                  t ,Пғt
                                                                                        (ОЈt , ОІ s , ОІ s ) ,         (9)
where the asymptotic risk is defined as

                 RМ„Оәs2t
                     t ,Пғt
                           (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s ) := E gt вҲҘОЈt1/2 (XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ22
                                                                  t   t

                                         = вҲҘОЈt1/2 (Оё1 ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ22 + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                             |            {z
                                                           (a)
                                                                          }   |        {z            }             (10)
                                                                                        (b)

                                           = (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                          + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ).

In the asymptotic risk, the term (a) corresponds to a part of the bias risk caused by the model shift (ОІ s ), and
the implicit regularization term where the eigenvalues of Оё1 are less than 1. The term (b) corresponds to the
remaining part of the bias and variance risks. We now state our non-asymptotic characterization of the risk.
Theorem 1. Suppose that, for some constant Mt > 1, we have 1/Mt вүӨ Оәt , Пғ2t вүӨ Mt and вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1 t  op
                                                                                                        вүӨ Mt .
Recall from (5) that R(ОІ ) represents the risk of the surrogate-to-target model given ОІ . Then, there exists a
                        s2t                                                            s

constant C = C(Mt ) such that, for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], the following holds with R + 1 < Mt :
                                                                          (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s ) вүҘ Оө) вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C .
                                                                                                              4
                                   sup           P( R(ОІ s2t ) вҲ’ RМ„Оәs2t
                                                                    t ,Пғt
                                                                                                                   (11)
                              ОІвӢҶ ,ОІ s вҲҲB p (R)


The proof of Theorem 1 utilizes the non-asymptotic characterization of the minimum norm interpolator in Han
& Xu (2023), which is based on the convex Gaussian min-max theorem (Gordon, 1988; Thrampoulidis et al.,
2015). The proof is deferred to Appendix A.
The surrogate parameter ОІ s that minimizes the individual term (a) in (10) is Оё1вҲ’1 ОІвӢҶ . On the other hand, the
surrogate parameter ОІ s that minimizes the individual term (b) in (10) is the zero vector, which follows from
(16) in Appendix A. Now, we are going to jointly minimize the asymptotic risk in the next proposition. The
optimal surrogate parameter is visualized as the green curve in Figure 1.
                         tr(ОЈ2t (ОЈt +П„t I)вҲ’2 )
Proposition 1. Let в„Ұ =             n           . The optimal surrogate ОІ s minimizing the asymptotic risk in (10) is
                                                                                   !вҲ’1
                                                              в„ҰП„2t вҲ’1
                             ОІ = (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt +
                                sвҲ—                   вҲ’1
                                                                   ОЈ (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1
                                                                                       ОІвӢҶ .
                                                             1вҲ’в„Ұ t

                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that, under the setting of Theorem 1, Proposition 1 can be extended to the non-asymptotic risk by
applying (11). The corollary below then offers a direct interpretation of the optimal surrogate parameter ОІ sвҲ— .
The proofs of both Corollary 1 and Proposition 1 are in Appendix A.
                                                                                       p
Corollary 1. Without loss of generality, suppose that ОЈt is diagonal.1 Let (О»i )i=1       be the eigenvalues of ОЈt in
non-increasing order and let О¶i = О»iП„+П„  t
                                           t
                                             for i вҲҲ [p]. Then, the following results hold:
                               в„Ұ О¶i вҲ’1

1. ОІi = (ОІвҲ— )i (1 вҲ’ О¶i ) + О¶i 1вҲ’в„Ұ 1вҲ’О¶i
    sвҲ—
                                            for every i вҲҲ [p].
                                                  Pp
                                                       (1вҲ’О¶ j )2
2. |ОІisвҲ— | > |(ОІвҲ— )i | if and only if 1 вҲ’ О¶i > в„Ұ = Pj=1
                                                     p
                                                        (1вҲ’О¶ )
                                                               for every i вҲҲ [p].
                                                    j=1       j


3. ОІ sвҲ— = ОІвӢҶ if and only if the covariance matrix ОЈt = cI for some c вҲҲ R.
                                                                                           p
The first part shows that the optimal surrogate parameter is fully characterized by (О¶i )i=1   , which only depends
                                                                                                    p
on the covariance spectrum (via О»i ) and the sample size n (via П„t ). Note that the spectrum (О¶i )i=1  characterizes
the risk in both linear regression and random features regression, shown in Ildiz et al. (2024) and Simon et al.
                                              p
(2023), respectively. As the eigenvalues (О»i )i=1 are ordered, the О¶i вҖҷs are ordered as well, and the second part of
the corollary identifies a threshold behavior: before the transition point 1 вҲ’ О¶i = в„Ұ, the entries of the surrogate
are amplified w.r.t. the ground-truth parameter ОІвӢҶ , while they experience shrinkage after the transition. The
threshold corresponds to the ratio of the sample second moment to the sample first moment of the random
variable whose realization is given by (1 вҲ’ О¶i ), and it arises from the optimization of the trade-off between the
bias and variance terms in (10). Finally, the third part of the corollary shows that, unless the eigenvalues of the
covariance matrix are constant, there is potential for improvement by tuning the surrogate parameter.
The intuition behind improving the performance of the standard target model by utilizing a surrogate parameter
ОІ s different from ОІвӢҶ is associated with the implicit regularization of the minimum norm interpolator in the
over-parametrized region (p > n). As long as the covariance matrix eigenvalues are not constant, there is a
way to mitigate the bias risk caused by the implicit regularization. This implicit regularization term is specific
to the over-parametrized region. Indeed, in the next proposition (proved in Appendix A), we will show that the
optimal surrogate parameter ОІ s is ОІвӢҶ when the target model is under-parametrized:
Proposition 2. The optimal surrogate parameter ОІ s that minimizes the asymptotic risk in the under-
parametrized region (n > p) is equivalent to the ground truth parameter ОІвӢҶ . In other words, for any
ОІ s , the surrogate-to-target model cannot outperform the standard target model in the asymptotic risk.

In other words, the result above shows that the improvement in the surrogate-to-target model compared to the
standard target model is special to the over-parameterized region.

3.1   Weak-to-strong generalization

To connect with knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) and weak-to-strong generalization (Burns et al.,
2023), we allow the surrogate model to use fewer features, p s < p, by introducing a mask operation M(x),
where M(x) вҲҲ R ps selects p s features from the full set of p features in x вҲҲ R p . Alongside this mask, we adjust
the distributions for both the surrogate and target models as
         (M( xМғ), yМғ) вҲј D sps follows yМғ = M( xМғ)вҠӨ M(ОІвӢҶ ) + zМғ, where ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ R p , xМғ вҲј N(0, ОЈ s ), zМғ вҲј N(0, Пғ2s ),
         (x, y s ) вҲј Dtps (ОІ s ) follows y s = M(x)вҠӨ ОІ s + z, where ОІ s вҲҲ R ps , x вҲј N(0, ОЈt ), z вҲј N(0, Пғ2t ).
Then, ОІ s2t is estimated based on the samples from Dtps (ОІ s ), and the risk R(ОІ s2t ) is still calculated with respect
to the standard target model distribution Dt (ОІвӢҶ ) as defined in (5). As we focus on analyzing the model shift
case, we assume that the covariance matrices ОЈ s and ОЈt are identical.
In this formulation, the surrogate model is considered weak because it has access to fewer features, while
the target model is the strong model. We now address the following question: Can the surrogate-to-target
model outperform the standard target model, provided in (6), in the absence of model shift (M(ОІвӢҶ ) = ОІ s )?
    1
      If not, there exists an orthogonal matrix U вҲҲ R pГ—p s.t. UОЈt UвҠӨ is diagonal. Then, we can consider the covariance matrix
as UОЈt UвҠӨ and the ground truth parameter as UОІвӢҶ , which behaves the same as the original parameters, see Observation 2.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The absence of model shift corresponds to the case where the surrogate model has infinitely many data. The
next proposition provides a sufficient condition to answer the question above in the affirmative, and it derives
the optimal selection of features.
Proposition 3. Consider the target model in (6), assume that ОЈt is diagonal, and recall the definitions of О¶i
and в„Ұ. Then, the following results hold:
1. If the mask operation M selects all the features that satisfy 1 вҲ’ О¶i2 > в„Ұ, then the surrogate-to-target model
   outperforms the standard target model in the asymptotic risk in (10).
2. Let M represent the set of all possible M, where |M| = 2 p . The optimal MвҲ— for the asymptotic risk in (10)
   within M is the one that selects all features satisfying 1 вҲ’ О¶i2 > в„Ұ.

The proof of Proposition 3 is provided in Appendix A, and the result can be extended to the non-asymptotic
risk by applying Theorem 1. Similarly to Corollary 1, the result above identifies a threshold behavior: the
entries of the surrogate are masked (i.e., set to 0) after the transition point 1 вҲ’ О¶i2 = в„Ұ, while they coincide
with the ground-truth parameter ОІвӢҶ otherwise. The transition point changes with respect to Corollary 1 and,
as 1 вҲ’ О¶i2 > 1 вҲ’ О¶i , it is shifted to the right: the optimal mask includes not only features whose magnitude
increases, but also features whose magnitude decreases while selecting the optimal surrogate ОІ sвҲ— .
In Figure 1a, we illustrate the optimal M and ОІ s , showing that the threshold associated with the optimal M is
larger than the threshold associated with the transition from amplification to shrinkage in the optimal ОІ s . In
addition, we note that the ratio between the green curve and the blue curve in Figure 1a is not monotone with
respect to О»i . In Figure 1b, we also present a comparison of their associated risks.
In Figure 2a, we examine the surrogate-to-target model in the context of image classification. Specifically, we
fine-tune a pretrained ResNet-50 model (He et al., 2015) using both ground-truth labels and predictions from a
surrogate (weak) model on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009). The surrogate models are
shallow, 3-layer convolutional neural networks with varying parameter sizes. In all cases, surrogate-to-target
models consistently outperform surrogate models across different model sizes. However, in this setting,
surrogate-to-target models do not outperform the standard target (strong) model. This is in agreement with
the weak-to-strong results in Burns et al. (2023), where the GPT-4 model trained with GPT-2 labels performs
comparably to GPT-3.5. The reason why the surrogate-to-target model underperforms the standard target
model is the surrogate model is not able to follow the feature selection mechanism characterized in Proposition
3. This suggests that the feature selection mechanism is crucial for surpassing the performance of the standard
target model. We provide further experimental details in Appendix A.2.

4    Fundamental limits and scaling laws
We now study the fundamental limits of the surrogate-to-target model with the optimal surrogate parameter
ОІ sвҲ— (see Proposition 1) and the optimal mask operator MвҲ— (see Proposition 3). Our analysis shows that, when
eigenvalues (О»i ) and signal coefficients (О»i ОІ2i ) follow a power law, the risk of the surrogate-to-target model
under the optimal selection of the parameters ОІ sвҲ— and MвҲ— scales the same as that of the target model (even
though there is a strict improvement in the risk, as per Corollary 1). By Observation 1, this also indicates that
the gain obtained by the covariance shift model, as outlined in Mallinar et al. (2024), does not change the
scaling law. We start our analysis with the definition of the omniscient test risk estimate.
Definition 2 (Omniscient test risk estimate). Fix p > n вүҘ 1. Given a covariance ОЈ = U diag(О»)UвҠӨ , ОІвӢҶ , and
                                                                                                     P p О»i
the noise term Пғ, set ОІМ„ = UвҠӨ ОІвӢҶ and define П„ вҲҲ R as the unique non-negative solution of n = i=1         О»i +П„ . Then,
the omniscient excess test risk estimate is the following:
                                                h           i          Пғ2 в„Ұ + B(ОІМ„)
                          Rom (ОІМӮ) вүҲ EОІМӮвҲјD(ОІвӢҶ ) (y вҲ’ xвҠӨ ОІМӮ)2 вҲ’ Пғ2 =                 ,                             (12)
                                                                           1вҲ’в„Ұ
                                                            p                         p
                                          П„             1X                         X              2
                        where О¶i =             , в„Ұ=           (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 , B(ОІМ„) =      О»i О¶i2 ОІМ„i .
                                       О»i + П„           n i=1                       i=1

The above test risk estimate yields exact results (and, hence, вүҲ in (12) becomes =) in the proportional limit via
                                                                                               s2t
the analysis of Section 3. In other words, the omniscient test risk estimate is identical to RМ„Оә,Пғ (ОЈ, ОІвӢҶ , ОІвӢҶ ), which
can be derived by substituting ОІ = ОІвӢҶ into Equation 10. Specifically, suppose that the empirical distributions
                                  s



                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       90
                                                               Surrogate-b-to-Target
                                                               Surrogate-m-to-Target                1.0                                  Theoretical = 0.5
                                                               Surrogate-s-to-Target                                                     Experimental = 0.5
                       85                                      Surrogate-b                                                               Theoretical = 1
                                                               Surrogate-m                                                               Experimental = 1
                       80
                                                               Surrogate-s
                                                               Standard Target
                                                                                                    0.8                                  Theoretical = 1.5
                                                                                                                                         Experimental = 1.5
                                                                                                                                         Theoretical = 2
        Accuracy (%)


                       75                                                                           0.6                                  Experimental = 2


                                                                                        Test Risk
                       70
                                                                                                    0.4
                       65
                                                                                                    0.2
                       60
                                                                                                    0.0
                       55
                            0      10    20     30      40       50             60                        0   20      40            60     80          100
                                               Epoch                                                               Sample Size (n = m)
                                (a) Weak-to-strong on CIFAR-10                         (b) Comparison of theoretical and experimental risks

Figure 2: (a): On the CIFAR-10 dataset, we fine-tune a ResNet50 model using the ground-truth labels
(target) and the predictions of three weak convolutional models (surrogate) with different capacities: big (b),
medium (m), and small (s). We observe that surrogate-to-target models consistently outperform surrogate
modelsвҖҷ accuracies, even though they are trained on the surrogate modelsвҖҷ predictions. (b): We compare the
experimental two-stage risk with our estimated theoretical risk. In the experimental setup, p = 100, and we
vary n = m from 1 to 100. Both feature covariances follow the power-law structure О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for Оұ = 0.5, 1, 1.5
and 2; the ground truth parameter ОІвӢҶ is specified as ОІi = 1.

of ОІМ„ and О» converge as p вҶ’ вҲһ having fixed the ratio p/n = Оә. Then, the risk obtained in Theorem 1 converges
to the omniscient risk estimate given in (12), as proved in Appendix B. We will use this omniscient risk
estimate in the limit of p вҶ’ вҲһ, as considered in several papers (Cui et al., 2022; Simon et al., 2024; Wei et al.,
2022a). Yet, our empirical validations in Figure 1 demonstrate that this framework yields consistent results
even when applied to scenarios with moderately sized p and n.
Throughout the section, we analyze the case where the surrogate parameter ОІ s is given, therefore we need
to take into account only the target covariance matrix ОЈt . Without loss of generality, we assume that the
covariance matrix ОЈt is diagonal by Observation 2. From now on, we will consider the particular case of
power-law eigenstructure, that is ОЈi,i = О»i = iвҲ’Оұ . The omniscient risk under this structure still depends on the
parameters П„t and в„Ұ, and the next proposition analyzes them asymptotically. Its proof is in Appendix B.
Proposition 4 (Asymptotic analysis of П„t and в„Ұ). Let the covariance matrix ОЈ вҲҲ R pГ—p be diagonal and
ОЈi,i = О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for 1 < Оұ. Recall from Definition 2 that, as p вҶ’ вҲһ, П„t and в„Ұ are given by the equations
                                    вҲһ                           вҲһ           !2
                                   X     О»i                    X      iвҲ’Оұ
                                              = n,       nв„Ұ =                  .
                                       О» + П„t
                                   i=1 i                       i=1
                                                                   iвҲ’Оұ + П„t

Then, the following results hold
                                                                                                                           !Оұ
                                                                                                       ПҖ
                                              П„t = cn  вҲ’Оұ
                                                              1 + O(nвҲ’1 ) ,               for c =                               ,
                                                                                                  Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                                                                                                                                                              (13)
                                                 ОұвҲ’1
                                              в„Ұ=     вҲ’ O(nвҲ’1 ).
                                                  Оұ

Recall from Corollary 1 and Proposition 3 that the cut-off indices for the optimal surrogate parameter ОІ sвҲ— and
the optimal mask operation MвҲ— are respectively О¶i < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ and О¶i2 < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ, which depend on П„t , в„Ұ. Armed
with the asymptotic expressions in (13), we now identify the cut-off indices as a function of the sample size n.
                                             Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)             Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
Proposition 5. Set the constants C1 :=                   and C2 :=     вҲҡ           and assume the power-law
                                             ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ            ПҖ( Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ
eigenstructure ОЈi,i = О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for 1 < Оұ. Let П„t and в„Ұ be the solutions given by Proposition 4 and define
О¶i = О»iП„+П„
         t
           t
             . Then, the indices i for which О¶i < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ are i < nC1 + O(1); while the indices i for which is
О¶i < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ are i < nC2 + O(1).
 2



                                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The result above is proved in Appendix B, and it shows that, as the sample size n decreases, the cut-off indices
of both the optimal surrogate parameter ОІ sвҲ— and the optimal mask MвҲ— shift to the left linearly in n. This also
implies that, with less data, optimal surrogate models tend to be more sparse.
Next, we address the question of how the excess test risk scales with respect to the sample size n, when
the surrogate parameter is the optimal ОІ sвҲ— . Specifically, Proposition 6 below shows that, under a power-
law decay of both the eigenvalues (О»i ) and the signal coefficients (О»i ОІ2i ), the excess test risk of the optimal
surrogate-to-target model scales the same as the standard target model.
Before stating the result, we make a comment on the noise assumption needed to ensure that the scaling law of
the excess test risk remains unaffected by the introduction of noise, which allows us to analyze the modelвҖҷs
inherent error. Specifically, we choose the variance of the noise term Пғ2t to be at most of the order of the
scaling law of the excess test risks when Пғ2t = 0. This corresponds to Пғ2t = O(nвҲ’Оі ), where Оі is the exponent of
the scaling law in the noiseless setting. Conversely, a fixed noise variance Пғ2t = Оҳ(1) that does not decay with
n would cause the noise to overshadow the uncaptured part of the signal, which scales down with n. In this
unintended scenario, the noise would dominate our observations.
Proposition 6 (Scaling law). Let the covariance matrix ОЈt be diagonal with eigenvalues О»i , and let the
ground-truth parameter ОІвӢҶ have components ОІi corresponding to each feature. Assume that both eigenvalues
О»i and signal coefficients О»i ОІ2i follow a power-law decay, i.e., О»i ОІ2i = iвҲ’ОІ and О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for Оұ, ОІ > 1. Let the
optimal surrogate parameter ОІ sвҲ— be given by Proposition 1 and define the minimum surrogate-to-target risk
attained by ОІ sвҲ— as Rom
                     вҲ—
                        (ОІ s2t ) = min Rom (ОІ s2t ), where Rom (ОІ s2t ) is described in Definition 2. Then, in the limit
of p вҶ’ вҲһ, the excess test risk of the surrogate-to-target model with an optimal surrogate parameter scales the
same as that of the standard target model. Specifically, we have
                               вҲ—
                              Rom (ОІ s2t ) = Оҳ(nвҲ’(ОІвҲ’1) ) = Rom (ОІt ),     if ОІ < 2Оұ + 1,
                               вҲ—
                              Rom (ОІ s2t ) = Оҳ(nвҲ’2Оұ ) = Rom (ОІt ),      if ОІ > 2Оұ + 1.

        вҲ—
Since Rom  (ОІ s2t ) is a lower bound on Rom (ОІ s2t ), we have that the scaling law of the excess test risk of the
surrogate-to-target model cannot be improved beyond that of the standard target model, even with the freedom
to choose ОІ s . This also indicates that the optimal selection of the mask does not improve the scaling law, see
Proposition 7 in Appendix B for details.
The  proof of Proposition        6 is deferred to Appendix B. Here, we note that we utilize the expression
  в„Ұ Pp

1вҲ’в„Ұ        О»
        i=1 i i(ОІ  ) О¶
                  s 2 2
                      i   as a lower bound for the risk, while proving the scaling law for the optimal surrogate-to-
target model. Although this expression alone is insufficient to determine an asymptotic lower bound for an
arbitrary ОІ s , it becomes particularly useful when considering the optimal surrogate parameter ОІ sвҲ— provided in
Proposition 1. We then leverage the fact that the optimal surrogate parameter yields the minimum test risk to
characterize its asymptotic behavior.
Finally, we provide in Appendix B also a non-asymptotic analysis of П„t and в„Ұ (see Propositions 8 and 9,
respectively), which complements the asymptotic one in Proposition 4 above. This allows us to characterize a
region with finite n and p where the surrogate-to-target model strictly outperforms the standard target model,
see Proposition 10.

5   Risk characterization for the two-stage model
Until now, we have examined the behavior of the surrogate-to-target model when ОІ s is given. In this section, we
characterize the non-asymptotic risk of the surrogate-to-target model when ОІ s is the solution of the surrogate
problem (3) where Оә s = p/m > 1. Our analysis includes two cases: (i) the target model has infinitely many
data (n = вҲһ), and (ii) the target model is overparametrized, i.e., Оәt = p/n > 1.
When the target model has infinitely many data, the estimate of the surrogate-to-target model ОІ s2t is equal to
the estimate of the surrogate model ОІ s . This means that the correct ground-truth parameter ОІвӢҶ is estimated
under a distribution D s and tested under another distribution Dt (ОІвӢҶ ), which is equivalent to the covariance
shift model by definition. By Observation 1, the model shift in the surrogate-to-target model is equivalent to
the covariance shift model and, hence, the analysis in Sections 3 and 4 is valid for this case.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, we consider the case where the target model is overparametrized and begin with the following
asymptotic risk definition.
Definition 3. Recall the definition of П„t and Оіt in Theorem 1. Let Оә s = p/m > 1 and define П„ s вҲҲ R similarly to
П„t . We define the random variable XОәs ,Пғ2 based on g s вҲј N(0, I) and the function Оі s : R p вҶ’                     вҲ’ R as follows:
                                              s s

                                                                                ОЈвҲ’1/2 Оі s (ОІвӢҶ ) g s пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                         пЈ®                            пЈ№
                      XОәs ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) := (ОЈ s + П„ s I)вҲ’1 ОЈ s пЈҜпЈҜпЈ°ОІвӢҶ + s вҲҡ
                                                                         пЈҜпЈҜ
                                                                                                      пЈәпЈ»
                         s s                                                               p

                                     Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ) := Оә s Пғ2s + E gs [вҲҘОЈ1/2   s (XОә ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 ] .
                                                                              s                              2
                                                                             s   s

Let ОәМҮ = (Оә s , Оәt ), ОЈМҮ = (ОЈ s , ОЈt ), and ПғМҮ = (Пғ2s , Пғ2t ). Then, we define the asymptotic risk estimate as
                                                                                   EОІs вҲјX s 2 [Оіt2 (ОІ s )]
                                                                                         Оә s ,Пғ s

      RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) = вҲҘОЈt I вҲ’ (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 +
                             1/2                  вҲ’1                 вҲ’1       2
                                                                                                          tr ОЈ2t (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2
                                                                                                p
                          Оі (ОІвӢҶ )
                           2
                        + s         tr ОЈ1/2
                                          s (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s
                                                           вҲ’1            вҲ’1              вҲ’1                 вҲ’1 1/2
                                                                                                                     .
                             p
The non-asymptotic characterization of the risk is stated below and proved in Appendix C, which also contains
a closed-form expression for EОІs вҲјX s 2 [Оіt2 (ОІ s )] (see Lemma 1).
                                           Оә s ,Пғ s

Theorem 2. Suppose that, for some constant Mt > 1, we have 1/Mt вүӨ Оә s , Пғ2s , Оәt , Пғ2t вүӨ Mt and
вҲҘОЈ s вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1s op , вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop , ОЈ s op вүӨ Mt . Consider the surrogate-to-target model defined in Section 2, and
                                вҲ’1

let R(ОІ s2t ) represent its risk when ОІвӢҶ is given. Recall the definition of ОЈМҮ, ОәМҮ, ПғМҮ and RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ in Definition 3. Then,
there exists a constant C = C(Mt ) such that for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], the following holds when R + 1 < Mt :
                                     sup P( R(ОІ s2t ) вҲ’ RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) вүҘ Оө) вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C .
                                                                                              4


                                   ОІвӢҶ вҲҲB p (R)

In the proof of Theorem 2, we apply the distributional characterization of the minimum norm interpolator
(Han & Xu, 2023) twice. The main technical difficulty is to satisfy the Lipschitz condition of the distributional
characterization in the second step, which is handled by bounding the intermediate stepвҖҷs interpolator in a ball.
We implement the surrogate-to-target model with a synthetic dataset and demonstrate that our risk characteri-
zation agrees well with the experimental two-stage linear regression in Figure 2b. Furthermore, we extend our
analysis of the two-stage model to the under-parametrized region in Appendix C.1. This extension enables us
to analyze Section 3.1 thoroughly because this analysis allows the surrogate model to have finite data.

6    Concluding remarks
We have provided a sharp characterization of knowledge distillation for high-dimensional linear regression
when labels are generated by a surrogate model and, additionally, characterized the risk of the two-stage
process where the surrogate model is the outcome of an initial ERM. These results shed light on the form of
the optimal surrogate model, reveal an amplify-to-shrink phase transition as a function of the eigenspectrum,
and draw connections to weak-to-strong generalization. Specifically, we have shown that the labels coming
from the optimal surrogate model strictly allow for improving the performance of the target model, unless
the covariance is a multiple of the identity. However, even though there is a strict improvement in the risk,
the scaling behavior of the two-stage process with labels coming from the optimal surrogate model remains
unchanged compared to the standard target model that utilizes ground-truth labels.
We outline three interesting directions for future research. The first is to extend the two-stage process to
multiple stages, establishing whether this further improves the risk. The second is to apply the two-stage
learning to data pruning, using the surrogate model to decide whether to keep or discard each (x, y) pair during
the training of the target model. The third is to go beyond linear regression towards neural network models. In
this regard, the precise asymptotics of the test error of the ERM solution were provided by (Mei & Montanari,
2022) for the random features model and by (Montanari & Zhong, 2022) for two-layer neural networks in
the NTK regime. However, a non-asymptotic characterization (similar to that given by (Han & Xu, 2023) for
linear regression) remains an open problem. The resolution of this open problem, as well as the analysis of the
phenomena of knowledge distillation and weak-to-strong generalization, represent exciting future directions.


                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgements

M.E.I., H.A.G., E.O.T., S.O. are supported by the NSF grants CCF-2046816, CCF-2403075, the Office of
Naval Research grant N000142412289, an OpenAI Agentic AI Systems grant, and gifts by Open Philanthropy
and Google Research. M. M. is funded by the European Union (ERC, INF2 , project number 101161364).
Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of
the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor
the granting authority can be held responsible for them.

References
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany Awadalla,
 Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable
 language model locally on your phone, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14219.
Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining neural scaling laws.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(27):e2311878121, 2024.
Peter L. Bartlett, Philip M. Long, GГЎbor Lugosi, and Alexander Tsigler. Benign overfitting in linear regression.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30063вҖ“30070, 2020.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-learning practice
 and the classical biasвҖ“variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(32):
 15849вҖ“15854, 2019.
Blake Bordelon, Alexander Atanasov, and Cengiz Pehlevan. A dynamical model of neural scaling laws, 2024a.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01092.
Blake Bordelon, Alexander Atanasov, and Cengiz Pehlevan. How feature learning can improve neural scaling
  laws, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17858.
Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbrenner, Yining
  Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, Ilya Sutskever, and Jeff Wu. Weak-to-strong generalization:
  Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.09390.
Xiangyu Chang, Yingcong Li, Samet Oymak, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Provable benefits of overparame-
  terization in model compression: From double descent to pruning neural networks. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 6974вҖ“6983, 2021.
Moses Charikar, Chirag Pabbaraju, and Kirankumar Shiragur. Quantifying the gain in weak-to-strong
 generalization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15116.
Chen Cheng and Andrea Montanari. Dimension free ridge regression, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2210.08571.
Hugo Cui, Bruno Loureiro, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka ZdeborovГЎ. Generalization error rates in kernel
  regression: the crossover from the noiseless to noisy regime. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and
 Experiment, 2022(11):114004, 2022.
Alex Fang, Albin Madappally Jose, Amit Jain, Ludwig Schmidt, Alexander Toshev, and Vaishaal Shankar.
  Data filtering networks, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.17425.
Spencer Frei, Difan Zou, Zixiang Chen, and Quanquan Gu. Self-training converts weak learners to strong
  learners in mixture models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  8003вҖ“8021. PMLR, 2022.
Y. Gordon. On milmanвҖҷs inequality and random subspaces which escape through a mesh in rn. In Geometric
  Aspects of Functional Analysis, pp. 84вҖ“106, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1988. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio CГ©sar Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth Gopi,
  Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, Adil Salim, Shital Shah, Harkirat Singh
  Behl, Xin Wang, SГ©bastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Adam Tauman Kalai, Yin Tat Lee, and Yuanzhi Li.
  Textbooks are all you need, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11644.
Qiyang Han and Xiaocong Xu. The distribution of ridgeless least squares interpolators, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2307.02044.
Hrayr Harutyunyan, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Seungyeon Kim, and Sanjiv Kumar. Su-
  pervision complexity and its role in knowledge distillation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.
  12245.
Trevor Hastie, Andrea Montanari, Saharon Rosset, and Ryan J. Tibshirani. Surprises in high-dimensional
  ridgeless least squares interpolation, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.08560.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition,
  2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad, Md.
  Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable, empirically, 2017.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.00409.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network, 2015. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
Muhammed E. Ildiz, Zhe Zhao, and Samet Oymak. Understanding inverse scaling and emergence in multitask
 representation learning. In Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, volume 238 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4726вҖ“4734. PMLR, 02вҖ“04 May
 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v238/ildiz24a.html.
Ayush Jain, Andrea Montanari, and Eren Sasoglu. Scaling laws for learning with real and surrogate data, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.04376.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
  Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361.
Germain Kolossov, Andrea Montanari, and Pulkit Tandon. Towards a statistical theory of data selection under
  weak supervision, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.14563.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical
  Report 0, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 2009. URL https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/
  learning-features-2009-TR.pdf.
Hunter Lang, David Sontag, and Aravindan Vijayaraghavan. Theoretical analysis of weak-to-strong general-
  ization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16043.
Licong Lin, Jingfeng Wu, Sham M. Kakade, Peter L. Bartlett, and Jason D. Lee. Scaling laws in linear
  regression: Compute, parameters, and data, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08466.
Zhenghao Lin, Zhibin Gou, Yeyun Gong, Xiao Liu, Yelong Shen, Ruochen Xu, Chen Lin, Yujiu Yang,
  Jian Jiao, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. Rho-1: Not all tokens are what you need, 2024b. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2404.07965.
Bruno Loureiro, CГ©dric Gerbelot, Hugo Cui, Sebastian Goldt, Florent Krzakala, Marc MГ©zard, and Lenka
  ZdeborovГЎ. Learning curves of generic features maps for realistic datasets with a teacher-student model*.
  Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2022(11):114001, November 2022. ISSN 1742-
  5468. doi: 10.1088/1742-5468/ac9825. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/ac9825.
Neil Mallinar, Austin Zane, Spencer Frei, and Bin Yu. Minimum-norm interpolation under covariate shift,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00522.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander Maloney, Daniel A. Roberts, and James Sully. A solvable model of neural scaling laws, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.16859.

Song Mei and Andrea Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression: Precise asymptotics
  and the double descent curve. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 75(4):667вҖ“766, 2022.

Aditya Krishna Menon, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank J. Reddi, Seungyeon Kim, and Sanjiv Kumar. Why
  distillation helps: a statistical perspective, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.10419.

Hossein Mobahi, Mehrdad Farajtabar, and Peter Bartlett. Self-distillation amplifies regularization in hilbert
  space. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3351вҖ“3361, 2020.

Andrea Montanari and Yiqiao Zhong. The interpolation phase transition in neural networks: Memorization
  and generalization under lazy training. The Annals of Statistics, 50(5):2816вҖ“2847, 2022.

Andrea Montanari, Feng Ruan, Youngtak Sohn, and Jun Yan. The generalization error of max-margin linear
  classifiers: Benign overfitting and high dimensional asymptotics in the overparametrized regime, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.01544.

Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Aditya K Menon, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Hossein Mobahi, and Sanjiv Kumar. On student-
  teacher deviations in distillation: does it pay to disobey? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36:5961вҖ“6000, 2023.

Samet Oymak and Talha Cihad Gulcu. A theoretical characterization of semi-supervised learning with self-
  training for gaussian mixture models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 3601вҖ“3609. PMLR, 2021.

Elliot Paquette, Courtney Paquette, Lechao Xiao, and Jeffrey Pennington. 4+3 phases of compute-optimal
  neural scaling laws, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15074.

Pratik Patil, Jin-Hong Du, and Ryan J. Tibshirani. Optimal ridge regularization for out-of-distribution
  prediction, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01233.

Dominic Richards, Jaouad Mourtada, and Lorenzo Rosasco. Asymptotics of ridge (less) regression under
  general source condition. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3889вҖ“3897.
  PMLR, 2021.

Mark Rudelson and Roman Vershynin. The smallest singular value of a random rectangular matrix, 2009.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/0802.3956.

James B Simon, Madeline Dickens, Dhruva Karkada, and Michael Deweese. The eigenlearning framework: A
  conservation law perspective on kernel ridge regression and wide neural networks. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2023.

James B. Simon, Dhruva Karkada, Nikhil Ghosh, and Mikhail Belkin. More is better in modern machine
  learning: when infinite overparameterization is optimal and overfitting is obligatory, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2311.14646.

Yanke Song, Sohom Bhattacharya, and Pragya Sur. Generalization error of min-norm interpolators in transfer
  learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13944.

Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari Morcos. Beyond neural scaling
  laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  19523вҖ“19536, 2022.

Stefano Spigler, Mario Geiger, and Matthieu Wyart. Asymptotic learning curves of kernel methods: empirical
  data versus teacherвҖ“student paradigm. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2020(12):
  124001, 2020.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Christos Thrampoulidis, Samet Oymak, and Babak Hassibi. Regularized linear regression: A precise analysis of
  the estimation error. In Proceedings of The 28th Conference on Learning Theory, volume 40 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1683вҖ“1709, Paris, France, 03вҖ“06 Jul 2015. PMLR.
A. Tsigler and P. L. Bartlett. Benign overfitting in ridge regression, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2009.14286.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In Proceedings of
  the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  13484вҖ“13508, 2023.
Alexander Wei, Wei Hu, and Jacob Steinhardt. More than a toy: Random matrix models predict how real-world
  neural representations generalize, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.06176.
Colin Wei, Kendrick Shen, Yining Chen, and Tengyu Ma. Theoretical analysis of self-training with deep
  networks on unlabeled data, 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03622.
Denny Wu and Ji Xu. On the optimal weighted в„“_2 regularization in overparameterized linear regression.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10112вҖ“10123, 2020.
Fan Yang, Hongyang R. Zhang, Sen Wu, Christopher RГ©, and Weijie J. Su. Precise high-dimensional
  asymptotics for quantifying heterogeneous transfers, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11750.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    Proofs for Section 3
Below, we summarize the notations used throughout this paper:

Category              Symbol               Description
                       R(В·)                Excess population test risk.
    Risk               RМ„(В·)               Asymptotic excess test risk.
                      Rom (В·)              Asymptotic omniscient excess test risk, which is equivalent to the two-stage
                                           risk when ОІ s = ОІвӢҶ .
                          ОІs               Estimator of the surrogate model after the stage 1.
Parameters                ОІ s2t            Estimator of the target model after the stage 2.
                           ОІt              Estimator of the standard target model.
                          ОІвӢҶ               Ground truth parameter.
                          ОЈs               Covariance matrix of the data distribution used in surrogate model.
Covariances                ОЈt              Covariance matrix of the data distribution used in target and standard target
                                           models.
                           О»i              iвҖҷth eigenvalue of the covariance matrix ОЈt in decreasing order.

                           П„t              The unique solution to the fixed point equation: ОәtвҲ’1 = 1p tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt .

                           П„s              The unique solution to the fixed point equation: ОәвҲ’1
                                                                                              s = p tr (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s .
                                                                                                  1                 вҲ’1

                           О¶i              Covariance statistics given by О¶i = О»iП„+П„    t
                                                                                          t
                                                                                            .
                                                                         Pp           2
                                                 tr(ОЈ2t (ОЈt +П„t I)вҲ’2 )        (1вҲ’О¶   )
                           в„Ұ               в„Ұ=                          = P p (1вҲ’О¶ ) .
                                                                          j=1      j
 Variables                                                n         j=1    j

               XОәs ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s )   Asymptotic characterization of the minimum в„“2 interpolator obtained after
                  s s
                                           training surrogate model.
               XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt )    Asymptotic characterization of the minimum в„“2 interpolator obtained after
                  t   t
                                           training target   model.
                      Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ )            Оі s (ОІвӢҶ ) = Оә s Пғ2s + E gs [вҲҘОЈ1/2
                                             2
                                                                             s (XОә ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 ] .
                                                                                       s                        2
                                                                                        s s

                      Оіt2 (ОІ s )           Оіt2 (ОІ s ) = Оәt Пғ2t + RМ„Оәs2t
                                                                     t ,Пғt
                                                                           (ОЈt , ОІ s
                                                                                     , ОІ s
                                                                                           ) .

                                      Table 1: Summary of notations used in the paper.

Observation 1. The model shift in the surrogate-to-target model is equivalent to the covariance shift model
(Mallinar et al., 2024). Formally, given any ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ R p and any jointly diagonalizable covariance matrices
ОЈ s , ОЈt вҲҲ R pГ—p , there exists a unique ОІ s вҲҲ R p such that the risk of the surrogate-to-target problem R(ОІ s2t ) with
(ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s , ОЈt ) is equivalent to the risk of the covariance shift model Rcs (ОІМӮ) with (ОІвӢҶ , ОЈ s , ОЈt ).

Proof. By Observation 2, we assume that ОЈt and ОЈ s are diagonal matrices. As ОЈt and ОЈ s are jointly diagonaliz-
able, there exists a unique diagonal matrix A вҲҲ R pГ—p such that
                                                          ОЈ s = AвҠӨ ОЈt A.
Then, consider the model shift discussed in Section 3. Take the case where ОІ s = AОІвӢҶ and labels are
generated as y = xвҠӨ ОІ s + z, where x вҲј N(0, ОЈt ) and z вҲј N(0, Пғ2t ). This is equivalent to the case where
y = (xвҠӨ A)ОІвӢҶ + z = xМ„вҠӨ ОІвӢҶ + z such that x вҲј N(0, ОЈ s ) and z вҲј N(0, Пғ2t ). Note that (i) the transformed inputs and
the labels are identical in both scenarios, and (ii) the estimators are computed in the same way. Thus, it follows
that the risks R(ОІ s2t ) and Rcs (ОІМӮ) are equivalent. The other way follows from an almost identical argument. в–Ў

Observation 2. For any covariance matrix ОЈ вҲҲ R pГ—p , there exists an orthonormal matrix U вҲҲ R pГ—p such that
the transformation of x вҶ’ UвҠӨ x and ОІ вҶ’ UвҠӨ ОІ does not affect the labels y but ensures that the covariance
matrix is diagonal.

Proof. Since the covariance matrix ОЈ is PSD, its unit-norm eigenvectors are orthogonal. Consider the matrix
U whose columns are the eigenvectors of ОЈ. Then, ОЈ can be expressed as ОЈ = UОӣUвҠӨ , where Оӣ is the diagonal


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


matrix containing the eigenvalues of ОЈ. Consider now the transformation
                                 h i       h        i         h   i
                z = UвҠӨ x =вҮ’ E zzвҠӨ = E UвҠӨ xxвҠӨ U = UвҠӨ E xxвҠӨ U = UвҠӨ UОӣUвҠӨ U = Оӣ.
In this way, the covariance matrix is diagonalized. Thus, the transformation (x, ОІвӢҶ ) вҶ’ (UвҠӨ x, UвҠӨ ОІвӢҶ ) works as
intended since the labels are preserved.                                                                     в–Ў
Definition 1. Let Оәt = p/n > 1 and П„t вҲҲ R be the unique solution of the following equation
                                              1
                                        ОәtвҲ’1 = tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt .                                                              (7)
                                              p
                                                        g
Let Оё1 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt and Оё2 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                    t   вҲҡt where gt вҲј N(0, I p ). Now, define the asymptotic
                                                          p
characterization of the minimum в„“2 -norm interpolator and the function Оіt : R p вҶ’ вҲ’ R as the following fixed
point equation based on the asymptotic risk
                                               XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt ) := Оё1 ОІ s + Оіt (ОІ s )Оё2 ,                                 (8)
                                                  t t

                                                             Оіt2 (ОІ s ) := Оәt Пғ2t + RМ„Оәs2t
                                                                                         t ,Пғt
                                                                                               (ОЈt , ОІ s , ОІ s ) ,                (9)
where the asymptotic risk is defined as

                  RМ„Оәs2t
                      t ,Пғt
                            (ОЈ t , ОІ вӢҶ , ОІ s
                                             ) := E gt
                                                        вҲҘОЈ 1/2
                                                           t   (X t
                                                                 Оә ,Пғ 2 (ОЈt , ОІ s
                                                                                  , g t ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2
                                                                                                 2
                                                                        t   t

                                                = вҲҘОЈt1/2 (Оё1 ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ22 + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                                   |           {z
                                                                (a)
                                                                                }       |     {z            }                    (10)
                                                                                               (b)

                                                 = (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                                 + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ).
Theorem 1. Suppose that, for some constant Mt > 1, we have 1/Mt вүӨ Оәt , Пғ2t вүӨ Mt and вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1 t  op
                                                                                                        вүӨ Mt .
Recall from (5) that R(ОІ ) represents the risk of the surrogate-to-target model given ОІ . Then, there exists a
                        s2t                                                            s

constant C = C(Mt ) such that, for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], the following holds with R + 1 < Mt :
                                                                               (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s ) вүҘ Оө) вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C .
                                                                                                                     4
                                        sup           P( R(ОІ s2t ) вҲ’ RМ„Оәs2t
                                                                         t ,Пғt
                                                                                                                                 (11)
                                   ОІвӢҶ ,ОІ s вҲҲB p (R)


Proof. Even though the claim readily follows from Theorem 2, we give a proof for the sake of completeness.
                           вҲ’ R as f1 (x) = вҲҘОЈ1/2
Define a function f1 : R p вҶ’                 t (x вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 . The gradient of this function is
                                                         2

                                          вҲҘвҲҮ f1 (x)вҲҘ2 = вҲҘ2ОЈt (x вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop вҲҘx вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 .
Using Corollary 2, there exists an event E with P(E c ) вүӨ Ct eвҲ’p/Ct where Ct = Ct (Mt , Mt2вҲ’R ) (with the definition
of Mt in Corollary 2), such that f1 (ОІ s2t ) is 2Mt2 -Lipschitz if ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s вҲҲ B p (R). Applying Theorem 4 on the target
model, there exists a constant CМ„ s = CМ„ s (Mt ) such that for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], we obtain

                         sup P f (ОІ s2t ) вҲ’ E gt [ f (XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt ))] вүҘ Оө вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C ,
                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                   (14)
                                                                                t
                             ОІ s вҲҲB( Mt2+R )
                                                                                    t



where f (ОІ s2t ) = R(ОІ s2t ) and
                                                                                         ОЈвҲ’1/2 Оіt (ОІ s ) gt пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                                   пЈ®                          пЈ№
                                     XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt ) = (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt пЈҜпЈҜпЈ°ОІ s + t вҲҡ                 пЈәпЈ» .
                                                                                   пЈҜпЈҜ
                                        t t                                                       p
Furthermore,
                                                     h                                                i
                                                        t (Оё1 (ОІ вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) вҲ’ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ + Оё2 Оіt (ОІ ))вҲҘ2
             E gt f (XОәs ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt )) = E gt вҲҘОЈ1/2     s                               s   2
                         t     t

                                                        = (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                                        + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ),   (15)
                                                          g
where Оё1 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt and Оё2 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                      t   вҲҡt . This completes the proof.
                                                            p                                                                      в–Ў


                                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  tr(ОЈ2t (ОЈt +П„t I)вҲ’2 )
Proposition 1. Let в„Ұ =                     n            . The optimal surrogate ОІ s minimizing the asymptotic risk in (10) is
                                                                                                   !вҲ’1
                                                          в„ҰП„2t вҲ’1
                                     ОІ = (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt +
                                       sвҲ—
                                                               ОЈ (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1
                                                               вҲ’1
                                                                                                         ОІвӢҶ .
                                                          1вҲ’в„Ұ t

Proof. We have that
                                                  h                                                i
          E gt f (XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt )) = E gt вҲҘОЈ1/2
                                                     t (Оё1 (ОІ вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) вҲ’ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ + Оё2 Оіt (ОІ ))вҲҘ2
                                                             s                               s   2
                          t   t

                                                  = (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                                  + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ),
                                                                 g
where Оё1 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt , Оё2 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2   t     вҲҡt . Recall from (9) that
                                                                   p

                     Оіt2 (ОІ s ) = Оәt Пғ2t + RМ„Оәs2t
                                               t ,Пғt
                                                     (ОЈt , ОІ s , ОІ s )

                                = Оәt Пғ2t + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ] + (ОІ s )вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІ s .
This implies that
                                                              Пғ2t + (ОІ s )вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІ s
                                            Оіt2 (ОІ s ) = Оәt                                                                 (16)
                                                                      1 вҲ’ Оәt E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                                     (a) Пғt + П„t вҲҘОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I) ОІ вҲҘ2
                                                          2    2   1/2          вҲ’1 s 2
                                                     =                                       ,
                                                               1 вҲ’ 1n tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t

where
      (a) follows from
                       the fact that I вҲ’ Оё1 = I вҲ’ (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt = П„t (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 and Оәt E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ] =
n tr (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt .
1               вҲ’2 2


In order to optimize this with respect to ОІ s , letвҖҷs take the derivative:
           вҲӮ
              E g   f (X t
                        Оәt ,Пғ2t
                                (ОЈt , ОІ s
                                          , g t ))
          вҲӮОІ s t

                                                                         Оәt П„2t                    tr ОЈ2t (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2
                 = 2Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) вҲ’ 2Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ + 2             ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I) ОІ
                                                                                              вҲ’2 s
                                                                       1вҲ’в„Ұ                                  p

                                                    Оәt П„2t                        tr ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)
                                                                                        2           вҲ’2
                 = 2Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОІ s вҲ’ 2ОЈt Оё1 ОІвӢҶ + 2            ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОІ s
                                                   1вҲ’в„Ұ                                      p
                                                    Оәt П„ t
                                                         2
                                                                                  nв„Ұ
                 = 2Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОІ s вҲ’ 2ОЈt Оё1 ОІвӢҶ + 2            ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОІ s
                                                   1вҲ’в„Ұ                             p
                                                    в„ҰП„t    2
                 =вҮ’ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОІ sвҲ— вҲ’ ОЈt Оё1 ОІвӢҶ +              ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОІ sвҲ— = 0
                                                   1вҲ’в„Ұ
                                     в„ҰП„2t
                 =вҮ’ (Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 +            Оё1 (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 )ОІ sвҲ— = ОЈt Оё1 ОІвӢҶ
                                     1вҲ’в„Ұ
Hence, the claimed result follows.                                                                                              в–Ў
                                                                                   p
Corollary 1. Without loss of generality, suppose that ОЈt is diagonal.2 Let (О»i )i=1   be the eigenvalues of ОЈt in
                                           П„t
non-increasing order and let О¶i = О»i +П„t for i вҲҲ [p]. Then, the following results hold:
                                 в„Ұ О¶i вҲ’1

1. ОІisвҲ— = (ОІвҲ— )i (1 вҲ’ О¶i ) + О¶i 1вҲ’в„Ұ 1вҲ’О¶i      for every i вҲҲ [p].
    2
      If not, there exists an orthogonal matrix U вҲҲ R pГ—p s.t. UОЈt UвҠӨ is diagonal. Then, we can consider the covariance matrix
as UОЈt UвҠӨ and the ground truth parameter as UОІвӢҶ , which behaves the same as the original parameters, see Observation 2.


                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                  Pp
                                                       (1вҲ’О¶ j )2
2. |ОІisвҲ— | > |(ОІвҲ— )i | if and only if 1 вҲ’ О¶i > в„Ұ = Pj=1
                                                     p
                                                        (1вҲ’О¶ )
                                                               for every i вҲҲ [p].
                                                     j=1       j


3. ОІ sвҲ— = ОІвӢҶ if and only if the covariance matrix ОЈt = cI for some c вҲҲ R.

Proof. When the definition of О¶i and в„Ұ is plugged in Proposition 1, the first claim is obtained. Using the
diagonalization assumption on ОЈt , letвҖҷs analyze only the i-th component of the optimal surrogate given in
Proposition 1:
                                                           1
                                        ОІisвҲ— =                                (ОІвҲ— )i
                                              О»i      в„Ұ      П„2t
                                            О»i +П„t + 1вҲ’в„Ұ О»i (О»i +П„t )
                                                                    О»i
                                                                 О»i +П„t
                                         вҮҗвҮ’ ОІisвҲ— =          2                       П„  2 (ОІвҲ— )i
                                                       О»              в„Ұ
                                                           О»i +П„t
                                                                   i
                                                                          + 1вҲ’в„Ұ        t
                                                                                    О»i +П„t
                                                                            (1 вҲ’ О¶i )
                                         вҮҗвҮ’ ОІisвҲ— = (ОІвҲ— )i                             в„Ұ 2
                                                                       (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 + 1вҲ’в„Ұ О¶i
                                                                                  1
                                         вҮҗвҮ’ ОІisвҲ— = (ОІвҲ— )i                           в„Ұ О¶i
                                                                                                 .
                                                                       (1 вҲ’ О¶i ) + 1вҲ’в„Ұ 1вҲ’О¶i О¶i

ItвҖҷs now clear that О¶i > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ if and only if |ОІisвҲ— | < |(ОІвҲ— )i |.
LetвҖҷs now check when the ratio between them is 1. Algebraic manipulations give:
                                (1 вҲ’ О¶i )
                                          в„Ұ 2
                                               =1
                           (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 + 1вҲ’в„Ұ О¶i
                                                                        в„Ұ 2
                            вҮҗвҮ’ (1 вҲ’ О¶i ) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 =                   О¶
                                                                       1вҲ’в„Ұ i
                                                                                             Pp
                                                                                                       (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2
                            вҮҗвҮ’ О¶i = 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ вҮҗвҮ’ 1 вҲ’ О¶i = в„Ұ where в„Ұ = Pi=1
                                                                    p                                                .
                                                                                                     i=1 (1 вҲ’ О¶i )

This gives that ОІ sвҲ— = ОІвӢҶ if all О¶i вҖҷs are equal, which implies that all О»i вҖҷs are equal. Concluding, the covariance
matrix is a multiple of the identity if and only if ОІ sвҲ— = ОІвӢҶ .                                                    в–Ў

Proposition 3. Consider the target model in (6), assume that ОЈt is diagonal, and recall the definitions of О¶i
and в„Ұ. Then, the following results hold:
1. If the mask operation M selects all the features that satisfy 1 вҲ’ О¶i2 > в„Ұ, then the surrogate-to-target model
   outperforms the standard target model in the asymptotic risk in (10).
2. Let M represent the set of all possible M, where |M| = 2 p . The optimal MвҲ— for the asymptotic risk in (10)
   within M is the one that selects all features satisfying 1 вҲ’ О¶i2 > в„Ұ.

Proof. The proof for Proposition 3 was correct, yet we made changes to it to improve clarity by explicitly
stating all intermediate steps. For the purposes of analysis, we assume, without loss of generality, that the
first p s dimensions are selected from ОІвӢҶ in M(ОІвӢҶ ) = ОІ s вҲҲ R ps . Based on this, we no longer need to have the
decreasing order for the corresponding О»i вҖҷs. Let RМ„(ОІt ) and RМ„(ОІвӢҶ ) represent the asymptotic risk of the target
and the surrogate-to-target models, respectively. From the excess test risk formula in Definition 1, we have that
                                                          2         B(ОІвӢҶ ) + Пғ2t в„Ұ
                                    RМ„(ОІt ) = E y вҲ’ xвҠӨ ОІt вҲ’ Пғ2t =                  ,                           (17)
                                                                        1вҲ’в„Ұ
                                                                                 ОІ
                                                                              " s #
                 Pp
where B(ОІвӢҶ ) = i=1    О»i О¶i2 ОІ2i . Now, consider the zero-padded vector ОІВҜs =         вҲҲ R p . This way, we consider
                                                                               0 pвҲ’ps
the labels in the second training phase as y s = xвҠӨ ОІВҜs + z, where z вҲј N(0, Пғ2t ). Next, using the asymptotic risk


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


estimate in Equation (10), we write the excess test risk formula for the surrogate-to-target model with respect
to the original ground truth labels:
                 RМ„Оәs2t
                     t ,Пғt
                           (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІВҜs ) := (ОІВҜs вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІВҜs вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІВҜs ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                            + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІВҜs вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ),

where Оё1 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt , Оё2 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt1/2 вҲҡgtp , and gt вҲј N(0, I p ). Algebraic manipulations give:
                                    2
         RМ„(ОІ s2t )= E y вҲ’ xвҠӨ ОІ s2t вҲ’ Пғ2t
                 вүҲ RМ„Оәs2t
                       t ,Пғt
                             (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІВҜs )

                                                                                                        вҲ’2 ВҜs tr ОЈ2 (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2
                                                                    Пғ  2
                                                                          +   П„   (ОІ
                                                                                2 ВҜs вҠӨ
                                                                                      )  ОЈt (ОЈ t + П„t I)  ОІ       t
                 = (ОІВҜs вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІВҜs вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оәt t                    t
                                                                                        1вҲ’в„Ұ                           p
                 +ОІвӢҶ (I вҲ’ Оё1 ) ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ (I вҲ’ Оё1 ) ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )
                      вҠӨ            вҠӨ                                вҠӨ               вҠӨ        ВҜs

                                                                 P ps                П„  2
                    X p
                                        О» i
                                               !2        Пғ 2
                                                           t +       i=1  О» i ОІ 2      t
                                                                                i О»i +П„t
                 =          О»i ОІ2i                 +в„Ұ
                   i=p s +1
                                    О»i + П„t                           1вҲ’в„Ұ
                      p                         2      p
                                       П„t                               2П„t О»i
                    X                         !       X
                  +       О»i ОІ2i                  +          О»i ОІ2i
                     i=1
                                   О» i +  П„ t       i=p s +1
                                                                    (О»  i + П„t )
                                                                                   2

                                P ps
                    Пғ2t в„Ұ + i=1        О»i ОІ2i О¶i2     X p
                 =                                +          О»i ОІ2i
                              1вҲ’в„Ұ                    i=p +1
                                                       s
                                         p
                    B(ОІВҜs ) + Пғ2t в„Ұ    X
                  =                 +        О»i ОІ2i ,                                                                                 (18)
                       1вҲ’в„Ұ            i=p +1    s


Thus, the risk difference between the target and surrogate-to-target models is
                                                                                      p
                                                             B(ОІвӢҶ ) вҲ’ B(ОІВҜs )       X
                                       RМ„(ОІt ) вҲ’ RМ„(ОІ s2t ) =                   вҲ’           О»i ОІ2i
                                                                 1вҲ’в„Ұ               i=p s +1
                                                             Pp
                                                              i=p s +1 О»i О¶i ОІi
                                                                           2 2      Xp
                                                           =                    вҲ’          О»i ОІ2i .
                                                                 1вҲ’в„Ұ              i=p +1  s


We observe that each dimensionвҖҷs contribution to the excess test risk can be analyzed individually. Therefore,
if
                                                             О¶i2 > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ,                                                             (19)

excluding feature i in the feature selection reduces the overall risk RМ„(ОІ s2t ). Along the same lines, the projection
M that selects all the features i that satisfy О¶i2 < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ minimizes the asymptotic excess test risk.                в–Ў

Proposition 2. The optimal surrogate parameter ОІ s that minimizes the asymptotic risk in the under-
parametrized region (n > p) is equivalent to the ground truth parameter ОІвӢҶ . In other words, for any
ОІ s , the surrogate-to-target model cannot outperform the standard target model in the asymptotic risk.

Proof. According to Theorem 3 of Chang et al. (2021), when the second stage is in the under-parameterized
regime, the estimator ОІ s2t can be expressed asymptotically as:

                                                                      ОЈвҲ’1/2 gt
                                                    ОІ s2t = ОІ s + Пғt q  t       ,
                                                                      p Оәt вҲ’ 1
                                                                          вҲ’1


                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where gt вҲј N(0, I p ). Then, the excess test risk estimate of this estimate is:
                                                       h                             i
  E(x,y)вҲјDt (ОІвӢҶ ), gt [(y вҲ’ xвҠӨ ОІ s2t )2 ] вҲ’ Пғ2t = E gt вҲҘОЈ1/2      t (ОІ
                                                                       s2t
                                                                           вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ22
                                                         пЈ®пЈ«                                     пЈ¶вҠӨ пЈ«                                пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                            ОЈвҲ’1/2                               ОЈ вҲ’1/2
                                                         пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬                                 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·    пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬                          пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                                   g t                                 gt
                                                = E gt пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ОІ + Пғt q        t
                                                                                         вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ пЈ·пЈ·пЈ· ОЈt пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ОІ + Пғt q  t
                                                                                                                            вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                           пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ s                               пЈ·
                                                                                                  пЈ·
                                                                                                  пЈ·      пЈ¬
                                                                                                         пЈ¬
                                                                                                         пЈ¬  s
                                                                                                                                      пЈ·пЈ·пЈәпЈә

                                                             пЈ°пЈҜпЈӯпЈ¬           p ОәtвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1            пЈёпЈ·            p ОәtвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1
                                                                                                         пЈ¬пЈӯ                            пЈ·пЈёпЈәпЈ»

                                                                                       Пғ2t
                                               = (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ ОЈt (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) +
                                                                                     Оәt вҲ’ 1
                                                                                      вҲ’1

As ОЈt is positive semi-definite, the expression (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ ОЈt (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) is non-negative and takes its minimum
value of 0 at ОІ s = ОІвӢҶ . Note that at ОІ s = ОІвӢҶ the expression corresponds to the risk of the standard target model.
Hence, we conclude that it is not possible to surpass the performance of the standard target model with the
surrogate-to-target model when the target model is under-parameterized (n > p).                                 в–Ў

A.1     Analysis for Model Shift under Ridge Regression

In this subsection, we analyze the behavior of the surrogate-to-target model under ridge regression. First, we
redefine the surrogate and target models below.
Stage 1: Surrogate model. We consider a data distribution ( xМғ, yМғ) вҲј D s following the linear model yМғ = xМғвҠӨ ОІвӢҶ +zМғ,
where ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ R p , xМғ вҲј N(0, ОЈ s ) and zМғ вҲј N(0, Пғ2s ) is independent of xМғ. Let {( xМғi , yМғi )m
                                                                                             i=1 } be the dataset for the
surrogate model drawn i.i.d. from D s . The estimator of the surrogate model can be written as follows:
                                                                                       !вҲ’1
                                                        О»s
                                    (                          )
                                       1                            1 1 вҠӨ
                     ОІr := arg minp
                      s
                                         вҲҘyМғ вҲ’ XМғОІвҲҘ2 + вҲҘОІвҲҘ2 =
                                                   2         2
                                                                         XМғ XМғ + О» s I XМғвҠӨ yМғ,                       (20)
                               ОІвҲҲR    2p                2           p p
where XМғ = [ xМғвҠӨ1 , . . . , xМғвҠӨm ]вҠӨ вҲҲ RmГ—p and yМғ = [y1 , . . . , ym ]вҠӨ вҲҲ Rm .
Stage 2: Target model. Given ОІrs вҲҲ R p , we consider another data distribution (x, y s ) вҲј Dt (ОІ s ) following the
linear model y s = xвҠӨ ОІ s + z, where x вҲј N(0, ОЈt ) and z вҲј N(0, Пғ2t ). Let {(xi , yis )ni=1 } be the dataset for the target
model drawn i.i.d. from Dt (ОІ s ). As for the surrogate model, the estimator for the target model is defined as
                                                                                            !вҲ’1
                                                        О»t
                                    (                         )
                                       1 s                          1 1 вҠӨ
                    ОІr := arg minp
                     s2t
                                         вҲҘy вҲ’ XОІвҲҘ2 + вҲҘОІвҲҘ2 =
                                                    2       2
                                                                          XМғ XМғ + О»t I XМғвҠӨ y s ,                       (21)
                                ОІвҲҲR   2p                2           p p
where X = [xвҠӨ1 , . . . , xвҠӨn ]вҠӨ вҲҲ RnГ—p and y s = [y1s , . . . , yns ]вҠӨ вҲҲ Rn . Our analysis will generally apply to an arbitrary
ОІrs choice and will not require it to be the outcome of (20). Finally, we define the excess (population) risk for a
given estimator ОІМӮ вҲҲ R p as defined in (5). Throughout the section, we compare the surrogate-to-target model
with the following reference model.
Reference Model: Standard target model. We study the generalization performance of ОІrs2t with respect
to the standard target model, which has access to the ground-truth parameter through labeling. Specifically,
consider the dataset {(xi , yi )ni=1 } drawn i.i.d. from Dt (ОІвӢҶ ); then, the estimation is
                                                                                           !вҲ’1
                                                            О»t
                                         (                           )
                                            1                             1 1 вҠӨ
                     ОІr := arg minp
                       t
                                              вҲҘy вҲ’ XОІвҲҘ2 + вҲҘОІвҲҘ2 =
                                                        2          2
                                                                               XМғ XМғ + О»t I XМғвҠӨ y,     (22)
                                    ОІвҲҲR    2p                2            p p
where X = [xвҠӨ1 , . . . , xвҠӨn ]вҠӨ вҲҲ RnГ—p and y = [y1 , . . . , yn ]вҠӨ вҲҲ Rn . We compare the excess risks of the surrogate-to-
target model R(ОІrs2t ) with that of the standard target model R(ОІtr ).
Now, we will obtain a result similar to Theorem 1 under ridge regression. For this purpose, we have the
following definition:
Definition 4. Let Оәt = p/n > 1 and П„t,r вҲҲ R be the unique solution of the following equation
                                           О»t    1
                                   ОәtвҲ’1 вҲ’       = tr (ОЈt + П„t,r I)вҲ’1 ОЈt .                          (23)
                                           П„t,r   p
Then, define XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt ), the function Оіt , and the asymptotic risk RМ„Оәs2t
                                                                                     t ,Пғt
                                                                                           (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s ) as in Definition 1 based
on П„t,r .
                t t


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 3. Suppose that, for some constant Mt > 1, we have 1/Mt вүӨ Оәt , Пғ2t вүӨ Mt and вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1   t  op
                                                                                                          вүӨ Mt .
Then, there exists a constant C = C(Mt ) such that, for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], the following holds with R + 1 < Mt :

                                                                                (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s ) вүҘ Оө) вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C .
                                                                                                               4
                             sup           P( sup         R(ОІ s2t ) вҲ’ RМ„Оәs2t
                                                                          t ,Пғt
                                                                                                                       (24)
                        ОІвӢҶ ,ОІ s вҲҲB p (R)    О»t вҲҲ[0,Mt ]



Proof. The proof directly follows from the proof of Theorem 1 with only one modification in (14):
                                                                            !
                    sup P sup f (ОІ ) вҲ’ E gt [ f (XОә ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ , gt ))] вүҘ Оө вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C .
                                                                                      4
                                         s2t          t        s
                                                                                                                       (25)
                                                                            t
                  ОІ s вҲҲB( Mt2+R )     О»t вҲҲ[0,Mt ]                               t



                                                                                                                         в–Ў


In Propositions 1, 3 and Corollary 1, we treat П„t as a variable, which is a fixed point equation based on the
covariance matrix and ratio between numbers of features and samples under ridgeless regression. However,
under ridge regression, we modify the parameter П„t,r and define the asymptotic risk the same as we define under
ridgeless regression based on this parameter. This means that we can directly apply the results of Propositions
1, 3 and Corollary 1 to ridge regression by only modifying the parameter П„. Similarly, Theorem 2 can also be
extended to ridge regression.

A.2   Experimental Details

In the CIFAR-10 experiment, we initially trained the surrogate models on the training portion of the CIFAR-10
dataset. While training the surrogate-to-target models, we employed the predictions from the surrogate models.
Conversely, when training the standard target model, we utilized the ground truth labels. During testing,
all models were evaluated using the test portion of the CIFAR-10 dataset. It is important to note that the
distributions for both surrogate and target are identical since we trained and tested the models on the same
training and testing sets.
We employ three distinct surrogate model sizes: big, medium, and small. The big model contains 127,094
parameters, the medium model 58,342 parameters, and the small model 28,286 parameters. All three models
are shallow, three-layer convolutional networks that follow the same architectural specifications. For the small
model, x = 4; for the medium model, x = 8; and for the big model, x = 16.

                 Layer Type                Input Channels              Output Channels           Kernel/Stride/Pad
                  Conv2d                          3                           x                     3 Г— 3/1/1
                   ReLU                           вҲ’                           вҲ’                          вҲ’
                 MaxPool2d                        вҲ’                           вҲ’                      2 Г— 2/2
                  Conv2d                           x                         2x                     3 Г— 3/1/1
                   ReLU                           вҲ’                           вҲ’                          вҲ’
                 MaxPool2d                        вҲ’                           вҲ’                     2 Г— 2/2/0
                  Conv2d                          2x                         4x                     3 Г— 3/1/1
                   ReLU                           вҲ’                           вҲ’                          вҲ’
                 MaxPool2d                        вҲ’                           вҲ’                     2 Г— 2/2/0
                   Flatten                        вҲ’                           вҲ’                          вҲ’
                   Linear                        64x                        100                          вҲ’
                   ReLU                           вҲ’                           вҲ’                          вҲ’
                   Linear                        100                         10                          вҲ’

We initialize the optimizer for our model using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) provided by the optim
module of PyTorch. The optimizer is configured with the following parameters: learning rate set to 0.01,
momentum to 0.9, and weight decay to 5 Г— 10вҲ’4 . Additionally, we define a learning rate scheduler, specifically
a cosine annealing scheduler, which adjusts the learning rate using a cosine function over 200 iterations,
denoted T_max. We use a batch size of 32 and trained all models over 60 epochs.


                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     Proofs for Section 4
Definition 2 (Omniscient test risk estimate). Fix p > n вүҘ 1. Given a covariance ОЈ = U diag(О»)UвҠӨ , ОІвӢҶ , and
                                                                                                    P p О»i
the noise term Пғ, set ОІМ„ = UвҠӨ ОІвӢҶ and define П„ вҲҲ R as the unique non-negative solution of n = i=1        О»i +П„ . Then,
the omniscient excess test risk estimate is the following:
                                               h           i          Пғ2 в„Ұ + B(ОІМ„)
                         Rom (ОІМӮ) вүҲ EОІМӮвҲјD(ОІвӢҶ ) (y вҲ’ xвҠӨ ОІМӮ)2 вҲ’ Пғ2 =                 ,                             (12)
                                                                          1вҲ’в„Ұ
                                                           p                         p
                                         П„            1X                          X              2
                       where О¶i =             , в„Ұ=           (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 , B(ОІМ„) =      О»i О¶i2 ОІМ„i .
                                      О»i + П„          n i=1                        i=1


In the following proof, we suppose that the empirical distributions of ОІМ„ and О» converge as p вҶ’ вҲһ having fixed
the ratio p/n = Оә. Then, we will prove that the omniscient risk converges to the asymptotic risk defined in (10).

Proof for the proportional asymptotic case. Using Theorem 2.3 of Han & Xu (2023), we can estimate ОІМӮ as
follows:
                                                        ОЈвҲ’1/2 Оі s (ОІвӢҶ ) g
                                                                          !
                                  ОІМӮ = (ОЈ + П„I) ОЈ ОІвӢҶ +
                                               вҲ’1
                                                              вҲҡ             ,
                                                                 p
where
                                                                                                        p
                                          Пғ + П„2 вҲҘ(ОЈ + П„I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2 ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ22                                X     О»i
        g вҲј N(0, I p ),   Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ) = Оә                              ,       П„ is the solution to n =            .
                                           1 вҲ’ 1n tr (ОЈ + П„I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2                                         О» +П„
                                                                                                        i=1 i
Let
                                                                   (ОЈ + П„I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2 Оі s (ОІвӢҶ )
                              X1 = (ОЈ + П„I)вҲ’1 ОЈ ,           X2 =            вҲҡ                .
                                                                              p
Using this estimate, we can calculate the excess test risk as
                                       h                                          i
                        Rom (ОІМӮ) = E ((X1 вҲ’ I) ОІвӢҶ + X2 g)вҠӨ ОЈ ((X1 вҲ’ I) ОІвӢҶ + X2 g)
                                                                 h            i
                                 = ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (X1 вҲ’ I)вҠӨ ОЈ(X1 вҲ’ I)ОІвӢҶ + E gвҠӨ X2вҠӨ ОЈX2 g

                                 = ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (X1 вҲ’ I)вҠӨ ОЈ(X1 вҲ’ I)ОІвӢҶ + tr X2вҠӨ ОЈX2 .                                         (26)
Then by recalling the eigendecomposition for the covariance matrix ОЈ = UОӣU , we have       вҠӨ

                                            X1 = (UОӣUвҠӨ + П„UUвҠӨ )вҲ’1 UОӣU вҠӨ
                                                = U(Оӣ + П„I)вҲ’1 UвҠӨ UОӣUвҠӨ
                                                           О»
                                                               !
                                                = U diag         UвҠӨ .
                                                         О»+П„
Using the diagonalization of I, X1 вҲ’ I can now be computed as
                                                           вҲ’П„
                                        X1 вҲ’ I = U diag          UвҠӨ .
                                                          О»+П„
LetвҖҷs now compute
                                                         вҲ’П„                     вҲ’П„
              ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (X1 вҲ’ I)вҠӨ ОЈ(X1 вҲ’ I)ОІвӢҶ = ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ U diag         UвҠӨ UОӣUвҠӨ U diag        U вҠӨ ОІвӢҶ
                                                        О»+П„                    О»+П„
                                                           О»П„2
                                                                 !
                                         = ОІвӢҶ U diag
                                              вҠӨ
                                                                   U вҠӨ ОІвӢҶ .
                                                        (О» + П„)2
As ОІМ„ = UвҠӨ ОІвӢҶ , we obtain that the RHS of the previous expression equals
                                              p
                                            X     О»i П„2 ОІМ„2i
                                                             = B(ОІМ„).
                                             i=1
                                                 (О»i + П„)2


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we write more compactly the terms tr X2вҠӨ ОЈX2 and Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ). By defining the short-hand notation
                               Pp
в„Ұ = 1n tr (ОЈ + П„I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2 = n1 i=1    (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 , we have
                                         p           !2
                             Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ) X         О»i      Оі2 (ОІвӢҶ )nв„Ұ
              tr X2 ОЈX2 =
                   вҠӨ
                                                        = s         ,
                                  p     i=1
                                              О»i + П„           p
                                                                         P p О»i П„2 ОІМ„2i
                                 Пғ2 + П„2 вҲҘ(ОЈ + П„I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2 ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ22    Пғ2 + i=1   (О»i +П„)2    Пғ2 + B(ОІМ„)
                   Оі s (ОІвӢҶ ) = Оә
                     2
                                                                 =Оә                     =Оә            ,
                                             1вҲ’в„Ұ                        1вҲ’в„Ұ                  1вҲ’в„Ұ
where Оә = np . Hence, putting it all together in (26) gives the desired result.                         в–Ў
Proposition 4 (Asymptotic analysis of П„t and в„Ұ). Let the covariance matrix ОЈ вҲҲ R pГ—p be diagonal and
ОЈi,i = О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for 1 < Оұ. Recall from Definition 2 that, as p вҶ’ вҲһ, П„t and в„Ұ are given by the equations
                                    вҲһ                           вҲһ           !2
                                   X     О»i                    X     iвҲ’Оұ
                                              = n,      nв„Ұ =                   .
                                      О» + П„t
                                   i=1 i                       i=1
                                                                   iвҲ’Оұ + П„t
Then, the following results hold
                                                                                    !Оұ
                                                                          ПҖ
                              П„t = cnвҲ’Оұ
                                           1 + O(nвҲ’1 ) ,     for c =                     ,
                                                                     Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                                                                                                              (13)
                                   ОұвҲ’1
                              в„Ұ=       вҲ’ O(nвҲ’1 ).
                                    Оұ
                                                                                                             вҲ’Оұ
Proof. We start with the asymptotic analysis of П„t . Along the same lines as Simon et al. (2024), since iвҲ’Оұi +П„t is
a monotonically decreasing function, we have:
                               вҲһ
                                                                         ПҖ
                                              Z вҲһ
                              X      iвҲ’Оұ                xвҲ’Оұ
                           n=               вүӨ                  dx =             П„вҲ’1/Оұ .
                              i=1
                                  i вҲ’Оұ + П„t    0     x вҲ’Оұ + П„t      Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)  t

Furthermore,
                                                                                       вҲһ
                   ПҖ
                                        Z вҲһ                       Z вҲһ
                                                xвҲ’Оұ                       xвҲ’Оұ         X     iвҲ’Оұ
                         П„вҲ’1/Оұ вҲ’ 1 =                   dx вҲ’ 1 вүӨ                  dx вүӨ              = n.
              Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t               0   xвҲ’Оұ + П„t             1    xвҲ’Оұ + П„t      i=1
                                                                                          iвҲ’Оұ + П„t
Hence, combining these two facts gives
                                        ПҖ                            ПҖ
                                               П„вҲ’1/Оұ вҲ’1вүӨnвүӨ                  П„вҲ’1/Оұ
                                   Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)  t
                                                                Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t
                                                        !вҲ’Оұ                       !вҲ’Оұ
                                    (n + 1) Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)              nОұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                            вҮҗвҮ’                              вүӨ П„t вүӨ                    ,
                                             ПҖ                            ПҖ
which leads to the desired result.
Next, we move to the asymptotic analysis of в„Ұ. We have that
                           вҲһ           !2 Z вҲһ             !2
                          X      iвҲ’Оұ                xвҲ’Оұ           ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ
                     nв„Ұ =                 вүӨ                  dx = 2         П„   .
                          i=1
                               i + П„t
                                вҲ’Оұ
                                              0   x + П„t
                                                   вҲ’Оұ            Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t
Besides, since the summand is monotonically decreasing, we also have
                                            !2                        !2       вҲһ           !2
        ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ
                              Z вҲһ                       Z вҲһ
                                     xвҲ’Оұ                        xвҲ’Оұ           X     iвҲ’Оұ
                    П„  вҲ’ 1 вүӨ                   dx вҲ’ 1 вүӨ                  dx вүӨ                 = nв„Ұ.
      Оұ2 sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t           0   xвҲ’Оұ + П„t              1   xвҲ’Оұ + П„t         i=1
                                                                                  iвҲ’Оұ + П„t
Hence,
                                 ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ            ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ
                                            П„t вҲ’ 1 вүӨ nв„Ұ вүӨ 2         П„   .                                     (27)
                                Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                                 2                       Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t
By the hypothesis on П„t , we have that
                                               Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                                        П„вҲ’1/Оұ =n             1 вҲ’ O nвҲ’1 ,                                      (28)
                                         t
                                                    ПҖ
and plugging this in (27) gives the desired result.                                                               в–Ў


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)            Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
Proposition 5. Set the constants C1 :=                   and C2 :=   вҲҡ          and assume the power-law
                                             ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ           ПҖ( Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ
eigenstructure ОЈi,i = О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for 1 < Оұ. Let П„t and в„Ұ be the solutions given by Proposition 4 and define
О¶i = О»iП„+П„
         t
           t
             . Then, the indices i for which О¶i < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ are i < nC1 + O(1); while the indices i for which is
О¶i < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ are i < nC2 + O(1).
 2



Proof. Recall from Proposition 3 that we should identify indices i which satisfy the condition О¶i2 > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ to
decide if weвҖҷre better off not selecting this dimension i in the surrogate model. Furthermore, Proposition 4
               ОұвҲ’1
gives that в„Ұ =        вҲ’ O(nвҲ’1 ). Putting these together, we have
                 Оұ
                                                О¶i2 > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ
                                                                      1
                                           вҮҗвҮ’ О¶i2 > cвҖІ   where cвҖІ =     + O(nвҲ’1 )
                                                                      Оұ
                                              П„2t                  П„2t i2Оұ
                                           вҮҗвҮ’               =                  > cвҖІ
                                         (П„t + i )вҲ’Оұ     2     (П„t iОұ + 1)2
                                      вҮҗвҮ’ (1 вҲ’ cвҖІ )П„2t i2Оұ > 2cвҖІ П„t iОұ + cвҖІ
                                                                              !2
                                           вҲҡ                Оұ          cвҖІ             cвҖІ
                                      вҮҗвҮ’     1 вҲ’ c П„t i вҲ’ вҲҡ
                                                     вҖІ                           >
                                                                      1 вҲ’ cвҖІ        1 вҲ’ cвҖІ
                                                         вҲҡ
                                                           cвҖІ
                                      вҮҗвҮ’ iОұ >                вҲҡ
                                               П„t (1 вҲ’ cвҖІ )
                                                      пЈ« вҲҡ вҖІ пЈ¶1/Оұ
                                                                c пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                      вҮҗвҮ’ i > П„вҲ’1/Оұ
                                                      пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬
                                              t         пЈ¬пЈӯ      вҲҡ пЈ·пЈё
                                                           1 вҲ’ cвҖІ
                              вҲҡ  1/Оұ
                                  вҖІ
As cвҖІ = Оұ1 + O(nвҲ’1 ), we get 1вҲ’ вҲҡc cвҖІ   = ( вҲҡОұвҲ’1)
                                               1
                                                   1/Оұ (1 + O(n
                                                                      вҲ’1
                                                                         )). Incorporating (28), we achieve that
                                       вҲҡ    пЈ¶1/Оұ
                                                  Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                                пЈ«
                                       cвҖІ пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                        П„вҲ’1/Оұ          вҲҡ пЈ·пЈё = n вҲҡ               1 + O(nвҲ’1 ) = nC2 + O(1).
                              пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬
                         t
                                                 ПҖ( Оұ вҲ’ 1)
                                пЈ¬пЈӯ
                                          вҖІ                 1/Оұ
                                     1вҲ’ c
Similarly, by following the same procedure with the initial inequality О¶i > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ, we get
                                                                                       Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                          О¶i > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ вҮҗвҮ’ i > nC1 + O(1),             where C1 =                     .
                                                                                       ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ
                                                                                                                   в–Ў

In Figure 3, we compare the empirical results with theoretical predictions for the number of features that meet
                                                                                                    Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
the selection criteria in the optimal mask MвҲ— (О¶i2 < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ). The theoretical value, calculated as n вҲҡ
                                                                                                   ПҖ( Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ
ignoring the O(1) term, aligns well with the experimental data and the accuracy in estimation increases with Оұ.
Notably, our theoretical estimate also closely matches the empirical results when the sample size n is small
relative to the feature size p.
Proposition 7 (Scaling law for masked surrogate-to-target model). Together with the eigenvalues, also assume
now power-law form for О»i ОІ2i , that is О»i ОІ2i = iвҲ’ОІ for ОІ > 1. Then, in the limit of p вҶ’ вҲһ, the excess test risk
for the masked surrogate-to-target model with the optimal dimensionality has the same scaling law as the
reference (target) model:
                                           Rom (ОІ s2t ) = Оҳ(nвҲ’(ОІвҲ’1) ) if ОІ < 2Оұ + 1,
and
                                            Rom (ОІ s2t ) = Оҳ(nвҲ’2Оұ ) if ОІ > 2Оұ + 1.


                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            500        Empirical =1.5


                                 *
                                                                       Theoretical =1.5


                               # Features in Optimal Mask
                                                            400        Empirical =3.0
                                                                       Theoretical =3.0
                                                                       Empirical =4.5
                                                            300        Theoretical =4.5
                                                            200

                                                            100

                                                                  50   100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
                                                                               Sample Size (n)

Figure 3: Comparison of the empirical and theoretical number of features satisfying the feature selection
                                                                                         Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
condition in the optimal mask MвҲ— (О¶i2 < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ). The theoretical value is calculated as n вҲҡ           , ignoring
                                                                                        ПҖ( Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ
the O(1) in Proposition 5. Setting: The feature size is p = 500, and the feature covariance follows the
power-law structure О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for Оұ = 1.5, 3.0, and 4.5.


Proof. As discussed in Section 4, in order to analyze the modelвҖҷs inherent error, we need to set Пғ2t = O(nвҲ’Оі )
where Оі is the exponent characterizing the scaling law of the test risk in the noiseless setting. We will work on
this proof in two cases depending on ОІ and 2Оұ + 1.
Case 1: ОІ < 2Оұ + 1. In this case, it is previously stated by Cui et al. (2022); Simon et al. (2024) that the test
risk of ridgeless overparameterized linear regression can be described in the scaling sense as err = Оҳ(nвҲ’ОІ+1 )
when ОІ < 2Оұ + 1. Consider the optimal mask operation M mentioned in Proposition 3 that selects all features
satisfying 1 вҲ’ О¶i2 > в„Ұ. Let p s be the number of selected features. We can then decompose the risk estimate in
Definition 2 as follows:
                                    P ps            Pp
                                      i=1 О»i О¶i ОІi + i=p s +1 О»i О¶i ОІi + Пғt в„Ұ
                                              2 2                 2 2     2
                  B(ОІВҜвӢҶ ) + Пғ2t в„Ұ                                               err1 + err2 + Пғ2t в„Ұ
                                  =                                           =                     ,
                      1вҲ’в„Ұ                            1вҲ’в„Ұ                              1вҲ’в„Ұ
where err1 and err2 are the contributions to the total risk of the target model from dimensions selected and
omitted in the surrogate model, respectively. Therefore, we express the total error as:
                                                                  err1 + err2 + Пғ2t в„Ұ
                                                                                      = err = Оҳ(nвҲ’ОІ+1 ).
                                                                        1вҲ’в„Ұ
Going back to Proposition 5, we know that, as p вҶ’ вҲһ, the criterion for selecting a feature i in the optimal
masked surrogate model is given by
                                                             Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                              i<nC2 + O(1), where C2 = вҲҡ                  .
                                                           ПҖ( Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ

                                                                                                                  err2
Define now Пүn = nC2 + O(1). The equation (18) tells us that after the optimal mask operation M,                        is
                                                                                                                  1вҲ’в„Ұ
replaced by err2вҖІ , which is calculated as follows
                                                 X p          p
                                                              X
                                        err2вҖІ =      О»i ОІ2i =   iвҲ’ОІ .
                                                                                 i=Пүn +1           i=Пүn +1
          вҲ’ОІ
Since x        is a monotonically decreasing function, we can bound the summation by the following two integrals:
                                            Z p+1           X p       Z p
                                                   xвҲ’ОІ dx вүӨ     iвҲ’ОІ вүӨ     xвҲ’ОІ dx
                                                                         Пүn +1             Пүn +1             Пүn
                                                                                             p
                              (Пүn + 1)вҲ’ОІ+1 вҲ’ (p + 1)вҲ’ОІ+1              (Пүn )вҲ’ОІ+1 вҲ’ pвҲ’ОІ+1    X
                                                         вүӨ      iвҲ’ОІ вүӨ                   .
                                        ОІвҲ’1                Пү +1
                                                                            ОІвҲ’1
                                                                                            n


                                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the limit of p вҶ’ вҲһ, we obtain
                                                           err2вҖІ = Оҳ(nвҲ’ОІ+1 ).
Thus, we have tightly estimated err2вҖІ . Using the fact from Proposition 4 that в„Ұ = Оҳ(1), and our assumption on
the noise variance Пғ2t = O(nвҲ’ОІ+1 ), we conclude that the scaling law doesnвҖҷt change for the surrogate-to-target
model as
                                                          err1 + Пғ2t в„Ұ
                                         Rom (ОІ s2t ) =                + err2вҖІ = Оҳ(nвҲ’ОІ+1 ).
                                                             1вҲ’в„Ұ

Case 2: ОІ > 2Оұ + 1. In this case, we show that the scaling law is determined by err1, hence changing
err2 to err2вҖІ has no effect in the scaling sense.
                                             !Оұ     From Proposition 4, we have the asymptotic expression
                                      ПҖ                                                                 1
П„t = cn 1 + O(n ) , for c =
       вҲ’Оұ         вҲ’1
                                                . We can argue that there exists positive constants c1 < < c2 ,
                                 Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)                                                            c
              Оұ  1        Оұ
such that c1 n вүӨ    вүӨ c2 n . We have that
                 П„t
                                           Пүn                Пүn
                                           X      iвҲ’ОІ       X          iвҲ’ОІ
                                   err1 =                 вүӨ
                                          i=1 (1 + П„t i )
                                                   1 вҲ’Оұ 2
                                                            i=1
                                                                (1 + c1 nОұ iвҲ’Оұ )2
                                                             Пүn                    Пүn 2ОұвҲ’ОІ
                                                            X       i2ОұвҲ’ОІ         X   i
                                                          =       Оұ        Оұ
                                                                                вүӨ            .
                                                            i=1
                                                                (i + c1 n )  2
                                                                                      c2 n2Оұ
                                                                                  i=1 1

This implies err1 = O(nвҲ’2Оұ ). At the same time,
                                   Пүn                 Пүn
                                   X       iвҲ’ОІ       X       i2ОұвҲ’ОІ
                      err1 =                       вүҘ
                                   i=1 (1 + П„t i )
                                            1 вҲ’Оұ 2
                                                     i=1
                                                         (i + c2 nОұ )2
                                                           Оұ

                                                      Пүn                      Пүn
                                                     X         i2ОұвҲ’ОІ         X        i2ОұвҲ’ОІ
                                                   вүҘ           Оұ       Оұ
                                                                           =                         .
                                                     i=1
                                                         ((Пүn ) + c2 n ) 2
                                                                             i=1
                                                                                 n ((Пүn /n)Оұ + c2 )2
                                                                                  2Оұ


Using Пүn /n = Оҳ(1) gives err1 = в„Ұ(nвҲ’2Оұ ) and we can conclude that err1 = Оҳ(nвҲ’2Оұ ). From Cui et al. (2022),
we already know that err = Оҳ(nвҲ’2Оұ ) when ОІ > 2Оұ + 1. Using в„Ұ = Оҳ(1), and our assumption on the noise
variance Пғ2t = O(nвҲ’2Оұ ) allows us to conclude that the scaling is dominated by err1, and thus, the scaling law
remains unchanged.                                                                                           в–Ў

Proposition 6 (Scaling law). Let the covariance matrix ОЈt be diagonal with eigenvalues О»i , and let the
ground-truth parameter ОІвӢҶ have components ОІi corresponding to each feature. Assume that both eigenvalues
О»i and signal coefficients О»i ОІ2i follow a power-law decay, i.e., О»i ОІ2i = iвҲ’ОІ and О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for Оұ, ОІ > 1. Let the
optimal surrogate parameter ОІ sвҲ— be given by Proposition 1 and define the minimum surrogate-to-target risk
attained by ОІ sвҲ— as Rom
                     вҲ—
                        (ОІ s2t ) = min Rom (ОІ s2t ), where Rom (ОІ s2t ) is described in Definition 2. Then, in the limit
of p вҶ’ вҲһ, the excess test risk of the surrogate-to-target model with an optimal surrogate parameter scales the
same as that of the standard target model. Specifically, we have
                                      вҲ—
                                     Rom (ОІ s2t ) = Оҳ(nвҲ’(ОІвҲ’1) ) = Rom (ОІt ),         if ОІ < 2Оұ + 1,
                                      вҲ—
                                     Rom (ОІ s2t ) = Оҳ(nвҲ’2Оұ ) = Rom (ОІt ),         if ОІ > 2Оұ + 1.

Proof. From asymptotic risk decomposition in (34), we can write

           E gt f (XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt )) = (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                           t   t

                                               + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )
                                                вүҘ Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ],


                                                                26
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Target Risk                                           2 Г— 10 1               Target Risk
            10 1                   Optimal Masked Surrogate-to-Target Risk                                      Optimal Masked Surrogate-to-Target Risk
                                   Optimal Surrogate-to-Target Risk                                             Optimal Surrogate-to-Target Risk

                                                                                            10 1
Test Risk


                                                                             Test Risk
                                                                                         6 Г— 10 2
            10 2
                                                                                         4 Г— 10 2
                                  102                                                                          102
                                     Sample Size (n)                                                                 Sample Size (n)
                   (a) Test risks in log-log scale when p = 500                             (b) Test risks in log-log scale when p = 5000 вү« n

 Figure 4: Scaling law behavior of the test risks of optimal surrogate models. (a): Associated test risks as a
 function of sample size in log-log scale. Setting: The feature size is p = 500; the sample size n changes from
 50 to 450 with increments of 50; the feature covariance follows the power-law structure О»i = iвҲ’2 , О»i ОІ2i = iвҲ’1.5
 (b): Associated test risks as a function of sample size in log-log scale when p вү« n. Setting: Same as in (a)
 except that p = 5000.
 since we can put in the form of (a вҲ’ b)2 + c2 вүҘ c2 . At the same time, we know that

                                                                                        2 tr ОЈ2 (ОЈ + П„ I)вҲ’2
                                                     Пғ 2
                                                       t  + П„2
                                                             t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)   ОЈ
                                                                            вҲ’1 1/2
                                                                                t  ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ      t   t   t
                   Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ] = Оәt                                   2
                                                         1 вҲ’ 1 tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
                                                                    n
                                                                                                  p

                                                              Пғt + П„t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                               2    2
                                                                                      t ОІ вҲҘ2 nв„Ұ
                                                                                          s 2
                                                       = Оәt
                                                                            1вҲ’в„Ұ                           p
                                                                  пЈ«          p             пЈ¶
                                                            в„Ұ     пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ 2 X
                                                       =            пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯПғt +    О»i ОІi О¶i пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈё .
                                                                                   s2 2
                                                                                           пЈ·пЈ·
                                                           1вҲ’в„Ұ               i=1
 Recall the optimal surrogate vector discussed in Proposition 1 and the corresponding minimal surrogate-to-
              вҲ—
 target risk Rom (ОІ s2t ). In this case, we can write
                                         p                 p
                                       X                  X                (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 О¶i2
                                           О»i ОІisвҲ—2 О¶i2 =     О»i ОІ2i                           .
                                                                                      в„Ұ 2 2
                                       i=1                i=1          (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 + 1вҲ’в„Ұ   О¶i

 Similar to the previous proposition and as discussed in Section 4, to analyze the modelвҖҷs inherent error, we set
 Пғ2t = O(nвҲ’Оі ) where Оі is the exponent characterizing the scaling law of the test risk in the noiseless setting. It is
 previously stated by Cui et al. (2022); Simon et al. (2024) that the test risk of ridgeless overparameterized
 linear regression can be described in the scaling sense as err = Оҳ(nвҲ’ОІ+1 ) when ОІ < 2Оұ + 1. We will proceed
 by considering two cases based on the relationship between ОІ and 2Оұ + 1.
 Case 1: ОІ < 2Оұ + 1
 Consider the interval of iвҖҷs satisfying О¶i > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ and О¶i2 < 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ. By Proposition 5, we have
                                                                                Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                                      О¶i > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ вҮҗвҮ’ i > nC1 + O(1),                         .  where C1 =
                                                                                ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ
                                                                               Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                      О¶i2 > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ вҮҗвҮ’ i > nC2 + O(1), where C2 = вҲҡ                           .
                                                                              ПҖ( Оұ вҲ’ 1)1/Оұ
 Let Пүn be defined as in the previous proposition and define П•n = nC1 + O(1). Then, the interval of interest
 corresponds to the set of indices i such that П•n < i < Пүn . Within this interval, we observe
                                                           p          2
                                       (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 О¶i2 вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ в„Ұ) (1 вҲ’ в„Ұ)2 = k1
                                                            в„Ұ 2      в„Ұ
                                          (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 +        О¶ вүӨ1+     = k2
                                                           1вҲ’в„Ұ i    1вҲ’в„Ұ


                                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              ОұвҲ’1
Using the fact from Proposition 4 that в„Ұ =              вҲ’ O(nвҲ’1 ) tells us k1 = Оҳ(1) and k2 = Оҳ(1). Utilizing these
                                                Оұ
bounds, we obtain
                            p                                            Пүn
                      в„Ұ X 2               (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 О¶i2           в„Ұ X                 (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 О¶i2
         вҲ—     s2t
        Rom (ОІ ) вүҘ            О»i ОІi                            вүҘ             i вҲ’ОІ
                    1 вҲ’ в„Ұ i=1         (1 вҲ’ О¶ )2 + в„Ұ О¶ 2
                                                             2   1 вҲ’ в„Ұ i=П•
                                                                                   (1 вҲ’ О¶ )2 + в„Ұ О¶ 2
                                                                                                       2
                                                 i      1вҲ’в„Ұ i                    n             i     1вҲ’в„Ұ i
                                                                              Пүn
                                                                          в„Ұ   X       k1
                                                                  вүҘ               iвҲ’ОІ
                                                                        1 вҲ’ в„Ұ i=П•     k2
                                                                                 n

                                                                          k1 в„Ұ     (П•n /n)вҲ’ОІ+1 вҲ’ (Пүn /n)вҲ’ОІ+1
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                  вүҘ nвҲ’ОІ+1
                                                                          k2 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ           ОІвҲ’1
                                                                  (a)
                                                           = Оҳ(nвҲ’ОІ+1 ),
where (a) follows from the fact Пүn /n = Оҳ(1), П•n /n = Оҳ(1), and в„Ұ = Оҳ(1). This implies that
                                             вҲ—
                                           Rom (ОІ s2t ) = в„Ұ(nвҲ’ОІ+1 ).
                                                                                                       вҲ—
Recall that the optimal surrogate-to-target improves over the risk of the standard target model, thus Rom (ОІ s2t ) =
O(nвҲ’ОІ+1
        ). We therefore conclude Rom (ОІ ) = Оҳ(n
                                     вҲ—    s2t      вҲ’ОІ+1
                                                        ) for this case.
Case 2: ОІ > 2Оұ + 1
In this case, we have
                          p                                         p
                     в„Ұ X 2              (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2 О¶i2         в„Ұ X 2 2                (1 вҲ’ О¶i )2
   вҲ—
  Rom (ОІ s2t ) вүҘ             О»i ОІi                         =           О»i ОІ  О¶
                   1 вҲ’ в„Ұ i=1        (1 вҲ’ О¶ )2 + в„Ұ О¶ 2
                                                         2   1 вҲ’ в„Ұ i=1     i  i
                                                                                 (1 вҲ’ О¶ )2 + в„Ұ О¶ 2
                                                                                                    2
                                          i     1вҲ’в„Ұ i                                      i       1вҲ’в„Ұ i
                                                                                                        П•n
                                                                X                          в„Ұ3           X      iвҲ’ОІ
                                                          вүҘ             О»i О¶i2 ОІ2i                    =                k,
                                                                                                                1 вҲ’Оұ 2 3
                                                                                               (1 вҲ’ в„Ұ) i=1 (1 + П„t i )
                                                                                             2
                                                                                         в„Ұ
                                                              i:О¶i <1вҲ’в„Ұ             1 + 1вҲ’в„Ұ
                  в„Ұ    3
where k3 =       в„Ұ 2
                            = Оҳ(1). From Case 2 in Proposition 7, we already know that the same summation вҖ“
            (1+ 1вҲ’в„Ұ ) (1вҲ’в„Ұ)
with upper bound Пүn rather than П•n вҖ“ scales as Оҳ(nвҲ’2Оұ ). Yet, since П•n and Пүn have the same order Оҳ(n), the
result remains. This gives Rom вҲ—
                                 (ОІ s2t ) = в„Ұ(nвҲ’2Оұ ), which eventually yields
                            вҲ—
                          Rom (ОІ s2t ) вүӨ Rom (ОІt ) = O(nвҲ’2Оұ ) =вҮ’ Rom
                                                                  вҲ—
                                                                     (ОІ s2t ) = Оҳ(nвҲ’2Оұ ).
Hence, this allows us to say that the scaling law doesnвҖҷt improve even with the freedom to choose any ОІ s .                 в–Ў

In Figures 4 and 5, we illustrate the scaling-law behavior of the test risk. In Figure 4a, the sample size n varies
from small values up to values close to p. Even though a linear trend is observable for smaller values of n
when p = 500 in the log-log scale, as n approaches p, it is less apparent due to finite-sample effects of p. We
note that the asymptotic approximations in Propositions 4 and 5 rely on p being significantly large compared
to n. Thus, Figure 4b considers the same experiment with a larger dimension (p = 5000) and the same range
of n values to satisfy n вүӘ p. In this scenario, we observe a clear linear behavior in the log-log plot, which is
consistent with the scaling-law results presented in Proposition 6.
In Figure 5, we analyze the scaling-law behavior of the test risk under a two-stage framework where the
sample sizes m = n vary relative to a fixed dimension p = 1000. In this scenario, we observe a similar linear
behavior in the log-log scale when m = n is sufficiently small compared to p = 1000. Whereas, as the gap
between m = n and p diminishes, the linearity in the figure disappears as the asymptotic approximations in
Propositions 4 and 5 require p to be significantly larger compared to n. These observations align well with our
expectations and results in Section 4.
Proposition 8 (Non-asymptotic analysis of П„). Suppose that ОЈ вҲҲ R pГ—p is diagonal and ОЈi,i = О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for
                                      3 + 2вҲ’Оұ
1 < Оұ. Assume that n < pk for k =               . If П„t satisfies
                                    4 + 2вҲ’(ОұвҲ’2)
                                                  p
                                                 X       О»i
                                                               = n,
                                                 i=1 i
                                                      О» + П„t


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              100                                    Theoretical = 0.5
                                                                                     Experimental = 0.5
                                                                                     Theoretical = 1
                                                                                     Experimental = 1
                                                                                     Theoretical = 1.5
                                              10 1                                   Experimental = 1.5
                                                                                     Theoretical = 2
                                                                                     Experimental = 2


                                  Test Risk
                                              10 2



                                              10 3


                                                         102                                         103
                                                               Sample Size (n = m)

Figure 5: We compare the experimental two-stage risk with our estimated theoretical risk in log-log scale to
demonstrate the scaling law. Setting: The feature size is p = 1000; the sample sizes m = n change from 50 to
900 with increments of 50; both feature covariances follow the power-law structure О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for Оұ = 0.5, 1, 1.5
and 2; the ground truth parameter ОІвӢҶ is specified as ОІi = 1.

                                                                     !Оұ
          Оұ
                                    p+1 Оұ
                                                         Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
then cn       вүӨ П„вҲ’1
                 t вүӨc       n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1   for c =                       .
                                                              ПҖ

Proof. In a similar vein to Simon et al. (2024), we have:
                       p
                                                                                 ПҖ
                                     Z p                 Z вҲһ
                      X     iвҲ’Оұ              xвҲ’Оұ                xвҲ’Оұ
                 n=                вүӨ                dx вүӨ               dx =             П„вҲ’1/Оұ .
                      i=1
                          iвҲ’Оұ + П„t    0   x вҲ’Оұ + П„t       0  x вҲ’Оұ + П„t      Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
Since the summand is decreasing, we can bound the Riemann sum by an integral, thus:
                     p             Z p+1
                    X     iвҲ’Оұ               xвҲ’Оұ
               n=                вүҘ                 dx
                    i=1
                        iвҲ’Оұ + П„t    1     xвҲ’Оұ + П„t
                                   Z вҲһ                 Z 1                    Z вҲһ
                                           xвҲ’Оұ                xвҲ’Оұ                     xвҲ’Оұ
                                 =                dx вҲ’                 dx  вҲ’                  dx
                                    0   xвҲ’Оұ + П„t         0 x
                                                             вҲ’Оұ + П„
                                                                    t          p+1 x
                                                                                     вҲ’Оұ + П„
                                                                                            t

                                        ПҖ
                                                       Z 1                    Z вҲһ
                                                              xвҲ’Оұ                     xвҲ’Оұ
                                 =             П„вҲ’1/Оұ вҲ’                 dx  вҲ’                  dx
                                   Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)  t
                                                         0 x
                                                             вҲ’Оұ + П„t           p+1 x
                                                                                     вҲ’Оұ + П„t
                                        ПҖ
                                                           Z вҲһ
                                                                      1
                                 вүҘ             П„вҲ’1/Оұ вҲ’ 1 вҲ’                    dx
                                   Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t             p+1 1 +   П„t x Оұ
                                        ПҖ
                                                           Z вҲһ
                                                                   1
                                 вүҘ             П„вҲ’1/Оұ вҲ’ 1 вҲ’            Оұ
                                                                        dx
                                   Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t                 П„
                                                             p+1 t x
                                                           " вҲ’1 вҲ’Оұ+1 #вҲһ
                                        ПҖ                   П„ x
                                 =             П„t
                                                вҲ’1/Оұ
                                                     вҲ’1вҲ’ t
                                   Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)               вҲ’Оұ + 1 p+1
                                          ПҖ                  П„вҲ’1 (p + 1)вҲ’Оұ+1
                                                     =
                                                  П„вҲ’1/Оұ вҲ’ t                   вҲ’ 1.
                                     Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)   t
                                                                  ОұвҲ’1
                                             Оұ
Recalling that Оұ > 1 and assuming П„вҲ’1
                                    t < p , we derive:
                                  ПҖ                     p+1                   ПҖ
                                          П„tвҲ’1/Оұ вҲ’ 1 вҲ’           вүӨnвүӨ                 П„вҲ’1/Оұ
                             Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)                ОұвҲ’1             Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t
                                                          пЈ«            p+1
                                                                                           пЈ¶Оұ
                              nОұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)
                                              !Оұ          пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1    Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                        вҮҗвҮ’                       вүӨ П„t вүӨ пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ
                                                     вҲ’1     пЈ¬                              пЈ·пЈ·пЈ· .
                                     ПҖ                                    ПҖ                  пЈё


                                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Оұ                                                   Оұ
We conclude by proving that П„вҲ’1
                             t < p . For the sake of contradiction, assume that П„t вүҘ p . Then,
                                                                                 вҲ’1


                                           p        p/2               p
                                           X1       X      1         X        1
                                  n=          ОұП„
                                                  =          ОұП„
                                                                 +
                                     i=1
                                         1 + i  t   i=1
                                                        1 + i  t   i=p/2+1
                                                                           1 + iОұ П„t
                                                           p/2                 p
                                                           X       1           X            1
                                                       вүҘ                  +
                                                         i=1 1 +
                                                                          1
                                                                                  i=p/2+1
                                                                                          1 + 1
                                                                         2 Оұ

                                                               пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ 3 + 1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                               пЈ«                пЈ¶

                                                       = p пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬
                                                                 пЈ¬пЈ¬      2Оұ пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ· ,
                                                                          1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                                     4 + ОұвҲ’2 пЈё
                                                                  пЈ¬пЈӯ
                                                                        2
which contradicts our assumption that n < pk.                                                                      в–Ў

Proposition 9 (Non-asymptotic analysis of в„Ұ). Suppose that ОЈ вҲҲ R pГ—p is diagonal and ОЈi,i = О»i = iвҲ’Оұ for
                                                                       Оұ2                          Оұ
1 < Оұ. Let П„t be defined as in Proposition 8 and assume that pk1 +           < n < pk2 for k1 =          and
                                                                    (Оұ вҲ’ 1)2                    (Оұ вҲ’ 1)2
       3 + 2вҲ’Оұ
k2 =             . Let в„Ұ be the solution to
     4 + 2вҲ’(ОұвҲ’2)
                                                    p          !2
                                                   X      О»i
                                             nв„Ұ =                 .
                                                   i=1
                                                       О»i + П„t

Then,
                                                                   p+1 пЈ¶2ОұвҲ’1
                                              Оұ вҲ’ 1 1 пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                         пЈ«
                                                                              1
                                           в„Ұ>      вҲ’ пЈ¬пЈӯ                      вҲ’ .
                                                Оұ   Оұ         p+1 пЈё
                                                                          пЈ·
                                                                              n


Proof. Since the summand is monotonically decreasing, we can lower bound the sum by the following integral
and manipulate:
                 p                !2       Z p+1          !2
                 X       iвҲ’Оұ                      xвҲ’Оұ
          nв„Ұ =                         вүҘ                     dx
                 i=1
                       iвҲ’Оұ + П„t           1     xвҲ’Оұ + П„t
                                         Z вҲһ            !2       Z 1             !2        Z вҲһ             !2
                                                 xвҲ’Оұ                      xвҲ’Оұ                      xвҲ’Оұ
                                       =                   dx  вҲ’                     dx вҲ’                     dx
                                          0   xвҲ’Оұ + П„t             0   xвҲ’Оұ + П„t             p+1 x
                                                                                                  вҲ’Оұ + П„
                                                                                                         t
                                                                              !2                        !2
                                          ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ
                                                               Z 1                      Z вҲһ
                                                                       xвҲ’Оұ                       xвҲ’Оұ
                                       = 2           П„       вҲ’                    dx вҲ’                      dx
                                         Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t          0    xвҲ’Оұ + П„t             p+1 x
                                                                                                вҲ’Оұ + П„
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                     !2
                                          ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ
                                                                   Z вҲһ
                                                                               1
                                       вүҘ 2           П„       вҲ’1вҲ’                   Оұ
                                                                                        dx
                                         Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t               p+1 1 + П„t x
                                          ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ
                                                                   Z вҲһ
                                                                            1
                                       вүҘ 2           П„       вҲ’1вҲ’              Оұ 2
                                                                                  dx
                                         Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) t               p+1 (П„t )
                                                                            x
                                                                   " вҲ’2 вҲ’2Оұ+1 #вҲһ
                                          ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ              П„ x
                                       = 2           П„t      вҲ’1вҲ’ t
                                         Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)                  вҲ’2Оұ + 1 p+1
                                            ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) вҲ’1/Оұ П„вҲ’2t (p + 1)
                                                                      вҲ’2Оұ+1
                                       =                П„  вҲ’                вҲ’ 1.
                                           Оұ2 sin (ПҖ/Оұ)  t
                                                                2Оұ вҲ’ 1


                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LetвҖҷs now utilize the upper and lower bounds for П„вҲ’1
                                                  t from Proposition 8. Substituting, we have

                                  ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) nОұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) П„вҲ’2    (p + 1)вҲ’2Оұ+1
                          nв„Ұ вүҘ                             вҲ’ t                 вҲ’1
                                  Оұ2 sin (ПҖ/Оұ)     ПҖ             2Оұ вҲ’ 1
                                n(Оұ вҲ’ 1) П„вҲ’2    (p + 1)вҲ’2Оұ+1
                              =          вҲ’ t                 вҲ’1
                                    Оұ            2Оұ вҲ’ 1
                                             пЈ«         p+1
                                                                         пЈ¶2Оұ
                                n(Оұ вҲ’ 1) пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ· p + 1
                              вүҘ          вҲ’ пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ                                      вҲ’1
                                    Оұ                 ПҖ(p + 1)
                                                                         пЈ·пЈ·пЈё
                                                                             2Оұ вҲ’ 1

Dividing both left and right-hand side by n gives:
                                            пЈ«        p+1
                                                                         пЈ¶2Оұ
                                 Оұ вҲ’ 1 пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·        p+1       1
                       =вҮ’ в„Ұ >           вҲ’ пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ                                           вҲ’
                                    Оұ               ПҖ(p + 1)
                                                                         пЈ·пЈ·пЈё
                                                                             n(2Оұ вҲ’ 1) n
                                                              p+1 пЈ«          p+1 пЈ¶2ОұвҲ’1
                                 ОұвҲ’1            1 n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·     1
                               >        вҲ’                                              вҲ’ ,
                                    Оұ                                  p+1 пЈё
                                                                  пЈ¬пЈӯ              пЈ·
                                            2Оұ вҲ’ 1      n                               n
                                                       p+1 пЈ¶2ОұвҲ’1
                                 Оұ вҲ’ 1 1 пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                               пЈ«
                                                                      1
                               >        вҲ’ пЈ¬пЈӯ                         вҲ’ ,
                                    Оұ       Оұ      p+1
                                                             пЈ·пЈё
                                                                      n

        Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)                           p+1
since               < 1 for Оұ > 1 and n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 < n 2ОұвҲ’1
                                                        Оұ by our assumption on n.                                        в–Ў
             ПҖ
Proposition 10. Under the assumption that
                                                     пЈ«                                   q         1/Оұ            пЈ¶
                                                                                      ПҖ    2Оұ
                                                                                               вҲ’ 1
                                                     пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬                                                          пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                 Оұ           Оұ2
                                                              ОұвҲ’2      3+2  вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                                         p + 1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                     !                                           !
                                                       пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬                                  5
 max 2Оұ, p              +                < n < min пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬(p + 1)
                                                         пЈ¬        ,p               ,p                  вҲ’            пЈ·пЈ· вҲ’ 1
              (Оұ вҲ’ 1) 2   (Оұ вҲ’ 1)2                       пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ   Оұ     4 + 2вҲ’(ОұвҲ’2)        Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)      Оұ вҲ’ 1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈё

and 4 < Оұ, we can find a masked surrogate-to-target setting that improves over the risk of the standard target
model by selecting all features i such that О¶i2 > 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ.

Proof. From Proposition 9, we have
                                                                 p+1 пЈ¶2ОұвҲ’1
                                            Оұ вҲ’ 1 1 пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                       пЈ«
                                                                            1
                                         в„Ұ>      вҲ’ пЈ¬пЈӯ                      вҲ’ .
                                              Оұ   Оұ         p+1
                                                                        пЈ·пЈё
                                                                            n

ItвҖҷs then enough to show that we can find a set of iвҖҷs such that
                                                                   p+1 пЈ¶2ОұвҲ’1
                                                         пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1
                                                         пЈ«
                                                1 1пЈ¬                          1
                                           О¶i2 > + пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ                      + .
                                                                       пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                 Оұ     Оұ      p+1 пЈё
                                                                         пЈ·пЈ·
                                                                              n

From the proof of Proposition 5, we know that
                                                                    пЈ«      вҲҡ     пЈ¶1/Оұ
                                                                            cвҖІ пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                          О¶i2 > cвҖІ   вҮҗвҮ’ i > П„вҲ’1/Оұ           вҲҡ пЈ·пЈё .
                                                                  пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬
                                                             t      пЈ¬пЈӯ
                                                                         1 вҲ’ cвҖІ
Hence, using the bound on П„вҲ’1
                           t from Proposition 8, itвҖҷs enough to find indices i such that

                                   ! пЈ« вҲҡ вҖІ пЈ¶1/Оұ                                              p+1 пЈ¶2ОұвҲ’1
                                                                            1 1 пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1 пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                                                   пЈ«
             Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)      p + 1 пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬  c пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·                                                          1
          i>             n+1+            вҲҡ пЈ·пЈё                      where c = + пЈ¬пЈӯ
                                                                               вҖІ
                                                                                                       + .            (29)
                  ПҖ           Оұ вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ cвҖІ                                  Оұ Оұ         p+1 пЈё
                                      пЈ¬пЈӯ                                                            пЈ·
                                                                                                        n


                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                          вҲҡ  1/Оұ
                                  p+1                                                                       x
By our assumption p + 1 > n + 1 + ОұвҲ’1        and n > 2Оұ, we obtain that 2Оұ     5
                                                                                 > cвҖІ . Since               вҲҡ
                                                                                                          1вҲ’ x
                                                                                                                      is increasing with
x when 0 вүӨ x вүӨ 1, we have
                                     пЈ«                пЈ¶1/Оұ
                                     пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬              пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·          пЈ« вҲҡ вҖІ пЈ¶1/Оұ
                                                 1                       c пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                                         вҲҡ пЈ·пЈё .
                                       пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬             пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·       пЈ¬пЈ¬
                                          пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ q            пЈ·пЈ·пЈ· вүҘ пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ
                                            пЈӯ 2Оұ вҲ’ 1 пЈё                1 вҲ’ cвҖІ
                                                5

Then, to ensure the existence of an interval of iвҖҷs satisfying the above inequality, we choose
                                              пЈ«              пЈ¶1/Оұ                          пЈ«             пЈ¶1/Оұ
                                 Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) пЈ¬пЈ¬                               Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ) пЈ¬пЈ¬
                                              пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬            пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·                           пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬           пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                       1                                          1
                     p вҲ’ (p + 1)                                         +
                                                пЈ¬              пЈ·                             пЈ¬             пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                                                    вүҘ (n   1)
                                                               пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                  ПҖ(Оұ вҲ’ 1) пЈӯпЈ¬ 2Оұ                                   ПҖ
                                                пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ q            пЈ·
                                                                 пЈ·                           пЈ¬
                                                                                             пЈ¬
                                                                                             пЈ¬ q             пЈ·пЈ·
                                                         вҲ’ 1     пЈёпЈ·                          пЈӯпЈ¬ 2Оұ вҲ’ 1 пЈ·пЈёпЈ·
                                                      5                                          5
                          q         1/Оұ
                       ПҖ    2Оұ
                             5 вҲ’1         p+1
               вҮҗвҮ’ p                     вҲ’             вүҘn+1
                         Оұ sin (ПҖ/Оұ)      ОұвҲ’1
which follows from our assumption on n. Thus, discarding the features i provided in the interval (29) will
strictly improve the test risk of the masked surrogate-to-target model over the standard target model.  в–Ў

One can verify that our assumptions are coherent because they ensure a non-empty interval for n when Оұ > 4
                                             Оұ
as the coefficients of p are positive and          is smaller compared to the other three coefficients of p in the
                                          (Оұ вҲ’ 1)2
minimum function.

C     Proofs for Section 5
Theorem 4 (Distributional characterization, Han & Xu (2023)). Let Оә s = p/m > 1 and suppose that, for
some M > 1, 1/M вүӨ Оә s , Пғ2s вүӨ M and вҲҘОЈ s вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1
                                                s op вүӨ M. Let П„ s вҲҲ R be the unique solution of the following
equation:
                                           О»s    1
                                     ОәвҲ’1
                                      s вҲ’      = tr (ОЈ s + П„ s I)вҲ’1 ОЈ s .                                (30)
                                            П„    p
We define the random variable XОәs ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) based on g s вҲј N(0, I) and the function Оі s : R p вҶ’
                                                                                                          вҲ’ R as
                                       s s
follows:
                                                                         ОЈвҲ’1/2 Оі s (ОІвӢҶ ) g s пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                 пЈ®                             пЈ№
                                                                          s
                   XОә ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) := (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s пЈ°ОІвӢҶ +
                    s                                       вҲ’1
                                                                 пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ
                                                                   пЈҜ           вҲҡ               пЈәпЈ»
                     s s                                                           p                        (31)

                                 Оі s (ОІвӢҶ ) := Оә s Пғ s + E gs [вҲҘОЈ s (XОә ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 ] .
                                  2                  2             1/2 s                            2
                                                                                s   s

Then, for any L-Lipschitz function f : R вҶ’ вҲ’ R where L < L(M), there exists a constant C = C(M) such that
                                                       p

for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], we have the following:

                                               f (ОІ s ) вҲ’ E gs [ f (XОәw ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ))] вүҘ Оө) вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C ,
                                                                                                              4
                         sup P( sup                                                                                                (32)
                                                                    s
                       ОІвӢҶ вҲҲB(R)   О» s вҲҲ[0,M]                            s



where R < M.
Definition 3. Recall the definition of П„t and Оіt in Theorem 1. Let Оә s = p/m > 1 and define П„ s вҲҲ R similarly to
П„t . We define the random variable XОәs ,Пғ2 based on g s вҲј N(0, I) and the function Оі s : R p вҶ’
                                                                                             вҲ’ R as follows:
                                               s   s


                                                                             ОЈвҲ’1/2 Оі s (ОІвӢҶ ) g s пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                       пЈ®                           пЈ№
                                                                              s
                        XОә ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) := (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s пЈҜпЈ°ОІвӢҶ +
                         s                                       вҲ’1
                                                                       пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ
                                                                                   вҲҡ               пЈәпЈ»
                          s s                                                          p

                                     Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ) := Оә s Пғ2s + E gs [вҲҘОЈ1/2
                                                                    s (XОә ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 ] .
                                                                        s                              2
                                                                                s   s


                                                              32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let ОәМҮ = (Оә s , Оәt ), ОЈМҮ = (ОЈ s , ОЈt ), and ПғМҮ = (Пғ2s , Пғ2t ). Then, we define the asymptotic risk estimate as
                                                                                                      EОІs вҲјX s          [Оіt2 (ОІ s )]
                                                                                                             Оә s ,Пғ2s

      RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) = вҲҘОЈt1/2         I вҲ’ (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОЈ s + П„ s I)
                                                            вҲ’1                    вҲ’1
                                                                                       ОЈ s ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ22 +                                    tr ОЈ2t (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2
                                                                                         p
                       Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ )   1/2
                     +          tr ОЈ s (ОЈ s + П„ s I)вҲ’1 ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt (ОЈ s + П„ s I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                                                                             s     .
                            p
Theorem 2. Suppose that, for some constant Mt > 1, we have 1/Mt вүӨ Оә s , Пғ2s , Оәt , Пғ2t вүӨ Mt and
вҲҘОЈ s вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1s op , вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop , ОЈ s op вүӨ Mt . Consider the surrogate-to-target model defined in Section 2, and
                                вҲ’1

let R(ОІ ) represent its risk when ОІвӢҶ is given. Recall the definition of ОЈМҮ, ОәМҮ, ПғМҮ and RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ in Definition 3. Then,
          s2t

there exists a constant C = C(Mt ) such that for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], the following holds when R + 1 < Mt :

                                                 sup P( R(ОІ s2t ) вҲ’ RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) вүҘ Оө) вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C .
                                                                                                                        4


                                            ОІвӢҶ вҲҲB p (R)


                                  вҲ’ R as f1 (x) = вҲҘОЈ1/2
Proof. Define a function f1 : R p вҶ’                 t (x вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 . The gradient of this function is
                                                                2


                                             вҲҘвҲҮ f1 (x)вҲҘ2 = вҲҘ2ОЈt (x вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop вҲҘx вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 .

Using Proposition 12, there exists an event E with P(E c ) вүӨ Ct eвҲ’p/Ct where Ct = Ct (Mt , Mt2вҲ’R ) with the
definition of Mt in Proposition 12, such that f1 (ОІ s2t ) is 2Mt2 -Lipschitz if ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ B p (R). Applying Theorem 4 on
the target model, there exists a constant CМ„ s = CМ„ s (Mt ) such that for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], we obtain

                         sup P f (ОІ s2t ) вҲ’ E gt [ f (XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt ))] вүҘ Оө вүӨ C peвҲ’pОө /C ,
                                                                                              4
                                                                                                               (33)
                                                                              t
                               ОІ s вҲҲB( Mt2+R )
                                                                                  t



where f (ОІ s2t ) = R(ОІ s2t ) and
                                                                                             ОЈвҲ’1/2 Оіt (ОІ s ) gt пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                                       пЈ®                          пЈ№
                                         XОәt ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt ) = (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt пЈҜпЈҜпЈ°ОІ s + t вҲҡ                 пЈәпЈ» .
                                                                                       пЈҜпЈҜ
                                            t t                                                       p
Furthermore,
                                                        h                                                i
                E gt f (XОәs ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt )) = E gt вҲҘОЈ1/2
                                                           t (Оё1 (ОІ вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) вҲ’ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ + Оё2 Оіt (ОІ ))вҲҘ2
                                                                   s                               s   2
                           t     t

                                                          = (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                                          + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ),                                (34)
                                                           g
where Оё1 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt and Оё2 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                       t   вҲҡt . Let E(Mt , t
                                                             p
                                                                              M вҲ’R
                                                                               2 ) be the event defined in Proposition
                 вҲ’ R be defined as f2 (x) := (x вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (x вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ). By Proposition 13, the function f2 is
11. Let f2 : R p вҶ’
2Mt2 вҲ’Lipschitz if ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ B p (R) on the event E(Mt , Mt2вҲ’R ). Applying Theorem 4 on the surrogate model, there
exists a constant CМ„w,1 = CМ„w,1 (Mt ) such that for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], we obtain

    sup P f2 (ОІ s ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ ОҰ1 )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (I вҲ’ ОҰ1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ) E gs [ОҰвҠӨ2 Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОҰ2 ] > Оө вүӨ CМ„w,1 peвҲ’pОө /CМ„w,1 ,
                                                                                                                  4

  ОІвӢҶ вҲҲB p (R)
                                                                                                                                                                (35)
                                                               gs
where ОҰ1 := (ОЈ s + П„ s I)вҲ’1 ОЈ s and ОҰ2 := (ОЈ s + П„ s I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                           s вҲҡp .

             вҲ’ R be defined as f3 (x) := Оіt2 (x)Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 . By Proposition 14 and Proposition 2.1 in Han & Xu
Let f3 : R p вҶ’
(2023), the function f3 is 4Mt2 -Lipschitz if ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ B p (R) on the event E(Mt , Mt2вҲ’R ). Applying Theorem 4 on the
surrogate model, there exists a constant CМ„w,2 = CМ„w,2 (Mt ) such that for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], we obtain

                      sup P f3 (ОІ s ) вҲ’ EОІs вҲјX s [Оіt2 (ОІ s )] E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ] > Оө вүӨ CМ„w,2 peвҲ’pОө /CМ„w,2 .
                                                                                                 4

                                                                                                             (36)
                         ОІвӢҶ вҲҲB p (R)



                                                                         33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             вҲ’ R as f4 (x) := вҲ’2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (x вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ). By Proposition 15 and Proposition 2.1 in Han &
Let f4 : R p вҶ’
Xu (2023), the function f4 is 2Mt2 вҲ’Lipschitz if ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ B p (R) on the event E(Mt , Mt2вҲ’R ). Applying Theorem 4 on
the surrogate model, there exists a constant CМ„w,3 = CМ„w,3 (Mt ) such that for any Оө вҲҲ (0, 1/2], we obtain

                  sup P f4 (ОІ s ) вҲ’ 2 ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОҰ1 вҲ’ I)ОІвӢҶ > Оө вүӨ CМ„w,3 peвҲ’pОө /CМ„w,3 .
                                                                                             4
                                       h                                i
                                                                                                            (37)
                    ОІвӢҶ вҲҲB p (R)

By the definition of these functions, we have

               E gt f (XОәs ,Пғ2 (ОЈt , ОІ s , gt )) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ = f2 (ОІ s ) + f3 (ОІ s ) вҲ’ f4 (ОІ s )           (38)
                                  t   t


By the definition of Оё1 , Оё2 , ОҰ1 , and ОҰ2 , we have
 RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ = ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ ОҰ1 )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (I вҲ’ ОҰ1 )ОІвӢҶ + Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ) E gs [ОҰвҠӨ2 Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОҰ2 ]
                                                                                                 h                                 i
                                                    + EОІs вҲјX s [Оіt2 (ОІ s )] E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ] вҲ’ 2 ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОҰ1 вҲ’ I)ОІвӢҶ .
                                                                                                                                  (39)
Using (38)-(39) and applying a union bound on (33), (35), (36), and (37), we obtain the advertised claim.                          в–Ў

Proposition 11. Suppose that, for some Mt > 1, 1/Mt вүӨ Оә s , Пғ2s вүӨ Mt and вҲҘОЈ s вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1             s op вүӨ Mt . For every
c s > 0, there exists an event E(Mt , c s ) with P((E(Mt , c s ))c ) вүӨ C s eвҲ’p/C s where C s = C s (Mt , c s ) such that
                                          вҲҘОІ s вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + c s     and      вҲҘОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + c s .

Proof. By the definition of ОІ s , we have
                                                  ОІ s = XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 yМғ
                                                      = XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғОІвӢҶ + XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғ,                            (40)

where zМғ вҲј N(0, Пғ2s I). By triangle inequality, we obtain
                                             вҲҘОІ s вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғвҲҘ2
                                                    (a)
                                                     вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғвҲҘ2 ,                                       (41)

where (a) in above follows from the fact that XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғ is a projection matrix, and so all of its eigenvalues
are either 0 or 1. Focusing on the second term of the RHS, we derive
                                                                                  !вҲ’1
                                                                      zМғвҠӨ XМғ XМғвҠӨ         zМғ
                            вҲҘ XМғ ( XМғ XМғ ) zМғвҲҘ2 = zМғ ( XМғ XМғ ) zМғ = вҲҡ
                                вҠӨ       вҠӨ вҲ’1 2      вҠӨ       вҠӨ вҲ’1
                                                                                        вҲҡ
                                                                         p   p             p
                                                                                      вҲ’1
                                                                  (a) zМғвҠӨ zМғ XМғ XМғвҠӨ
                                                                                    !
                                                                   вүӨ                         ,                     (42)
                                                                        p       p
                                                                                                              op

where (a) in the above inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Using BernsteinвҖҷs inequality, there
exists an absolute constant C0 > 0 that depends on Пғ2s such that
                                                          пЈұ       пЈұ           пЈјпЈј
                                   zМғвҠӨ zМғ                              2
                                                   !      пЈҙ       пЈҙ pt     pt пЈҙ
                                                                              пЈҪпЈҙ
                                          вҲ’ Пғ2s > t вүӨ exp пЈҙ              ,        .
                                                          пЈҙ       пЈҙ           пЈҙ пЈҙ
                                                           вҲ’c min пЈҙ
                                                          пЈІ       пЈІ             пЈҪ
                               P
                                     p                    пЈҙ
                                                          пЈі       пЈі 4C 2 2C0 пЈҙ
                                                                  пЈҙ           пЈҫпЈҙ
                                                                              пЈҙ пЈҙ
                                                                                пЈҫ
                                                                                             0

On the other hand, let ZМғ = XМғОЈвҲ’1/2
                                 s   , which means that the entries of ZМғ are independent and normally distributed
with zero mean and unit variance. Then,
                                    !вҲ’1                   !вҲ’1                        !вҲ’1
                             XМғ XМғвҠӨ            ZМғОЈ s ZМғ вҠӨ                    ZМғ ZМғ вҠӨ
                                           =                  вүӨ ОЈ s op
                                                                    вҲ’1
                                                                                         .                    (43)
                                p                 p                             p
                                                    op                        op                                   op



                                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using Theorem 1.1 in Rudelson & Vershynin (2009), there exist absolute constants C1 , C2 > 0 such that we
have the following for every Оө > 0
                                пЈ«                          !2 пЈ¶пЈ·
                                пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ ZМғ ZМғ вҠӨ !вҲ’1          1
                                                вүӨ Оө2 1 вҲ’         пЈ·пЈ· вүӨ (C1 Оө) pвҲ’m+1 + eвҲ’pC2 .
                                                               пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                           P пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ                                                                    (44)
                                       p                 Оәs пЈё
                                               op

By combining (42), (43), and (44), we obtain that
                                              1 q
                   P вҲҘОІ s вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + Оө(1 вҲ’ ) (t + Пғ2s ) ОЈвҲ’1
                                             Оәs             s op
                                                                                                       (               )
                                                                                                           pt2
                                                                                              вҲ’c min            , pt
                                                          вүӨ (C1 Оө)   pвҲ’m+1
                                                                             +e   вҲ’pC2
                                                                                         +e                4C 2 2C0
                                                                                                              0


The advertised claim for вҲҘОІ s вҲҘ2 follows when Оө is selected as Оө < C11 e . For вҲҘОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 , using the definition of
ОІ s , we write as follows:
                           вҲҘОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 = вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғОІвӢҶ + XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғ вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                         вүӨ вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғ вҲ’ IвҲҘ2 вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғвҲҘ2
                                         (a)
                                         вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғвҲҘ2 ,                                              (45)
where (a) in the above inequalities follows from the fact that the eigenvalues of XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғ вҲ’ I are either 1
or 0 as the eigenvalues of XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғ are either 1 or 0. The remaining part of this proof is identical to the
previous part.                                                                                                       в–Ў
Corollary 2. Suppose that ОІ s вҲҲ R p is given, and for some Mt > 1, we have 1/Mt вүӨ Оәt , Пғ2t вүӨ Mt and
вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1
           t   op
                    вүӨ Mt . For every ct > 0, there exists an event E(Mt , ct ) with P((E(Mt , ct ))c ) вүӨ Ct eвҲ’p/Ct where
Ct = Ct (Mt , ct ) such that
                              вҲҘОІ s2t вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІ s вҲҘ2 + ct    and     вҲҘОІ s2t вҲ’ ОІ s вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІ s вҲҘ2 + ct .

Proof. The result directly follows from the proof of Proposition 11.                                                         в–Ў
Proposition 12. Suppose that, for some Mt > 1, 1/Mt вүӨ Оәt , Пғ2t вүӨ Mt and вҲҘОЈt вҲҘop , ОЈвҲ’1        t     op
                                                                                                       вүӨ Mt . For every
ct > 0, there exists an event E(Mt , ct ) with P((E(Mt , ct )) ) вүӨ Ct e
                                                              c        вҲ’p/Ct
                                                                             where Ct = Ct (Mt , ct ) such that we have
the following on this event E(Mt , ct ):
                              вҲҘОІ s2t вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ct     and     вҲҘОІ s2t вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ct

Proof. By the definition of ОІ s2t , we have the following:
                                        ОІ s2t = X(XXвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XОІ s + XвҠӨ (XXвҠӨ )вҲ’1 z                                             (46)
where z вҲј N(0, Пғ2t I). Plugging (40) into (46), we obtain

                     ОІ s2t = X(XXвҠӨ )вҲ’1 X XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғОІвӢҶ + XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғ + XвҠӨ (XXвҠӨ )вҲ’1 z                       (47)
Note that X(XXвҠӨ )вҲ’1 X and XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 XМғ are projection matrices. Multiplication of two projection matrices
results in a projection matrix. Using the fact that the eigenvalues of a projection matrix are either 1 or 0 in
(47), we have
                              вҲҘОІ s2t вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғвҲҘ2 + вҲҘXвҠӨ (XXвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zвҲҘ2                              (48)
By a similar reasoning used in (42),(43), and (44); there exist absolute constants C0 , C1 , C2 , c > 0 such that
we have the following for every Оө, t > 0:
                                                1 q
                   P вҲҘXвҠӨ (XXвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zвҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө(1 вҲ’ ) (t + Пғ2t ) ОЈвҲ’1
                                                Оәt               t  op
                                                                                                     (            )
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                               вҲ’c min pt 2 , 2Cpt
                                                              вүӨ (C1 Оө)   pвҲ’n+1
                                                                                 +e   вҲ’pC2
                                                                                             +e             4C
                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                           (49)


                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Similarly, for every ОөМғ > 0, there exist absolute constants CМғ0 , CМғ1 , CМғ2 , cМғ > 0 such that we have the following for
every ОөМғ, tЛң:
                                                      1 q
                    P вҲҘ XМғвҠӨ ( XМғ XМғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 zМғвҲҘ2 вүӨ ОөМғ(1 вҲ’ ) (tЛң + Пғ2s ) ОЈвҲ’1
                                                      Оәs                s op
                                                                                                        (                )
                                                                                                            pt2      Лң
                                                                                              вҲ’cМғ min             , pt
                                                             вүӨ (CМғ1 ОөМғ) pвҲ’m+1 + eвҲ’pCМғ2 + e                  4CМғ 2 2CМғ0
                                                                                                                0            (50)
Note that X, z, XМғ, and zМғ are independent of each other. Therefore, we q        can apply union bound on (49)
and (50) with selecting Оө, t, ОөМғ, and tЛң such that Оө < C11 e , c2t < Оө(1 вҲ’ Оә1t ) (t + Пғ2t ) ОЈвҲ’1   t   op
                                                                                                         , ОөМғ < CМғ1 , and
                                                                                                                   1
                q
ct
2  < Оө(1 вҲ’ 1
           Оәs )   (tЛң + Пғ 2 ) ОЈвҲ’1
                          s    s op . As a result, there exists an event E with P(E c
                                                                                      ) вүӨ C t (M  ,
                                                                                                 t tc ) such  that

                                                   вҲҘОІ s2t вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ct .
Using a similar argument in (45), we derive the following on the same event E1
                                                вҲҘОІ s2t вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ct .
This completes the proof.
                                                                                                                               в–Ў
Proposition 13. Let g : R p вҶ’
                            вҲ’ R be a function such that

                                                   t (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОІ вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2
                                      g(ОІ s ) := вҲҘОЈ1/2          вҲ’1    s       2


                                                                                                              2О»3
Then, on the same event E(Mt , c s ) in Proposition 11, the function g is (вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + c s ) (О»1 +П„1t )2 вҲ’Lipschitz where О»1
is the largest eigenvalue of ОЈt .

Proof. We take the gradient of the function g:
                            вҲҘвҲҮg(ОІ s )вҲҘ2 = 2вҲҘОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2
                                                                     2О»3i
                                           вүӨ вҲҘОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 max
                                                              i   (О»i + П„t )2
                                                                                         !2
                                                                                П„t
                                           = вҲҘОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 max 2О»i 1 вҲ’
                                                              i              О»i + П„t
                                                               2О»31
                                           = вҲҘОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2               .
                                                            (О»1 + П„t )2
Combining Proposition 11 on the event E(Mt , c s ) with the above inequality provides the advertised claim.                    в–Ў
Proposition 14. Let g : R p вҶ’
                            вҲ’ R be a function such that
                                                   1 1/2
                                      g(ОІ s ) :=    вҲҘОЈ (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                                      t Оіt (ОІ )вҲҘF
                                                                             s 2
                                                   p t
                                                                                                 p
Then, on the same event E(Mt , c s ) in Proposition 11, the function g is LвҲ’Lipschitz where (О»i )i=1 are the
eigenvalues of ОЈt with a descending order and
                                              4П„2t   О»31        вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + c s
                                       L=                                     .
                                               m (О»1 + П„t ) 1 вҲ’ 1 P p   О»i  2
                                                           4
                                                                      m     i=1 О»i +П„t


Proof. We take the gradient of the function g:
                                           2 1/2
                              вҲҮg(ОІ s ) =    ОЈ (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2 2 s
                                                                              t вҲҮОіt (ОІ ).
                                           p t


                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that

                                    Оіt2 (ОІ s ) = Оә s Пғ2s + E gs [вҲҘОЈ1/2
                                                                   s (XОә ,Пғ2 (ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , g s ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 ]
                                                                       s                              2
                                                                                   s   s

                                                        Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                                                  t ОІ вҲҘ2
                                                                                      s 2
                                               = Оәt                                     .
                                                          1 вҲ’ m1 tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t

Then, we have

                                                                 П„2 ОЈ1/2 (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ1/2
                                                                                        t ОІ
                                                                                             s
                                                вҲҮОіt2 (ОІ s ) = 2Оәt t t                         .
                                                                 1 вҲ’ m1 tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t

Plugging вҲҮОіt2 (ОІ s ) into вҲҮg(ОІ s ), we obtain that

                                               4П„2t ОЈt1/2 (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                                                                           t ОІ
                                                                                                               s
                            вҲҘвҲҮg(ОІ s )вҲҘ2 =
                                                m                   1 вҲ’ 1 tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
                                                                             m

                                              4П„2    О»31           вҲҘОІ s вҲҘ2
                                             вүӨ t                               .
                                               m (О»1 + П„t )4 1 вҲ’ 1 P p   О»i  2
                                                                         m       i=1 О»i +П„t

Combining Proposition 11 on the event E(Mt , c s ) with the above inequality provides the advertised claim.             в–Ў


Proposition 15. Let g : R p вҶ’
                            вҲ’ R be a function such that
                                                                     вҠӨ
                               g(ОІ s ) := 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ I вҲ’ (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ).

                                                О»  2
Then, the function g is 2вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 П„t                1
                                               О»1 +П„t     вҲ’Lipschitz where О»1 is the largest eigenvalue of ОЈt .



Proof. We take the gradient of the function g:

                                   вҲҘвҲҮg(ОІ s )вҲҘ2 = 2вҲҘОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt I вҲ’ (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                                                               !2
                                                                          П„t
                                               вүӨ 2вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 П„t max 1 вҲ’
                                                             i         О»i + П„t
                                                                     !2
                                                               О»1
                                               = 2вҲҘОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2 П„t             ,
                                                             О»1 + П„t

and the desired result readily follows.                                                                                 в–Ў


Lemma 1. We have that

                                                                    t ((ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                         Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2                 вҲ’1    2
          EОІs вҲјX s       [Оіt2 (ОІ s )] = Оәt
                                                        1 вҲ’ n1 tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
                       2
                 Оә s ,Пғ s

                                                            1/2
                                      Оәt П„2t Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ) tr ОЈ s (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s
                                                                           вҲ’1 1/2            вҲ’2 1/2        вҲ’1 1/2
                                    +                                                                               .
                                              p                          1 вҲ’ 1 tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
                                                                                           n



                                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. The desired claim follows from the following manipulations using the definition of XОәs ,Пғ2 in (14):
                                                                                                                             s s
                                               пЈ®                                       пЈ№
                                               пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                                             t ОІ вҲҘ2 пЈә
                                                                                  s 2пЈә
 EОІs вҲјX s 2 [Оіt2 (ОІ s )] = EОІs вҲјX s 2 пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°Оәt
                                                                                       пЈә
                                                                                    пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
       Оә s ,Пғ s                       Оә s ,Пғ s
                                                      1 вҲ’ n tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
                                                          1
                                                                                                                                       вҲҡ   2пЈ№
                                  пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ Пғt + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2          (ОЈ s + П„ s I)вҲ’1 ОЈ s ОІвӢҶ + (ОЈ s + П„ s I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                                                                                      s Оі s (ОІвӢҶ ) g s / p вҲҘ2 пЈә
                                  пЈ® 2
                                                                       t
                         = E gs пЈҜпЈҜпЈ°Оәt
                                    пЈҜ                                                                                                        пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                                                                                               пЈәпЈәпЈ»
                                                                             1 вҲ’ n tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
                                                                                  1


                               Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                          t ((ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s ОІвӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                                                             вҲ’1    2
                          = Оәt
                                              1 вҲ’ n1 tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
                                                  1/2
                            Оәt П„2t Оі2s (ОІвӢҶ ) tr ОЈ s (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈt (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОЈ s + П„ s I) ОЈ s
                                                                 вҲ’1 1/2            вҲ’2 1/2        вҲ’1 1/2
                          +                                                                               .
                                    p                          1 вҲ’ 1n tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
                                                                                                                                                         в–Ў

C.1     Analysis of Two-stage Model in Under-parametrized Region

Proposition 16. Consider the two-stage model where the surrogate model is under-parameterized with p s вүӨ p
features (m < p s ) and the target model is over-parameterized (n > p) with p features. Then, the difference in
the asymptotic risks of surrogate-to-target and standard target models is:
                                                 Пғ2
                  (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІвҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ + вҲ’1 s tr Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОЈМ„вҲ’1           + 2 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІвҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ
                                              Оәs вҲ’ 1                      s

                       в„Ұ          Пғ2s                                                                          !
                  +                     П„ 2
                                            tr  (ОЈt + П„t I) вҲ’2
                                                               ОЈ  ОЈМ„
                                                                 t s
                                                                     вҲ’1
                                                                           вҲ’ П„2
                                                                                вҲҘ(ОЈ t + П„t I)   ОЈ
                                                                                              вҲ’1 1/2
                                                                                                     (ОІ вӢҶ ) вҲҘ2 ,
                                                                                                           вҖІ 2
                     1 вҲ’ в„Ұ ОәвҲ’1  s вҲ’1
                                          t                                   t                   t

                                                                                                                  iвҠӨ
where Оё1 = (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt , в„Ұ = n1 tr ОЈ2t (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 , and (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ = 0 0 В· В· В· ОІ ps +1 ОІ ps +2 В· В· В· ОІ p вҲҲ R p .
                                                                                  h


                                   g
Proof. Let Оё2 := (ОЈt +П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                               t   вҲҡt where gt вҲј N(0, I p ). Then, by Equation (10), the asymptotic risk estimate
                                     p
for the single-stage linear regression is given as:
                       RМ„Оәs2t
                           t ,Пғt
                                 (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s ) := (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                                                                                                                                      (51)
                                               + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ).
For the ease of the analysis, define
                                                                                              ОІs
                     " вҲ’1/2                        #                                     "            #                   "            #
                        ОЈs          0 ps Г—(pвҲ’ps )                                                                              gs
            ОЈМ„ s =
              вҲ’1/2
                                                     вҲҲ R pГ—p ,                   ОІВҜs =                    вҲҲR ,
                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                 gМ„ s =                    вҲҲ Rp.
                      0(pвҲ’ps )Г—ps 0(pвҲ’ps )Г—(pвҲ’ps )                                           0 pвҲ’ps                           0 pвҲ’ps
Let ОІМ„вӢҶ = ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ be obtained by setting the last p вҲ’ p s entries of ОІвӢҶ to 0. Then, by Theorem 3 of Chang
et al. (2021), since the surrogate model is under-parameterized, the following asymptotic estimate for the
surrogate model obtained after this stage holds:
                                                                           ОЈМ„вҲ’1/2 gМ„ s
                                                          ОІВҜs = ОІМ„вӢҶ + Пғ s p s           ,
                                                                           p ОәвҲ’1
                                                                               s вҲ’1

where g s вҲј N(0, I p ). Let ОәМҮ = (Оә s , Оәt ), ОЈМҮ = (ОЈ s , ОЈt ), and ПғМҮ = (Пғ2s , Пғ2t ). Thus, plugging this surrogate parameter
in the asymptotic risk estimate for the second stage gives:
                                                                                                                                                         пЈ№
                                                                                                                                       ОЈ       + П„
                            пЈ®пЈ«                                  пЈ¶вҠӨ           пЈ«                                    пЈ¶                     2             вҲ’2 пЈә
                            пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ¬пЈ¬              ОЈМ„ вҲ’1/2
                                                       gМ„ s                                    ОЈМ„вҲ’1/2
                                                                                                       gМ„ s
                                                                                                                               tr       t (ОЈ t    t I)
RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) = E gs пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ(ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ вҲ’ Пғ s p s             пЈ·пЈ·пЈё Оё1 ОЈt Оё1 пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈӯ(ОІвӢҶ ) вҲ’ Пғ s p
                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                пЈ·пЈ·пЈё + Оіt (ОІВҜ )
                                                                пЈ·
                                                                пЈ· вҠӨ
                                                                пЈ·            пЈ¬
                                                                             пЈ¬
                                                                             пЈ¬     вҖІ
                                                                                                                  пЈ·
                                                                                                                  пЈ·
                                                                                                                  пЈ·    2 s
                                                                                                                                                         пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                                                                                                           пЈәпЈәпЈ»
                                               p Оәs вҲ’ 1
                                                    вҲ’1                                         p Оәs вҲ’ 1
                                                                                                    вҲ’1                                       p
                                                                   пЈ®                      пЈ«                                      пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                     ОЈМ„вҲ’1/2
                                                                                                        s      gМ„ s
                  + ОІвӢҶ (I вҲ’ Оё1 ) ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ E gs пЈҜпЈ°2ОІвӢҶ (I вҲ’ Оё1 ) ОЈt Оё1 пЈ¬пЈӯПғ s p                                   вҲ’ (ОІвӢҶ ) пЈ·пЈ·пЈёпЈәпЈәпЈ» ,
                       вҠӨ                вҠӨ                          пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ вҠӨ            вҠӨ    пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬                                   пЈ·пЈ·пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                                                                                                                вҖІпЈ·
                                                                                                     p Оәs вҲ’ 1
                                                                                                            вҲ’1



                                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where
                                                                                                                       вҲ’1/2
                                                                                                                 ОЈМ„ s gМ„ s
                                                                         Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                                                                   t (ОІМ„вӢҶ + Пғ s вҲҡ вҲ’1       )вҲҘ2
                           Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt1/2 ОІВҜs вҲҘ22                                                 p(Оә s вҲ’1) 2
         Оіt2 (ОІВҜs ) = Оәt                                            = Оәt                                                       .
                                                                                                 1вҲ’в„Ұ

                             1 вҲ’ 1n tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
Further modifications give:
                                                              Пғ2s
          RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) = (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІвҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ +               tr ОЈМ„вҲ’1/2 Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОЈМ„вҲ’1/2
                                                          p Оәs вҲ’ 1
                                                             вҲ’1             s                 s
                                      пЈ«            пЈ®                                                           пЈ№пЈ¶
                                в„Ұ пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ 2                                                  ОЈМ„вҲ’1/2
                                                                                            s    gМ„ s
                            +         пЈ¬пЈӯПғt + E gs пЈҜпЈ°П„t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОІМ„вӢҶ + Пғ s p
                                      пЈ¬            пЈҜ
                                                   пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ 2           вҲ’1 1/2                                 2пЈә
                                                                                                               пЈәпЈ·пЈ·
                                                                                                        )вҲҘ2 пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈё
                              1вҲ’в„Ұ                                                        p ОәвҲ’1 s вҲ’1


                            + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ + 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ
                                                              Пғ2s
                            = (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІвҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ +               tr Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОЈМ„вҲ’1
                                                          p Оәs вҲ’ 1
                                                             вҲ’1                       s

                                в„Ұ                                                 Пғ2s                                        !
                            +          Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2 ОІМ„ вҲҘ2
                                                                       вӢҶ 2 +                 П„2
                                                                                                tr  (ОЈt + П„t I) вҲ’2
                                                                                                                   ОЈ  ОЈМ„
                                                                                                                     t s
                                                                                                                         вҲ’1
                              1вҲ’в„Ұ                                 t
                                                                              p ОәвҲ’1           t

                                                                                  s вҲ’1
                            + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ + 2 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІвҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ .
Then, using the fact that since (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ is orthogonal to ОІМ„вӢҶ (thus, their supports do not overlap), it follows that the
difference between this surrogate-to-target risk and the standard target model risk is:
                                             Пғ2s
      Difference = (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІвҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ +         tr   Оё вҠӨ
                                                               ОЈt Оё1 ОЈМ„вҲ’1
                                                                             + 2 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІвҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІвӢҶ )вҖІ
                                          p ОәвҲ’1             1           s

                                             s вҲ’1
                                                                                                                                   (52)
                         в„Ұ      Пғ2s                                                                      !
                     +                П„t tr (ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt ОЈМ„ s вҲ’ П„t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I) ОЈt (ОІвӢҶ ) вҲҘ2 .
                                       2               вҲ’2      вҲ’1         2             вҲ’1 1/2       вҖІ 2
                       1 вҲ’ в„Ұ p ОәвҲ’1
                                s вҲ’1

This completes the proof.                                                                                                            в–Ў
Proposition 17. Consider the two-stage model where the surrogate model is under-parameterized with p
features (m < p) and the second stage is over-parameterized (n > p) with p features. Under this setting, the
surrogate-to-target model cannot outperform the standard target model in terms of asymptotic risk.

                                                               g
Proof. Let Оё1 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt and Оё2 := (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                           t   вҲҡt where gt вҲј N(0, I p ). Then, by Equation (10),
                                                                 p
the asymptotic risk estimate for the single-stage linear regression is given as:
                   RМ„Оәs2t
                       t ,Пғt
                             (ОЈt , ОІвӢҶ , ОІ s ) := (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ )вҠӨ Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ) + Оіt2 (ОІ s ) E gt [Оё2вҠӨ ОЈt Оё2 ]
                                                                                                                                   (53)
                                            + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ 2ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 (ОІ s вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ).
When the surrogate model is under-parameterized, we can use the following asymptotic estimate for the
surrogate model obtained after this stage by Theorem 3 of Chang et al. (2021):
                                                                            ОЈвҲ’1/2
                                                                             s    gs
                                                      ОІ s = ОІвӢҶ + Пғ s p              ,
                                                                            p ОәвҲ’1
                                                                               s вҲ’1

where g s вҲј N(0, I p ). Let ОәМҮ = (Оә s , Оәt ), ОЈМҮ = (ОЈ s , ОЈt ), and ПғМҮ = (Пғ2s , Пғ2t ). Then, by plugging this in Equation (53),
the asymptotic risk estimate is the following:
                                                                                                                         пЈ№
                                                                                                    ОЈ 2
                                                                                                             + П„      вҲ’2 пЈә
                                      пЈ®
                                      пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ    Пғ 2                                                tr    t (ОЈ t     t I)
          RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) = E gs пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°        s
                                                     gвҠӨs ОЈвҲ’1/2 Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОЈвҲ’1/2 g s + Оіt2 (ОІ s )
                                                                                                                         пЈәпЈәпЈә
                                          p Оәs вҲ’ 1        s                  s
                                             вҲ’1
                                                                                                                           пЈәпЈәпЈ»
                                                                                                           p
                                                                         пЈ®                                                     пЈ№
                                                                                   Пғ s
                            + ОІвӢҶ (I вҲ’ Оё1 ) ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ вҲ’ E gs пЈҜпЈҜпЈ°2 p                        ОІвӢҶ (I вҲ’ Оё1 ) ОЈt Оё1 ОЈ s g s пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ» ,
                                 вҠӨ               вҠӨ
                                                                         пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ                      вҠӨ           вҠӨ         вҲ’1/2
                                                                                                                               пЈәпЈә
                                                                               p ОәвҲ’1

                                                                                    s вҲ’1



                                                                    39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where
                                                                                                                    вҲ’1/2
                                                                                                                  ОЈs gs
                                                                           Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈ1/2
                                                                                                     t (ОІвӢҶ + Пғ s вҲҡ вҲ’1      )вҲҘ2
                             Пғ2t + П„2t вҲҘ(ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’1 ОЈt1/2 ОІ s вҲҘ22                                               p(Оә s вҲ’1) 2
           Оіt2 (ОІ s ) = Оәt                                            = Оәt                                                     .
                                                                                                   1вҲ’в„Ұ

                               1 вҲ’ 1n tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈ2t
Further simplifications give:
                         Пғ2s
                                                                  пЈ«           пЈ®                                                      пЈ№пЈ¶
                                                             в„Ұ пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ 2                                                 ОЈвҲ’1/2
                                                                                                                        s   gs
RМ„ОәМҮ,ПғМҮ (ОЈМҮ, ОІвӢҶ ) =                  ОЈ    Оё  ОЈ Оё ОЈ        +         Пғ  +         П„         + П„      ОЈ         + Пғ
                                      вҲ’1/2 вҠӨ       вҲ’1/2
                                                                              пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜ 2               вҲ’1 1/2                           2пЈә
                                                                                                                                     пЈәпЈәпЈ·пЈ·пЈ·
                                tr         1 t 1 s                       E gs пЈҜ      вҲҘ(ОЈ t    t I)       (ОІ вӢҶ     s p            )вҲҘ
                      p Оәs вҲ’ 1                              1вҲ’в„Ұ
                                       s                          пЈ¬пЈӯ t          пЈҜ  t                 t                             2
                                                                                                                                      пЈәпЈәпЈ»пЈ·пЈ·пЈё
                         вҲ’1
                                                                                                                      p ОәвҲ’1
                                                                                пЈ°
                                                                                                                          s вҲ’1
                + ОІвӢҶ вҠӨ (I вҲ’ Оё1 )вҠӨ ОЈt (I вҲ’ Оё1 )ОІвӢҶ
                   Пғ2s
                                                                           p
                                                                                              Пғ2s О»вҲ’1              p
                                                                   пЈ«                   пЈ«                 пЈ¶пЈ¶
                                                              в„Ұ пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬пЈ¬ 2 X                           s,i   пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ·пЈ· X
                =                ОЈ        Оё  ОЈ Оё ОЈ        +          Пғ  +     О»   О¶      ОІ  +                   +     О»t,i О¶t,i ОІi
                                    вҲ’1/2 вҠӨ         вҲ’1/2                             2 пЈ¬
                                                                                       пЈ¬пЈ¬ 2                                 2 2
                            tr              1 t 1 s                            t,i t,i пЈ¬
               p ОәвҲ’1                                            в„Ұ
                                    s                              пЈ¬пЈӯ t                 пЈӯ i p ОәвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1 пЈ·пЈёпЈ·пЈё
                                                                                        пЈ¬                  пЈ·  пЈ·
                   s  вҲ’ 1                                   1 вҲ’           i=1                  s                  i=1
                       Pp
              Пғ2t в„Ұ + i=1    О»t,i О¶t,i
                                   2 2
                                       ОІi
            >                             ,
                       1вҲ’в„Ұ
which is the asymptotic risk estimate of the standard target model (follows from Definition 2 or by simply
plugging ОІ s = ОІвӢҶ in Equation (53)). Hence, we conclude that improvement over the excess test risk is not
possible when the first stage is under-parameterized with p-dimensions.                                                           в–Ў
Corollary 3. Consider the setting of Proposition 3. Let ОЈt be the covariance matrix of the target model and
let M be the mask such that the surrogate-to-target model with ОЈt and M outperforms the standard target
model in the asymptotic risk. Let ОЈ s = E[M(x)M(x)вҠӨ ] where x вҲј N(0, ОЈt ). Then, for any ОІвӢҶ вҲҲ R p , there
exists K вҲҲ N such that the surrogate-to-target model with two stages given ОЈt , ОЈ s , ОІвӢҶ , and m > K outperforms
the standard target model.

Proof. We make the following three observations. First, the expression in (52) is continuous with respect
to m вҲҲ R when m > p. Note that m is a natural number in our setting, but we consider the expression in
                    of m where m вҲҲ  R. Second, the expression
(52)  as a function                                                  in (52) is monotone with respect to m since
                            в„Ұ 2

tr Оё1вҠӨ ОЈt Оё1 ОЈМ„вҲ’1
               s   вүҘ 0 and 1вҲ’в„Ұ П„t tr (ОЈt + П„t I)вҲ’2 ОЈt ОЈМ„вҲ’1
                                                        s    вүҘ 0. Third, by definition, we know that the standard
target model with ОЈt and M outperforms the standard target model in the asymptotic setting. This means
that the standard target model with two stages given ОЈt , ОЈ s , and ОІвӢҶ while m approaches вҲһ outperforms the
standard target model. By combining these three observations, the desired result follows.                       в–Ў


                                                                      40
