Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING FROM W EAK L ABELERS AS C ONSTRAINTS
 Vishwajeet Agrawal* , Rattana Pukdee* , Maria-Florina Balcan, Pradeep Ravikumar
 Carnegie Mellon University
 {vishwaja, rpukdee, ninamf, pkr}@cs.cmu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
          We study programmatic weak supervision, where, in contrast to labeled data, we
          have access to weak labelers, each of which either abstains or provides noisy
          labels corresponding to any input. Most previous approaches typically employ
          latent generative models that model the joint distribution of the weak labels and
          the latent “true” label. The caveats are that this relies on assumptions that may not
          always hold in practice, such as conditional independence assumptions over the
          joint distribution of the weak labelers and the latent true label, and more general
          implicit inductive biases in the latent generative models. In this work, we con-
          sider a more explicit form of side information that can be leveraged to denoise
          the weak labeler, namely the bounds on the average error of the weak labelers.
          We then propose a novel but natural weak supervision objective that minimizes a
          regularization functional subject to satisfying these bounds. This turns out to be
          a difficult constrained optimization problem due to discontinuous accuracy bound
          constraints. We provide a continuous optimization formulation for this objec-
          tive through an alternating minimization algorithm that iteratively computes soft
          pseudo labels on the unlabeled data satisfying the constraints while being close to
          the model, and then updates the model on these labels until all the constraints are
          satisfied. We follow this with a theoretical analysis of this approach and provide
          insights into its denoising effects in training discriminative models given multiple
          weak labelers. Finally, we demonstrate the superior performance and robustness
          of our method on a popular weak supervision benchmark.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Acquiring high-quality labeled data, which is critical for supervised learning, is often very expen-
sive. The burgeoning field of programmatic weak supervision addresses this caveat by training
models from “weak labelers,” which are functions that either abstain or provide noisy labels corre-
sponding to any input (Zhang et al., 2022). Such weak labelers could range from domain-expert-
specified functions to rule-based systems, heuristics, or even pre-trained models. There are two main
challenges in learning a predictor using only weak labelers: each weak labeler covers only part of
the input space (due to abstention) and it is typically noisy. Thus, one has to generalize beyond the
coverage regions, as well as denoise within them.
To learn from weak labelers, most prior works draw from developments in related fields such as
crowdsourcing (Estellés-Arolas & González-Ladrón-de Guevara, 2012; Wazny, 2017), employing
latent generative models that model the joint distribution of the weak labels and the latent “true”
label. Conditional inference on the true label then provides a natural approach to aggregate multiple
noisy labels into less noisy “pseudo-labels” which provide an estimate of the true label. However,
this relies on the implicit inductive bias since non-parametric mixture models are known to not be
identifiable without any further assumptions (Kasahara & Shimotsu, 2014; Aragam et al., 2020).
For example, Snorkel (Ratner et al., 2017; 2018) imposes both (a) conditional independence assump-
tions among the weak labelers and the true label (b) parametric assumptions on the latent generative
model. However, these assumptions might not be applicable and are, in general, difficult to validate
with domain experts. In addition, the denoising step does not take advantage of modern hypothe-
sis classes such as deep neural networks. Instead, it is common to follow a two-staged approach:
denoising step to estimate pseudo-labels and then train a neural network using these pseudo-labels.
    * Equal contribution.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We also note that this learning from weak labelers is closely related to a subfield of learning with
noisy labels that also faces a denoising problem (Angluin & Laird, 1988; Blum et al., 1998; Natara-
jan et al., 2013). Here, we assume that a noisy label is obtained by passing the unknown true label
through a noise channel that is usually assumed to be independent of the input (Natarajan et al.,
2013). There is also a general noise model that could depend on the input called Massart noise
(Massart & Nédélec, 2006) which is known to lead to a computationally hard learning problem (Di-
akonikolas et al., 2019a; 2022a). A recent line of work shows that we can make headway in this
difficult setting, provided we have additional side information such as the marginal distribution is
structured (Awasthi et al., 2015; 2016; Diakonikolas et al., 2022b). There have been considerable
recent advances in learning under such noise models and other difficult noise models such as the
malicious noise model (Awasthi et al., 2014; 2017; Diakonikolas et al., 2018; 2019b; Prasad et al.,
2018). However, we remark that results from learning with noisy labels are not directly applicable
to our setting since the levels of noise induced by our weak labelers do not satisfy the amount of
structure needed by these works.
Regardless, we believe that programmatic weak supervision can considerably benefit from connec-
tions with the field of learning from noisy labels and that it forms a rich area of research. As our first
step towards leveraging such a connection, we consider the following natural and explicit inductive
bias that domain experts might provide, a bound on the accuracy of each weak labeler (similar to a
bound on the fraction of corrupted data in the learning from noisy label setting), where accuracy can
either be with respect to the target Bayes optimal classifier or with respect to the underlying stochas-
tic label distribution. Our first contribution is to develop a constraint-based approach to aggregate
weak labelers by viewing the accuracy bound as a constraint, and accordingly impose this constraint
on the model to be learned. We pose the problem as learning the simplest model (with respect to
some regularization functional) that satisfies all of these constraints (Section 2). This objective is
however difficult along multiple facets: it is a constrained optimization problem, with discontinuous
accuracy bound constraints. While there is a rich literature on continuous convex surrogates of clas-
sification accuracy (or error), they are not immediately applicable in our setting since a bound on
the accuracy does not translate to a bound on any particular surrogate loss, and recall that it is these
accuracy bounds that form our domain-expert provided side information.
Our second contribution is a scalable optimization algorithm. This is based on a projection function
that projects the model onto the set of all functions that satisfy the constraints. First, we show that
the projection objective can be reduced to a linear program when the error bounds are given with
respect to the target Bayes optimal classifier (Section 3.1), and a convex optimization problem when
they are given with respect to the target label distribution (Section 3.2). The convex optimization
problem for the latter case results in an efficient and robust algorithm that can also be used as an
approximation when the constraints are given with respect to the target classifier.
Our third contribution is a rigorous analysis of our constrained estimator (Section 4). We note that
the traditional statistical learning theoretic tools are not applicable since we have no labeled data.
We provide two tools to bound the error of the learned classifier: i) an agreement region based
analysis ii) corrected triangle inequality. Both approaches involve disparate denoising coefficients
that track the benefit of having multiple rather than a single weak labeler. We further refine this
to provide a tighter extension of the bounds from the limited support to the overall space using a
subtle Lipschitz notion that might be of independent interest even outside the context of this paper.
Lastly, we demonstrate the robustness and competitive performance of our method on a popular
weak supervision benchmark (Zhang et al., 2021) in Section 5.


2    L EARNING FROM WEAK LABELER CONSTRAINTS

Setup: We consider the general setting of multi-class classification, with input space X , output
space Y = {1, . . . , K}, joint distribution P over X × Y, and marginal distribution over X denoted
by PX which we assume to be continuous. We use uppercase letters (e.g., X) to represent random
variables and lowercase letters (e.g., x) for deterministic variables. For a vector x ∈ Rd , we denote
xk as the kth entry of x. Let p∗ (x) = p(y|x) ∈ RK be the conditional distribution of y given x, and
let f ∗ (x) = arg maxk p∗ (x)k denote the Bayes optimal classifier. Our goal is to learn a classifier
f : X → Y that minimizes the expected misclassification error with respect to the Bayes optimal
classifier f ∗ , i.e. minimizes Pr(f (X) ̸= f ∗ (X)), or the error with respect to the stochastic label


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


itself: Pr(f (X) ̸= Y ). In our setting, we assume that we only have access to unlabeled data drawn
i.i.d. from PX and weak labelers {gj }j∈[m] , where each weak labeler gj : X → Y ∪ {∅} maps any
point in the instance space to the label space or abstains from prediction (denoted by ∅). We denote
the coverage set of the weak labeler by Sj := {x ∈ X | gj (x) ̸= ∅}. We consider formulating
a classifier from a smooth real-valued function h : X → RK from some hypothesis class F e.g.
neural networks. This function induces a conditional distribution denoted by ph , which we obtain
                                                              PK
by applying the softmax function, ph (x)k = exp(h(x)k )/ i=1 exp(h(x)i ). For any conditional
distribution p such that arg maxy p(x)y is unique for each x, we denote the corresponding classifier
as clf(p) where clf(p)(x) = arg maxk p(x)k .
Accuracy bounds and the corresponding constraints: We assume we have additional side infor-
mation about the average error of each weak labeler gj on its coverage set Sj . First, this can be an
error bound with respect to the Bayes optimal classifier f ∗ given by
                       ρclf (gj , f ∗ ) := Pr (gj (X) ̸= f ∗ (X)|X ∈ Sj ) ≤ ηj .                      (1)
                                           X∼PX

Since our target Bayes optimal classifier f ∗ only differs from gj by a fraction of at most ηj on Sj , a
natural learning strategy is to encourage our hypothesis to also have the same behavior (differ from
gj at most ηj ). This leads to a constraint ρclf (gj , clf(pf )) ≤ ηj . We propose to learn the simplest
hypothesis f (with respect to a regularization functional R(f )) that satisfies all of these constraints
which can be formalized as the following objective with constraints on classifier outputs:
                           min R(f ) s.t. ρclf (gj , clf(pf )) ≤ ηj , ∀j ∈ [m].                       (2)
                           f ∈F

On the other hand, if we may instead have access to an error with respect to the stochastic labels
sampled from p∗ , the bound is given by
                    ρdist (gj , p∗ ) :=         Pr          (gj (X) ̸= Y |X ∈ Sj ) ≤ ηj .             (3)
                                          X∼PX ,Y ∼p∗ (X)
                                                                               ∗
Here gj is a classifier but Y is a random variable distributed
                                                             P according to p (X), so the proba-
bility that gj (x) is not equal to y for each x is given by k̸=gj (x) p∗ (x)k , thus ρdist (g, p∗ ) ≡
EX∼PX [ k̸=gj (x) p∗ (x)k ]. Similar to before, we have the following objective with constraints on
         P

classifier probabilistic labels:
                              min R(f ) s.t. ρdist (gj , pf ) ≤ ηj , ∀j ∈ [m]                         (4)
                              f ∈F


3     A LGORITHMS
In this section, we will first examine an algorithm for solving the learning objective with constraints
on classifiers (equation 2) through an alternating minimization algorithm. This requires a projection
step that projects a conditional distribution into the set of conditional distributions that satisfy the
constraints. We will describe a method for estimating this projection and show that it can be reduced
to a linear program. Finally, we will extend our algorithm to solve the objective with constraints on
the distribution (equation 4). We provide proofs for results in this section in Appendix B.

3.1   L EARNING OBJECTIVE WITH CONSTRAINTS ON CLASSIFIER

The key challenge in solving equation 2 is that it is a constrained optimization problem and these
constraints are not continuous. As a key initial step, we define a projection loss of a conditional
distribution p to a class of classifiers that satisfies the constraint. We denote a set of all conditional
distributions that satisfy the constraints as
                       \
              Qclf =      Qj,clf , where Qj,clf = {q : X → ∆K | ρclf (gj , clf(q)) ≤ ηj }.             (5)
                       j

We consider a projection loss from any conditional distribution p to a set of conditional distributions
Q given by,
                               d(p, Q) = inf EX [DKL (q(X)||p(X))]                                  (6)
                                               q∈Q

where DKL is the KL-divergence. We can show that d(p, Qclf ) is zero if and only if p ∈ Qclf .


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 3.1. For any p such that clf(p) is well defined, i.e. arg maxy p(x)y is unique for each x,
we have d(p, Qclf ) = 0 if and only if p ∈ Qclf .

From Lemma 3.1, we may replace the constraints in equation 2 with the projection loss instead. This
would still lead to the same optimal solution. We have an objective
                                      min R(f ) s.t. d(pf , Qclf ) = 0                             (7)
                                      f ∈F

We consider a relaxation of this objective into an unconstrained optimization problem,
                                       min R(f ) + α · d(pf , Qclf )                               (8)
                                       f ∈F

where α trades off satisfying the constraints with a notion of simplicity of distribution specified
through the regularization. This relaxed objective is now more suitable for a gradient-based opti-
mization since it is continuous. We can rewrite this objective as
                          min       L(f, q) := R(f ) + αEX [DKL (q(X)||pf (X))]                    (9)
                     q∈Qclf ,f ∈F

This is a minimization problem in f ∈ F, q ∈ Qclf for which we propose to use an alternating
minimization algorithm where we keep track of a sequence of (ft , qt ) and update as follows:
                     1.    ft+1 = arg min R(f ) + αEX [DKL (qt (X)||pf (X))]                      (10)
                                         f ∈F

                     2.    qt+1 = arg min EX [DKL (q(X)||pft+1 (X))]                              (11)
                                         q∈Qclf


We can show that this algorithm leads to a sequence of (ft , qt ) that is decreasing in L(ft , qt ):
Lemma 3.2. A sequence (ft , qt ) with an update in equation 10 and equation 11 satisfies
L(ft+1 , qt+1 ) ≤ L(ft , qt ).

Proof. L(ft+1 , qt+1 ) ≤ L(ft+1 , qt ) from minimization in equation 11 and L(ft+1 , qt ) ≤ L(ft , qt )
from minimization in equation 10.

Solving step 1 (equation 10). It can be seen that the KL term in equation 10 is simply the cross-
entropy loss with respect to the pseudo soft labels given by q. Thus this first step of the alternating
minimization algorithm simply fits a regularized classifier to these pseudo labels. Further, one does
not need to estimate the exact minima at each step, as long as the next iterate reduces the objective,
i.e. L(ft+1 , qt+1 ) < L(ft , qt ). Thus one can take a single or few steps of gradient descent in
equation 10 to get ft+1 from ft .

Solving step 2 (equation 11). This step of the alternating minimization algorithm computes the
soft pseudo labels on the training data so that the constraints are satisfied. This is a much more
involved step, which we detail in the following section, where we show that estimating the projection
qt can be reduced to a linear program. Before doing so, we first remark that the constraints on
classifiers may not be robust to a small perturbation. For example, if one has a uniform conditional
distribution punif = (1/K, . . . , 1/K), we can make a small perturbation ∆p of size at most ϵ such
that clf(punif + ∆p) = k for any label k. This implies that there exists a conditional distribution p
such that d(p, Q) is small but clf(p) can be arbitrary.
Lemma 3.3. Let Q = {q ∈ X → ∆K | clf(q) ∈ H} for some set of classifiers H. For any ϵ > 0
and any classifier f , there exists a conditional distribution p such that clf(p) = f and d(p, Q) < ϵ.

To alleviate this problem, we enforce an additional constraint by making sure that q puts a higher
probability on one label than the rest,
            Λϵ := {q ∈ X → ∆K | for each x, ∃y : q(x)y ≥ (1 + ϵ)q(x)k for k ̸= y}                 (12)
With this additional constraint, we can show that d(p, Q) bounds the error in satisfaction of the
classifier constraints, and further show that the projection problem can be solved efficiently.
Proposition 3.4. For any ϵ, ν > 0 there exists δ(ϵ, ν) > 0 such that if d(p, Λϵ ∩ Qclf ) < δ(ϵ, ν) then
ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ ηj + ν/|Sj |, where |Sj | = PX (X ∈ Sj ) is the size of coverage set Sj of weak
labeler gj with respect to marginal distribution PX .


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 3.5. Given Q = Λϵ ∩ Qclf for Λϵ defined in equation 12 and Qclf defined in equation 5,
for any conditional distribution p, the optimal projection q ∗ = arg minq∈Q E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))]
can be found as follows,
1. Solve for optimal clf(q ∗ ) as
                   clf(q ∗ ) = arg min EX [ProjKL (p(X); ∆K
                                                          h(X),ϵ )] : ρclf (gj , h) ≤ ηj             (13)
                                h∈X →Y
   where
                                    ∆K          K

                                     y,ϵ = r ∈ ∆ | ry ≥ (1 + ϵ)rk , ∀k ̸= y ,
                            ProjKL (u; S) = min DKL (r||u).                                          (14)
                                             r∈S

2. Solve for an optimal distribution q ∗ given the optimal clf(q ∗ ). For each x,
                               q ∗ (x) = arg min DKL (r||p(x)) : r ∈ ∆K,ϵ
                                                                      clf(q ∗ )(x)                   (15)
                                              r

A key ingredient is the subset of the simplex ∆K
                                               y,ϵ , comprising probabilities that are more confident
about the label y with some margin ϵ. For any u ∈ ∆K , and label y ∈ [K], ProjKL (u; ∆K      y,ϵ ) is a
convex optimization problem since the objective DKL (r||u) is convex in r and the constraints in ∆K y,ϵ
are linear. While we can use a black box convex optimization solver, we solve this more efficiently
by reparameterizing into an unconstrained objective and using a fast heuristic approximation (see
Appendix D.2 for more details).
Given c(x, y) = ProjKL (p(x); ∆K    y,ϵ ) for each x, y, the optimization in step 1 can be framed as
an integer linear programming (ILP) problem by using a one-hot representation of the optimiz-
ing variable h as µ : X → {0, 1}K , with µ(x)y = 1 for y = h(x) and µ(x) = 0 otherwise.
                                   PK
The objective then becomes EX [ y=1 µ(X)y c(X, y)] and the constraint ρclf (gj , h) ≤ ηj becomes
   P                                                                           PK
E[ y̸=gj (X) µ(X)y ] ≤ ηj . For each x, we have an additional constraint y=1 µ(x)y = 1. Both
the objective and constraints are linear in µ, resulting in an ILP. ILPs are usually inefficient to solve,
however, we find empirically that the LP relaxation works very well for this class of ILPs (see Ap-
pendix D.1 for more details). One issue with solving the ILP is that it can still be slow even with LP
relaxation since it involves one constraint for each unlabeled data x. We also can’t take a small batch
size when using a stochastic gradient descent since the constraints involve the population means of
the weak labeler accuracies. Finally, this is not robust to misspecification of the error bounds, as the
constraints might become infeasible. In the next section, we propose our method for the learning
objective with constraints on distribution (equation 4). Interestingly, we found that it can also be
viewed as an approximation of the algorithm presented in this section, yet it overcomes issues of
efficiency and robustness, resulting in a more practical solution that is effective in both settings.

3.2   L EARNING OBJECTIVE WITH CONSTRAINTS ON DISTRIBUTION

Let Qdist be the set of conditional distributions that satisfy the constraints on distribution,
                       \
              Qdist =     Qj,dist , where Qj,dist = {q : X → ∆K | ρdist (gj , q) ≤ ηj }.             (16)
                        j
Now, with a similar proof, we would also have a version of Lemma 3.1 for the constraints on
distribution, and further d(p, Qdist ) bounds the error in satisfying the constraints without the need
of imposing any additional constraint.
Proposition 3.6. For Qdist defined in equation 16, we have d(p, Qdist ) = 0 if and only if p ∈ Qdist .
Furthermore, for any ν > 0 there exists δ(ν) > 0 such that if d(p, Qdist ) < δ(ν) then ρdist (gj , p) ≤
ηj + ν/|Sj |, where |Sj | = PX (Sj ) is the size of coverage set Sj of weak labeler gj with respect to
marginal distribution PX .
This allows us to derive the same alternating minimization algorithm as in equation 10 and equa-
tion 11. While the first step is identical, the main benefit of working with the constraints on distri-
bution is that the second projection step can be directly posed as a convex optimization problem.
        min E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))] s.t. E[q(X)gj (X) |x ∈ Sj ] ≥ 1 − ηj , ∀j ∈ [m].                  (17)
      q:X 7→∆|K|
We can also derive the optimal solution of equation 17.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 3.7. Given Qdist as defined in equation 16, for any conditional distribution p, the
                                                                                ∗
optimal projection q ∗ = arg minq∈Qdist E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))] is given by q ∗ = pλ where
                                                     X
                             pλ (x)y := Zλ (x) exp(        λ)p(x)y                         (18)
                                                               j:gj (x)=y

Zλ (x) is the normalization constant. The optimal λ∗ is given by the following optimization:
                                     m
                                     X
                         λ∗ = min          λj s.t. ρdist (gj , pλ ) ≤ ηj ∀j ∈ [m]                     (19)
                               λ≥0
                                     j=1


The optimization for λ∗ can be solved by a coordinate-wise alternating minimization. Given the
current iterate λ, pick some j, and update λj as
            λj = min λ s.t. ρdist (gj , pλ ) = 1 − E[Zλ (x) exp(λ)pλ−j (X)gj (X) ] ≤ ηi               (20)
                   λ≥0

where λ−j = (λ1 , . . . λj−1 , 0, λj+1 , . . . λm ). Note that while optimizing for a particular coordinate
λj , we only consider the constraint associated with gj . This can be seen as a relaxation of the true
constraint, which is an intersection of m constraints. While this does not ensure satisfaction of all
of the constraints as the alternating minimization proceeds, it lends us a simple method to solve this
by a Newton-Raphson root-finding method as follows:
                         Reset: λi = 0
      Repeat until convergence: λi ← λi + log(1 + (1 − ηi − τi (hi ))+ /τi (hi (1 − hi ))),
                                                                                                      (21)
                                  hi (x) = pλ (x)gi (x)
                                  τi (h) = E[h(X)|X ∈ Si ]
For derivations and proofs, see appendix B. For computational efficiency, we also propose a single
parallel update for all λi instead of performing the alternating minimization sequentially by using
a single step of the above Newton-Raphson method parallelly across all i given the starting point
λ = 0 as:
              λi = log(1 + (1 − ηi − τi (pi ))+ /τi (pi (1 − pi ))), (pi (x) = p(x)gi (x) ).          (22)
This does not give an exact projection of p on Qdist , but can be thought of as an approximate
projection that finds a q that is closer to Qdist than p is to Q, on average. Overall, we summarize our
learning algorithm (equation 10, equation 11) with our proposed projection step below,
Summary of our learning algorithm. We have an alternating minimization algorithm where we
track the pair (ft , qt ). Here, ft : X → RK is a real-valued function from our hypothesis class
(e.g., neural networks), and qt represents its projection onto the set of distributions that satisfy our
constraints. At each iteration t, we perform the following steps

1. Estimate qt+1 given ft .
    (a) Calculate a conditional distribution given by ft with a softmax function σ,
                                         pft (x) = softmax(ft (x)) ∈ ∆K                               (23)
    (b) We use a one-step parallel Newton-Raphson update to calculate λj for each weak labeler j
        (equation 22). For simplicity, for each unlabeled data xi for i = 1, . . . , n, we denote the
        gj (xi )th coordinate of pft (xi ) as zij := pft (xi )gj (xi ) then
                                            1     X                  1    X
                λj = log(1 + (1 − ηj −                   zij )+ /(          (zij )(1 − zij ))),  (24)
                                            cj                     cj
                                               i:gj (xi )̸=∅                i:gj (xi )̸=∅
                                                                       Pn
        cj is the number of data points that gj does not abstain, cj = i=1 1[gj (xi ) ̸= ∅].
    (c) Finally, we use λ to calculate qt+1 (x). We first compute the unnormalized version of qt+1 ,
                                                                 X
                                 q̃t+1 (xi )k = pft (xi )k exp(        λj ).                   (25)
                                                                       j:gj (xi )=k
                                         PK
        Then qt+1 (xi ) = q̃t+1 (xi )/     k=1 q̃t+1 (xi )k .


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2. Estimate ft+1 given qt+1 . This step is equivalent to fitting a ft+1 with respect to the soft pseudo
   labels given by qt+1 . Our loss of ft is given by
                                                        n
                                                     1X
                        L(ft ; qt+1 ) = R(ft ) + α ·       ℓCE (ft (xi ), qt+1 (xi ))
                                                     n i=1
    where ℓCE is a cross-entropy loss. We then update ft+1 with a gradient descent; ft+1 = ft −ν·∇L
    where ν is a learning rate.
We also provide a compact version of our algorithm in Algorithm 1 in Appendix C. Finally, we
remark that the sets Qj,dist can also be viewed as a convex approximation of the constraint sets
Qj,clf (see Appendix E for more details). Therefore, the method developed in this section is also
applicable (as an approximation) for the setting of constraints on classifiers but it is more efficient
and also robust to misspecification in error bounds ηj compared to the algorithm in Section 3.1.

4     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF THE O BJECTIVE
In this section, we provide some theoretical insights into the denoising effect of weak labeler con-
straints. We focus on the setting of constraints on classifiers (estimation objective equation 2). We
learn a conditional distribution pf and thus correspondingly a classifier clf(pf ) that minimizes a
regularization functional R(f ) subjected to weak labeler constraints. Minimizing R(f ) implicitly
defines a hypothesis class of classifiers as F = {clf(pf ) : R(f ) < δ} for some δ > 0. Let
Hj = {h : X → [K] | ρclf (gj , h) ≤ ηj } (here Hj is a set of classifiers that differ from Qj which is
                                                                          T
a set of conditional distributions). We learn a classifier f ∈ Fe := F ∩ j Hj . The constraints lead
to a smaller class Fe ⊆ F ′ , which implies that a typical measure of complexity V of the function
class Fe such as Rademacher complexity is also smaller than F. Thus, we can quantify the benefit
of the weak labeler constraints via the ratio V(F)/V(F).
                                                  e          However, such a function class statistical
complexity analysis merely makes the natural qualitative point that we require less labeled data to
learn from Fe than F. It does not provide a bound per se on the accuracy of our learned classifier,
because we are not using any labeled data to select f .

4.1   E RROR G UARANTEE ON AGREEMENT R EGION

Recall that we minimize R(f ) subject to satisfying constraints. We start with the observation that
the weak labeler constraint directly restricts the output of a classifier to be similar to that of the weak
labeler in its coverage set. For example, given a weak labeler that makes a constant prediction in a
small region, any linear separator that satisfies the accuracy bound constraint can only slice off the
coverage set by a fraction of at most η (Figure 1 (left)). This leads to an area in the middle where
the decision boundary can’t pass through: otherwise, the classifier would differ too much from the
weak labeler. This resembles the classical notion of agreement regions (Cohn et al., 1994; Balcan
et al., 2006), which we thus use to characterize the impact of weak labelers on F.
Definition 4.1. For a set of classifiers F , the agreement region is the set of all points where any
classifier in F agrees, Agree(F ) = {x ∈ X | ∀f1 , f2 ∈ F, f1 (x) = f2 (x)}.

Under realizability, we can show that the error of any f ∈ Fe in the agreement region is zero.
Furthermore, we can show that as multiple constraints are used, the resulting agreement region
will always be larger than or equal to the union of agreement regions for individual constraints. In
Figure 1, we provide an example with linear classifiers where the agreement regions from multiple
constraints are larger than the union of the agreement region from each individual constraint. This
is a possible explanation of the implicit denoising effect of multiple weak labelers when learning
from a function class F. Formally, we denote an error of a classifier f within the set S as
                                 errS (f ) := Pr(f (X) ̸= f ∗ (X) | S).                         (26)
                                                                                             ∗
Lemma 4.2. For any function class F, and corresponding constrained class F, so long as f ∈ F,
                                                                               e                  e
for any f ∈ F,
             e err        e (f ) = 0.
                    Agree(F )
Lemma 4.3. For a function class F and constraints H1 , H2 , we have
                Agree(F ∩ H1 ) ∪ Agree(F ∩ H2 ) ⊆ Agree(F ∩ H1 ∩ H2 ).


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The figure shows the agreement region of the class of linear separators given two weak
labeler constraints: one weak labeler labels red in the red circle, and the other labels blue in the blue
circle. A linear separator can only differ from each weak labeler by a fraction of η of its support,
and therefore the agreement region is given by the middle region of each coverage set (left). The
agreement regions from multiple constraints are larger than the union of the agreement region from
each individual constraint (right).
4.2   E RROR G UARANTEE ON THE C OVERAGE U NION

In the previous section, we used the geometry of constrained function classes in general. Here, we
note that the specific form of our constraints (weak labelers error bound) naturally leads to an error
guarantee via triangle inequality.
Lemma 4.4. Let Hj = {h : X → [K] | ρclf (gj , h) ≤ ηj } then for any f ∈ Hj ,
                                           errSj (f ) ≤ ηj + ρclf (gj , f ∗ )                              (27)

We show that it is possible to have a better guarantee than the combination of the error bound from
the triangle inequality when we have multiple constraints with conflicting regions.
Theorem 4.5. Let H1 , . . . , Hk be constraints of the form Hj = {h : X → [K] | ρclf (gj , h) ≤ ηj },
T with different constant weak labels, gj (X) = j − 1 for all j = 1, . . . , k, then for any f ∈
each
  j Hj , we have
                           k
                           X                               Pr(Sj )        X                    Pr(Bσ )
             errS (f ) ≤         (ηj + ρclf (gj , f ∗ ))           −              (2|σ| − 3)           .   (28)
                           j=1
                                                           Pr(S)                               Pr(S)
                                                                       σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                                                         |σ|≥2
           Sk                     T               T                  c
when S =     j=1 Sj , Bσ = (          i∈σ Si ) ∩ (    i∈{1,...,k}\σ Si ) are minterms.

The first term on the RHS is the error guarantee from naively combining multiple error guarantees
based on the triangle inequality. The improvement is in the second term which is the region where
weak labelers have a conflict (Bσ ), more conflict leads to a better error bound. The main idea is
that whenever there is a conflict, a classifier can match with only one weak labeler. Therefore, to
be approximately close to all weak labelers, it must closely match the other weak labelers in areas
outside of the conflict. We note that while our result is applicable to when each weak labeler has a
different label if we have multiple weak labelers that predict the same label, we can merge them into
a super weak labeler by combining the coverage region e.g. S1 ∪ S2 and then derive the new η as a
linear combination of η1 , η2 e.g. η = η1 Pr(S
                                          Pr(S1 )+η2 Pr(S2 )
                                               1 )+Pr(S2 )
                                                             , before applying Theorem 4.5.

4.3   E XTENDING E RROR G UARANTEES TO E NTIRE I NPUT S PACE

The previous two sections provided error guarantees in subsets of the input space: the first over the
agreement region of the constrained function class, and the second on the union of the coverage sets
of the weak labelers. In this section, we provided a more nuanced analysis based on a smoothness
argument which can be used to generalize beyond the coverage set or the agreement region. Intu-
itively, if f performs well on one region, and the underlying probability distribution is smooth then
we would expect it to perform well in a neighbor region as well.
Theorem 4.6. Let P be a joint distribution over X ×Y such that Pr(Y = y | X = x) is L-Lipschitz
w.r.t. a metric d where for all k = 1, . . . , K and x1 , x2 ∈ X ,
                   | Pr(Y = k | X = x1 ) − Pr(Y = k | X = x2 )| ≤ Ld(x1 , x2 ),                            (29)


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


then for any classifier f and a region S, we have
                 Pr(f (X) ̸= Y ) ≤ Pr(f (X) ̸= Y | X ∈ S)(1 + tf (S)) + Luf (S)                            (30)
The terms tf (S), uf (S) are distance between PX and PX condition on X ∈ S,
                                        Pr(f (X) = k | X ∈ S) − Pr(f (X) = k)
                       tf (S) = sup |                                         |                            (31)
                                   k            Pr(f (X) = k | X ∈ S)
                            X
                 uf (S) =         Pr(f (X) = k)Wd (PX|S∩{x|f (x)=k} , PX|{x|f (x)=k} )                     (32)
                             k
and Wd is a Wasserstien distance and we denote PX|A for a distribution PX condition on X ∈ A.

In this theorem, we analyze an error w.r.t. to y instead of f ∗ since we require the smoothness of
the underlying data distribution. The generalization bound is small whenever PX is close to PX
condition on X ∈ S. First, tf (S) is zero whenever Pr(f (X) = k | X ∈ S) = Pr(f (X) = k) for
all k, that is, the proportion of label k predicted by f is the same in both original distribution and the
distribution conditional on S. Second, uf (S) is a bit stronger where it is small when the Wasserstein
distance is small which is when S covers areas with high probability mass in X . The smoothness
of f is implicit in the term uf (S) in terms of the regions {x | f (x) = k}. We provide full proof in
Appendix I. We remark that tf (S), uf (S) only depends on the marginal distribution and, therefore,
can be calculated solely from unlabeled data for any classifier f .

5    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

                Bio      CDR           Chem   IMDB          Semeval   TREC       Yelp     Youtube Avg. rank
Sup (V)      64.21.1 59.90.6 35.91.4 64.31.3 59.63.0 52.13.7 73.41.4 80.91.2                         6.8
MV           56.40.4 68.40.4 52.60.5 75.70.7 65.32.5 37.31.1 69.10.5 82.20.6                         5.8
Snorkel      63.40.5 61.20.4 41.81.0 71.30.6 59.21.0 33.41.7 71.80.9 76.81.3                         7.8
LoL(S)       55.50.8 67.40.4 51.60.4 75.30.6 53.42.0 38.72.8 70.61.4 79.10.9                          7
Ours (C)     63.50.5 68.50.7 52.20.8 74.31.3 67.52.1 46.72.7 78.60.5 80.71.3                         4.6
Ours (V)     62.60.8 67.90.5 53.30.5 72.51.1 79.42.4 63.12.1 75.30.7 90.21.4                         4.1
Sup (T)      75.40.8    80.70.5     80.10.2   81.40.6       82.91.9   66.92.3   87.00.3   89.70.6    1.1
Ours (T)     64.80.7    69.10.2     55.60.3   74.81.1       77.31.4   66.32.9   78.30.3   88.00.4    2.8
Oursclf (T ) 60.90.9    66.00.4     49.80.7   73.31.0       81.01.9   57.21.2   75.80.5   87.30.3    5.1

Table 1: Average test accuracy and the corresponding standard error (over 5 random train-val-test
split of the data) of our proposed algorithm and the baselines. We bold methods that are within
a standard error of the best-performing method. Sup (T) and Sup (V) are supervised learning on
the training set and the validation set respectively. MV, Snorkel, and Lol(S) are Majority vote,
Snorkel, and Losses over labels (Simple) baselines. Ours is our proposed method (Algorithm 1)
with different ways to estimate the error bound ηj . Ours (V) is when we estimate ηj from the labels
from the validation set, given a Beta(1, 2) prior. Ours (C) is when we use a constant ηj and tune this
on the validation set. Ours (T) is when ηj is estimated from the labels from the training set. Finally,
Oursclf is our algorithm with respect to constraints on the classifier (Section 3.1).

Experiment details: We show a comparison of our proposed method and baselines on 8 text clas-
sification datasets from the WRENCH benchmark Zhang et al. (2021). We provide the dataset
statistics in Appendix G.1. For all methods and datasets, we use a neural network with a single
hidden layer and a hidden size of 16 on top of the pre-trained BERT text embeddings. The neural
network is trained with a full batch gradient descent with an Adam optimizer with a learning rate in
[0.001, 0.003, 0.01], weight decay in [0.001, 0.003, 0.01] and a number of epochs in range(1, 500, 5).
We tune these hyperparameters on the validation set of size 100 for each dataset. For our proposed
method, we implement Algorithm 1 with an L2 regularization. Since the WRENCH benchmark
does not provide error bounds ηj for each weak labeler, we consider 3 strategies to estimate ηj ; i)
we estimate ηj from the labels from the validation set, given a Beta(1, 2) prior, ii) we treat ηj as
a fixed constant η for all weak labelers and tune this η on the validation set, iii) we estimate ηj
from the labels from the training set which we treat as a ground truth error of each weak labeler.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


See Appendix F for more details on estimating error bound from the vaildation set. Finally, we
also implement our algorithm with respect to constraints on the classifier (Section 3.1) with a linear
programming relaxation of the integer linear program (see Appendix G.3 for more details).
Baselines: We compare with three baselines: Majority Vote (MV), Snorkel Metal (Ratner et al.,
2017) and Losses over Labels simple (LoL (S)) (Sam & Kolter, 2023). The majority vote and
Snorkel are two-staged approaches where we first aggregate weak labels and then train a neural
network on the aggregated labels. The Majority vote simply takes the majority vote between the
non-abstain weak labels for each data point while Snorkel deploys a latent generative model to
estimate soft labels from the weak labels. On the other hand, Losses over Labels (simple) is a
one-staged approach that directly minimizes a weighted linear combination of the loss with respect
to each weak labeler. We also compare to a baseline of simply performing supervised learning on
labels from the validation set, to avoid concerns regarding possibly large validation sets as raised by
Zhu et al. (2023).
Results: Our proposed method (Ours (V)) is the best performing approach compared to other base-
lines (Table 1). This does not solely come from the fact that we have a large number of labels in
the validation set since supervised learning on the validation set (with the best hyperparameters)
still performs worse than ours on almost every dataset. Surprisingly, our method with a constant ηj
(Ours (C)), also performs competitively and is the second best performing approach overall. On the
other hand, having access to a more accurate error bound can lead to a performance increase across
the board (Ours (T)). In addition, we found that most constraints are satisfied by the models trained
by our algorithms (see Table G.2).
Ablation on noisy weak labeler error bounds: We assume that the error bound ηj is given as a
form of domain knowledge (or estimated from a small validation set). As such, we may have ηj that
can be far from the ground truth error. In this section, we explore this impact on the performance
of our algorithm and we do so by adding noise to the “ground truth” ηj (estimated from the training
labels), given by η̃j = ηj + ϵ, ϵ ∼ Uniform(−a, a) and use η̃j as inputs of our algorithm. We see
that our algorithm is quite robust and the performance drops graciously as the noise level increases
(Figure 2).

                               90
                                                                  Bioresponse
                                                                  CDR
                               80                                 Chemprot
                                                                  IMDB
                        Test Acc


                                                                  Semeval
                               70                                 Trec
                                                                  Yelp
                                                                  Youtube
                               60
                                    0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
                                              Noise

Figure 2: Impact of using noisy error bounds η̃j = ηj + ϵ, ϵ ∼ Uniform(−a, a) for a ∈ [0, 0.5]. The
accuracy is averaged over 5 random splits of data and the shaded area is the standard error.


6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper we provided a principled approach to learn from weak labelers - weak classifiers that
label a subset of the input space, without making stringent assumptions about dependencies between
them, or about their noise model. Instead, we consider the expected error / accuracy as the only
source of information that characterizes the weakness of labelers. This information can either be
given by domain experts or can be estimated from a small amount of labeled data given only a
weak prior on the accuracy. We finally proposed a robust and scalable algorithm that can learn
from multiple noisy weak labelers even when only noisy estimates of expected errors are provided.
An interesting future direction could be to combine information about dependencies between weak
labelers when such information is given along with the information about the expected error, as well
as developing alternative techniques based on mixed integer linear programming for solving our
constraint-based approach to aggregate weak labelers by viewing the accuracy bound as a constraint.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the support of NSF via IIS-2211907 and IIS-1901403, ONR via N00014-23-1-
2368 and Bloomberg Data Science Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Dana Angluin and Philip Laird. Learning from noisy examples. Machine Learning, 2:343–370,
  1988.
Chidubem Arachie and Bert Huang. Constrained labeling for weakly supervised learning. Uncer-
  tainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 236–246, 2021.
B Aragam, C Dan, E Xing, and P Ravikumar. Identifiability of nonparametric mixture models and
  bayes optimal clustering. The annals of statistics, 48(4), 2020.
Abhijeet Awasthi, Sabyasachi Ghosh, Rasna Goyal, and Sunita Sarawagi. Learning from rules
  generalizing labeled exemplars. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06025, 2020.
Pranjal Awasthi, Maria Florina Balcan, and Philip M Long. The power of localization for efficiently
  learning linear separators with noise. In Proceedings of the forty-sixth annual ACM symposium
  on Theory of computing, pp. 449–458, 2014.
Pranjal Awasthi, Maria-Florina Balcan, Nika Haghtalab, and Ruth Urner. Efficient learning of linear
  separators under bounded noise. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 167–190. PMLR, 2015.
Pranjal Awasthi, Maria-Florina Balcan, Nika Haghtalab, and Hongyang Zhang. Learning and 1-bit
  compressed sensing under asymmetric noise. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 152–192.
  PMLR, 2016.
Pranjal Awasthi, Maria Florina Balcan, and Philip M Long. The power of localization for efficiently
  learning linear separators with noise. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 63(6):1–27, 2017.
Stephen H Bach, Bryan He, Alexander Ratner, and Christopher Ré. Learning the structure of genera-
  tive models without labeled data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 273–282.
  PMLR, 2017.
Maria-Florina Balcan and Nika Haghtalab. Noise in classification. https://arxiv.org/pdf/
 2010.05080.pdf, 2020.
Maria-Florina Balcan, Alina Beygelzimer, and John Langford. Agnostic active learning. In Pro-
 ceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 65–72, 2006.
Dimitri P Bertsekas. Constrained optimization and Lagrange multiplier methods. Academic press,
  2014.
Avrim Blum, Alan Frieze, Ravi Kannan, and Santosh Vempala. A polynomial-time algorithm for
  learning noisy linear threshold functions. Algorithmica, 22:35–52, 1998.
Paul T Boggs and Jon W Tolle. Sequential quadratic programming. Acta numerica, 4:1–51, 1995.
Salva Rühling Cachay, Benedikt Boecking, and Artur Dubrawski. End-to-end weak supervision.
  In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  gbcsmD3Iznu.
Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Eli Dichterman, Paul Fischer, Eli Shamir, and Hans Ulrich Simon. Sample-
  efficient strategies for learning in the presence of noise. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 46(5):
  684–719, 1999.
Nontawat Charoenphakdee, Jongyeong Lee, and Masashi Sugiyama. On symmetric losses for learn-
  ing from corrupted labels. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 961–970.
  PMLR, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mayee F Chen, Daniel Y Fu, Dyah Adila, Michael Zhang, Frederic Sala, Kayvon Fatahalian, and
 Christopher Ré. Shoring up the foundations: Fusing model embeddings and weak supervision. In
 Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 357–367. PMLR, 2022.
Yudong Chen and Martin J Wainwright. Fast low-rank estimation by projected gradient descent:
  General statistical and algorithmic guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.03025, 2015.
Edwin KP Chong, Wu-Sheng Lu, and Stanislaw H Zak. An Introduction to Optimization: With
  Applications to Machine Learning. John Wiley & Sons, 2023.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
   smoothing. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1310–1320. PMLR, 2019.
David Cohn, Les Atlas, and Richard Ladner. Improving generalization with active learning. Machine
  Learning, 15:201–221, 1994.
David W Coit, Alice E Smith, and David M Tate. Adaptive penalty methods for genetic optimization
  of constrained combinatorial problems. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 8(2):173–182, 1996.
George B Dantzig. Linear programming. Operations research, 50(1):42–47, 2002.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Gautam Kamath, Daniel M. Kane, Jerry Li, Ankur Moitra, and Alistair Stewart.
   Being robust (in high dimensions) can be practical, 2018.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Themis Gouleakis, and Christos Tzamos. Distribution-independent pac learning
   of halfspaces with massart noise. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019a.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Gautam Kamath, Daniel Kane, Jerry Li, Ankur Moitra, and Alistair Stewart.
   Robust estimators in high dimensions without the computational intractability, 2019b.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel Kane, Pasin Manurangsi, and Lisheng Ren. Cryptographic hardness of
   learning halfspaces with massart noise. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
   3624–3636, 2022a.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M Kane, Vasilis Kontonis, Christos Tzamos, and Nikos Zarifis. Learning
   general halfspaces with general massart noise under the gaussian distribution. In Proceedings of
   the 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 874–885, 2022b.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography: Third Theory of Cryptography Conference,
  TCC 2006, New York, NY, USA, March 4-7, 2006. Proceedings 3, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Enrique Estellés-Arolas and Fernando González-Ladrón-de Guevara. Towards an integrated crowd-
  sourcing definition. Journal of Information science, 38(2):189–200, 2012.
Michel Fortin and Roland Glowinski. Augmented Lagrangian methods: applications to the numeri-
 cal solution of boundary-value problems. Elsevier, 2000.
Marguerite Frank, Philip Wolfe, et al. An algorithm for quadratic programming. Naval research
 logistics quarterly, 3(1-2):95–110, 1956.
Daniel Fu, Mayee Chen, Frederic Sala, Sarah Hooper, Kayvon Fatahalian, and Christopher Ré. Fast
  and three-rious: Speeding up weak supervision with triplet methods. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 3280–3291. PMLR, 2020.
Kuzman Ganchev, Joao Graça, Jennifer Gillenwater, and Ben Taskar. Posterior regularization for
  structured latent variable models. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:2001–2049,
  2010.
Philip E Gill, Walter Murray, and Margaret H Wright. Practical optimization. SIAM, 2019.
Bo Han, Quanming Yao, Xingrui Yu, Gang Niu, Miao Xu, Weihua Hu, Ivor Tsang, and Masashi
  Sugiyama. Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks with extremely noisy labels.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bo Han, Gang Niu, Xingrui Yu, Quanming Yao, Miao Xu, Ivor Tsang, and Masashi Sugiyama.
  Sigua: Forgetting may make learning with noisy labels more robust. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 4006–4016. PMLR, 2020.

Earl O Heady, Candler Wilfried, et al. Linear programming methods. Linear programming methods.,
  1963.

Zhiting Hu, Xuezhe Ma, Zhengzhong Liu, Eduard Hovy, and Eric Xing. Harnessing deep neural
  networks with logic rules. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2410–2420, 2016.

Giannis Karamanolakis, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Guoqing Zheng, and Ahmed Hassan Awadallah.
  Self-training with weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05514, 2021.

Davood Karimi, Haoran Dou, Simon K Warfield, and Ali Gholipour. Deep learning with noisy
  labels: Exploring techniques and remedies in medical image analysis. Medical image analysis,
  65:101759, 2020.

George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang.
  Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6):422–440, 2021.

Hiroyuki Kasahara and Katsumi Shimotsu. Non-parametric identification and estimation of the
  number of components in multivariate mixtures. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B:
  Statistical Methodology, 76(1):97–111, 2014.

Michael J Kearns and Umesh Vazirani. An introduction to computational learning theory. MIT
 press, 1994.

Zhaobin Kuang, Chidubem Arachie, Bangyong Liang, Pradyumna Narayana, Giulia DeSalvo,
  Michael Quinn, Bert Huang, Geoffrey Downs, and Yang Yang. Firebolt: Weak supervision under
  weaker assumptions. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics 2022,
  2022.

Alexey Kurakin, Ian J Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial machine learning at scale. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.

Pascal Massart and Élodie Nédélec. Risk bounds for statistical learning. 2006.

Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey
  on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35, 2021.

Nagarajan Natarajan, Inderjit S Dhillon, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Ambuj Tewari. Cost-sensitive
  learning with noisy labels. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 18(1):5666–5698.

Nagarajan Natarajan, Inderjit S Dhillon, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Ambuj Tewari. Learning with
  noisy labels. Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.

Adarsh Prasad, Arun Sai Suggala, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Robust esti-
  mation via robust gradient estimation. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statisti-
  cal Methodology), 82, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  3614648.

Adarsh Prasad, Vishwak Srinivasan, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Pradeep Ravikumar. On learning
  ising models under huber’s contamination model. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:16327–16338, 2020.

Rattana Pukdee, Dylan Sam, Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar, and Nina Balcan. Label propagation with
  weak supervision. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rattana Pukdee, Dylan Sam, J Zico Kolter, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Learning
  with explanation constraints. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2023.
Alex Ratner, Braden Hancock, Jared Dunnmon, Roger Goldman, and Christopher Ré. Snorkel
  metal: Weak supervision for multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
  Data Management for End-To-End Machine Learning, pp. 1–4, 2018.
Alexander Ratner, Stephen H Bach, Henry Ehrenberg, Jason Fries, Sen Wu, and Christopher Ré.
  Snorkel: Rapid training data creation with weak supervision. In Proceedings of the VLDB En-
  dowment. International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, volume 11, pp. 269. NIH Public
  Access, 2017.
Alexander Ratner, Braden Hancock, Jared Dunnmon, Frederic Sala, Shreyash Pandey, and Christo-
  pher Ré. Training complex models with multi-task weak supervision. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 4763–4771, 2019.
Alexander J Ratner, Christopher M De Sa, Sen Wu, Daniel Selsam, and Christopher Ré. Data
  programming: Creating large training sets, quickly. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 29, 2016.
R Tyrrell Rockafellar. Lagrange multipliers and optimality. SIAM review, 35(2):183–238, 1993.
Dylan Sam and J. Zico Kolter. Losses over labels: Weakly supervised learning via direct loss
  construction, 2023.
Hwanjun Song, Minseok Kim, Dongmin Park, Yooju Shin, and Jae-Gil Lee. Learning from noisy
 labels with deep neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
 Systems, 2022.
Paroma Varma, Bryan D He, Payal Bajaj, Nishith Khandwala, Imon Banerjee, Daniel Rubin, and
  Christopher Ré. Inferring generative model structure with static analysis. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Kerri Wazny. “crowdsourcing” ten years in: A review. Journal of global health, 7(2), 2017.
Xiaobo Xia, Tongliang Liu, Nannan Wang, Bo Han, Chen Gong, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama.
  Are anchor points really indispensable in label-noise learning? Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
Xiaobo Xia, Tongliang Liu, Bo Han, Nannan Wang, Mingming Gong, Haifeng Liu, Gang Niu,
  Dacheng Tao, and Masashi Sugiyama. Part-dependent label noise: Towards instance-dependent
  label noise. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7597–7610, 2020.
Özgür Yeniay. Penalty function methods for constrained optimization with genetic algorithms.
   Mathematical and computational Applications, 10(1):45–56, 2005.
Xingrui Yu, Bo Han, Jiangchao Yao, Gang Niu, Ivor Tsang, and Masashi Sugiyama. How does dis-
  agreement help generalization against label corruption? In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 7164–7173. PMLR, 2019.
Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair representations.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 325–333. PMLR, 2013.
Jieyu Zhang, Yue Yu, Yinghao Li, Yujing Wang, Yaming Yang, Mao Yang, and Alexander Ratner.
   Wrench: A comprehensive benchmark for weak supervision. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural
   Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
Jieyu Zhang, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Yue Yu, Chao Zhang, and Alexander Ratner. A survey on program-
   matic weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05433, 2022.
Jieyu Zhang, Linxin Song, and Alex Ratner. Leveraging instance features for label aggregation
   in programmatic weak supervision. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
   Statistics, pp. 157–171. PMLR, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wen Li Zhao, Pierre Gentine, Markus Reichstein, Yao Zhang, Sha Zhou, Yeqiang Wen, Changjie
 Lin, Xi Li, and Guo Yu Qiu. Physics-constrained machine learning of evapotranspiration. Geo-
 physical Research Letters, 46(24):14496–14507, 2019.
Dawei Zhu, Xiaoyu Shen, Marius Mosbach, Andreas Stephan, and Dietrich Klakow. Weaker than
  you think: A critical look at weakly supervised learning, 2023.
Yinhao Zhu, Nicholas Zabaras, Phaedon-Stelios Koutsourelakis, and Paris Perdikaris. Physics-
  constrained deep learning for high-dimensional surrogate modeling and uncertainty quantification
  without labeled data. Journal of Computational Physics, 394:56–81, 2019.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK

A.1   P ROGRAMMATIC W EAK S UPERVISION .

Programmatic weak supervision Ratner et al. (2016), is a learning paradigm where subject matter
expert encodes their domain knowledge in terms of weak labelers (labeling functions). These are
functions that either provide labels (weak labels) or abstain from prediction on any input. The key
question is how to learn from such weak labels that are potentially noisy. A general approach in-
volves two steps of aggregating weak labels into less noisy labels and then training a discriminative
classifier on the inferred labels. Various statistical label models have been developed for label ag-
gregation, and most of these only depend on the weak labels Ratner et al. (2016; 2018; 2019); Bach
et al. (2017); Varma et al. (2017); Fu et al. (2020); Kuang et al. (2022). Recent methods incorpo-
rate the input information into this weakly supervised learning pipeline Chen et al. (2022); Pukdee
et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2023) e.g. smoothness of the label with respect to the input instance
or pretrained-embedding. Alternatively, there is a line of works that learns from weak labels in an
end-to-end fashion. The label model and the discriminative model are parameterized and are trained
jointly Cachay et al. (2021); Karamanolakis et al. (2021); Awasthi et al. (2020); Sam & Kolter
(2023). A key prior work is constrained label learning Arachie & Huang (2021), which involves
learning pseudo labels under constraints before training a discriminative model. Unlike our method,
CLL’s initial step is independent of the function class and remains a two-step process.


A.2   L EARNING WITH NOISY LABELS

Learning from data with noisy labels has been a prominent research problem that has received sub-
stantial attention from the machine learning community. The main assumption is that the observed
labels are flipped with some probability. There is a line of works in theoretical machine learning
that focuses on the learnability and polynomial-time algorithms for various noise models Kearns &
Vazirani (1994); Cesa-Bianchi et al. (1999); Angluin & Laird (1988); Awasthi et al. (2014; 2015);
Diakonikolas et al. (2019a); Balcan & Haghtalab (2020). On the other hand, in the statistical learning
theory community, various works are concerned with different surrogate losses or unbiased estima-
tors Natarajan et al. (2013); Prasad et al. (2020); Natarajan et al.; Charoenphakdee et al. (2019);
Xia et al. (2019; 2020). Recently, numerous studies have focused on learning noisy labels on deep
neural networks Song et al. (2022); Karimi et al. (2020); Yu et al. (2019); Han et al. (2018; 2020).
Despite rich theoretical and empirical research in this area, these approaches cannot be employed in
our context since the noisy labels in our setting are deterministic given the input and label.


A.3   L EARNING FROM CONSTRAINTS

Constrained optimization focuses on finding the optimal solution to a problem within given con-
straints Bertsekas (2014); Gill et al. (2019); Chong et al. (2023). The principal method involves con-
verting the constrained optimization problem into an unconstrained one. This can be accomplished
by adding auxiliary variables, as seen in the Lagrange multiplier method Rockafellar (1993), or by
incorporating a penalty term that penalizes the objective function when constraints are violated Coit
et al. (1996); Fortin & Glowinski (2000); Yeniay (2005). Additionally, gradient-based approaches
like PGD include a projection step to ensure the solution stays within a feasible region after each up-
date Chen & Wainwright (2015); Madry et al. (2018). For specific types of constraints such as linear
or quadratic, there are dedicated algorithms designed to address these constrained scenarios Heady
et al. (1963); Dantzig (2002); Frank et al. (1956); Boggs & Tolle (1995). In the field of machine
learning, the optimization goal is the empirical loss, and constraints can be used to enforce desirable
features in a machine learning model, such as fairness Zemel et al. (2013); Mehrabi et al. (2021),
robustness Cohen et al. (2019); Kurakin et al. (2016), or privacy Dwork et al. (2006). Recent studies
have begun incorporating constraints derived from domain knowledge into models, such as physics
constraints Zhao et al. (2019); Zhu et al. (2019); Karniadakis et al. (2021), explanation constraints
Pukdee et al. (2023), and weak supervision Ganchev et al. (2010); Hu et al. (2016), with the aim of
improving model performance.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B      P ROOFS OF PROPERTIES OF PROJECTION LOSS AND COMPUTING THE
       PROJECTION

Lemma B.1. For Qclf defined in equation 5, i.e.
                 \
          Qclf =     Qj,clf , where Qj,clf = {q : X → ∆K | ρclf (gj , clf(q)) ≤ ηj }.                     (33)
                       j
where
                        ρclf (gj , clf(q)) = E[gj (X) ̸= clf(q)(X)|gj (X) ̸= ϕ]                           (34)
and clf(q) is defined as
                                        clf(q)(x) = arg max q(x)y                                         (35)
                                                              y
(assuming arg maxy q(x)y is unique. If arg maxy q(x)y is not unique for some x then clf(q) is not
well defined. )
then for any p such that clf(p) is well defined,                                we   have   d(p, Qclf )     =
inf q∈Qclf E[DKL (p(X)||q(X))] = 0 if and only if p ∈ Qclf .

Proof. If p ∈ Qclf , we would have d(p, Qclf ) ≤ E[DKL (p(X)||p(X))] = 0. Conversely when
d(p, Qclf ) = 0 we prove that p ∈ Qclf i.e. ρclf (gj , p) ≤ ηj for all j ∈ [m].
First, we prove that
                                    inf E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] = 0                                          (36)
                                  q∈Qclf
where dT V is defined as
                                                             K
                                                             X
                                  dT V (u, v) = 1/2 ·              |uk − vk |                             (37)
                                                             k=1

Using Pinsker’s inequality,                         p
                                    dT V (u, v) ≤        DKL (u||v)/2                                     (38)
we have
                E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] = E[dT V (p(X), q(X))]                                               (39)
                                         p
                                     ≤ E[ DKL (p(X)||q(X))/2]                                             (40)
                                       p
                                     ≤ E[DKL (p(X)||q(X))]/2 (from Jenson’s)                              (41)
Thus
                                                     p
                   inf E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] ≤ inf     E[DKL (p(X)||q(X))]/2                               (42)
                  q∈Qclf                      q∈Qclf
                                              r
                                            ≤    inf E[DKL (p(X)||q(X))]/2                                (43)
                                                         q∈Qclf

                                                 ≤0                                               (44)
Let us say p ̸∈ Qclf , there exists some ϵ > 0 such that ρclf (gj , p) ≥ ηj + ϵ for some j ∈ [m].
                               Pr(gj (X) ̸= clf(p)(X)|X ∈ Sj ) ≥ ηj + ϵ                           (45)
where Sj = {x : gj (x) ̸= ϕ} is the coverage set of gj . Let S ′ ⊆ Sj defined as S ′ = {x : gj (x) ̸=
clf(p)(x)}. Denoting |S| = Pr(X ∈ S), since |S ′ |/|Sj | ≥ ηj + ϵ, and assuming |Sj | > 0, we have
|S ′ | > 0.
Now for any q ∈ Qclf , we have
                             Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ Sj ) ≤ ηj                          (46)
Then
Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ Sj ) = Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ S ′ , X ∈ Sj )P (X ∈ S ′ |X ∈ Sj )
                                                                                           (47)
                 = Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ S ′ )P (X ∈ S ′ , X ∈ Sj )/P (X ∈ Sj )                      (48)
                 = Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ S ′ )P (X ∈ S ′ )/P (X ∈ Sj )                               (49)
                                                         ′     ′
                 = Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ S )|S |/|Sj |                                               (50)


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus,
             Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ S ′ ) = Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ Sj )|Sj |/|S ′ |              (51)
                                                                       ′
                                                       ≤ ηj |Sj |/|S |                                   (52)
                                                       ≤ ηj /(ηj + ϵ)                                    (53)
Hence,
               Pr(clf(q)(X) = gj (X)|X ∈ S ′ ) = 1 − Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ S ′ )                    (54)
                                               ≥ 1 − ηj /(ηj + ϵ)                                        (55)
                                               ≥ ϵ/(ηj + ϵ)                                              (56)
Since clf(p)(x) ̸= gj (x) for x ∈ S ′ , clf(q)(x) = gj (x) implies clf(p)(x) ̸= clf(q)(x). Thus
                              Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= clf(p)(X)|X ∈ S ′ ) ≥ ϵ/(ηj + ϵ)                           (57)
        ′′          ′
Let S = {x ∈ S : clf(q)(x) ̸= clf(p)(x)}, we have
                                      Pr(X ∈ S ′′ |X ∈ S ′ ) ≥ ϵ/(ηj + ϵ)                                (58)
And thus,
               Pr(X ∈ S ′′ |X ∈ S ′ )P (X ∈ S ′ ) = P (X ∈ S ′′ , X ∈ S ′ ) = P (X ∈ S ′′ )              (59)
                                           ′′          ′                   ′′             ′
                              Pr(X ∈ S |X ∈ S ) = P (X ∈ S )/P (X ∈ S )                                  (60)
                                     ′′                ′
                           P (X ∈ S )/P (X ∈ S ) ≥ ϵ/(ηj + ϵ)                                            (61)
                                                    |S ′′ | ≥ |S ′ |ϵ/(ηj + ϵ) > 0                       (62)

Now let
                                   µ(x) =          max         p(x)clf(p)(x) − p(x)k                     (63)
                                                k̸=clf(p)(x)

For clf(p) to be well defined, µ(x) must be greater than 0, i.e. µ(x) > 0 for all x.
Since clf(p)(x) ̸= clf(q)(x) for x ∈ S ′′ , we have for any x ∈ S ′′
                                      p(x)clf(p)(x) ≥ p(x)clf(q)(x) + µ(x)                               (64)
                                      q(x)clf(q)(x) ≥ q(x)clf(p)(x)                                      (65)
Or
                                          p(x)clf(p)(x) ≥ p(x)clf(q)(x) + µ(x)                           (66)
                                      −q(x)clf(p)(x) ≥ −q(x)clf(q)(x)                                    (67)
                        p(x)clf(p)(x) − q(x)clf(p)(x) ≥ p(x)clf(q)(x) − q(x)clf(q)(x) + µ(x)             (68)
                 (p(x)clf(p)(x) − q(x)clf(p)(x) )+(q(x)clf(q)(x) − p(x)clf(q)(x) ) ≥ µ(x)                (69)
                 |p(x)clf(p)(x) − q(x)clf(p)(x) |+|p(x)clf(q)(x) − q(x)clf(q)(x) | ≥ µ(x)                (70)
                                   dT V (p(x), q(x)) ≥ µ(x)/2                                            (71)
                                                       ′′                         ′′
                  E[dT V (p(X), q(X))|X ∈ S ] ≥ E[µ(X)/2|X ∈ S ]                                         (72)

Since inf q∈Qclf E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] = 0, there exists some q ∈ Qclf such that
                                E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] < |S|E[µ(X)/2|X ∈ S]                                (73)
for any set S with |S| > 0. In particular this holds for S = S ′′ since |S ′′ | > 0. Then
                 E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] ≥ E[dT V (p(X), q(X))I(X ∈ S ′′ )]                                 (74)
                                                                                     ′′             ′′
                                                = E[dT V (p(X), q(X))|X ∈ S ] Pr(X ∈ S )                 (75)
                                                                                     ′′   ′′
                                                = E[dT V (p(X), q(X))|X ∈ S ]|S |                        (76)
Thus
                        E[dT V (p(X), q(X)|X ∈ S ′′ )]|S ′′ | < |S ′′ |E[µ(X)/2|X ∈ S ′′ ]               (77)
                                                                ′′                             ′′
                            E[dT V (p(X), q(X)|X ∈ S )] < E[µ(X)/2|X ∈ S ]                               (78)
which leads to a contradiction.


                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma B.2. Let Q = {q : clf(q) ∈ H} for some set H of classifiers. For any classifier f and any
ϵ > 0, there exists a conditional distribution p such that clf(p) = f and d(p, Q) < ϵ.

Proof. We claim that for any classifiers f1 , f2 there exists sequences of conditional distributions
{q1t }∞       t ∞                   t               t                               t           t
      t=1 , {q2 }t=1 such that clf(q1 ) = f1 , clf(q2 ) = f2 for all t, and limt→∞ q1 = limt→∞ q2 . The
main idea is that we can slightly perturb a uniform distribution to achieve any classifier. Formally,
we define q1t (x)k = 1/K − δ/((K − 1) · t) for k ̸= f1 (x) and q1t (x)k = 1/K + δ/t for k = f1 (x),
where K = |Y| is the number of classes. We can define q2t in the same manner. It’s clear that both
sequence converges to a uniform distribution, that is, limt→∞ q1t (x)y = limt→∞ q2t (x)y = 1/K for
all x, y even when f1 , f2 are completely different.
Now for any classifier h ∈ H and any classifier f , there exists a sequence {qht }, {qft } such that
clf(qht ) = h, clf(qft ) = f for all t and that limt→∞ qht = limt→∞ qft . Since clf(qht ) = h, we know
that qht ∈ Q and this implies that
                          lim d(qft , Q) = lim min E[DKL (q(X)||qft (X))]                         (79)
                         t→∞                 t→∞ q∈Q

                                          ≤ lim E[DKL (qht (X)||qft (X))] = 0.                    (80)
                                             t→∞

The last line comes from the fact that limt→∞ qht = limt→∞ qft . As a result, we can conclude that
for any ϵ, there exists some t for which p = qht satisfies d(p, Q) < ϵ and clf(p) = f .
Proposition B.3. For any ϵ, ν > 0 there exists δ(ϵ, ν) > 0 such that if d(p, Λϵ ∩ Qclf ) < δ(ϵ, ν)
then ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ ηj + ν/|Sj |, where |Sj | = PX (X ∈ Sj ) is the size of coverage set Sj of
                                                                                   νL(ϵ)
weak labeler gj with respect to marginal distribution PX . In particular δ(ϵ, ν) = (1+ν) where L(ϵ)
is a strictly increasing function in ϵ given by
                                  (1 + ϵ) log(1 + ϵ) − (2 + ϵ) log(1 + ϵ/2)
                          L(ϵ) =                                                            (81)
                                                    K +ϵ
where K is the number of classes. The bound can be rephrased as the following inequality: For all
p such that d(p, Qϵclf ) < L(ϵ), we have
                                                              d(p, Qϵclf )
                            ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ ηj +                                             (82)
                                                        (L(ϵ) − d(p, Qϵclf ))|Sj |
where Qϵclf = Λϵ ∩ Qclf .

Proof. First, we prove the following
                              ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ ηj + min dclf (p, q)/|Sj |                     (83)
                                                         q∈Qclf

where dclf (p, q) is defined as
                                  dclf (p, q) = Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X))                        (84)
                                              X

ρclf (gj , clf(p)) = Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ Sj )
                    X
                ≤ Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X)|X ∈ Sj ) + Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ Sj ) for all q
                    X                                             X
Thus
ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ min Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X)|X ∈ Sj ) + Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ Sj )
                   q∈Qclf X                                             X

                ≤ min Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X)|X ∈ Sj ) + max Pr(clf(q)(X) ̸= gj (X)|X ∈ Sj )
                   q∈Qclf X                                             q∈Qclf X

                ≤ min Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X)|X ∈ Sj ) + ηj
                   q∈Qclf X

                ≤ min Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X), X ∈ Sj )/|Sj | + ηj
                   q∈Qclf X

                ≤ min Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X))/|Sj | + ηj
                   q∈Qclf X

                = ηj + min dclf (p, q)/|Sj |
                         q∈Qclf



                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we will prove the bound on inf q∈Qclf dclf (p, q), i.e.
                                                             d(p, Qϵclf )
                                  inf dclf (p, q) ≤                                                    (85)
                                q∈Qclf                   (L(ϵ) − d(p, Qϵclf ))
For any conditional distributions p, q ∈ X → ∆K define the following
                      dkl (p, q) = E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))]                                                 (86)
                      d+
                       kl (p, q) = E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))| clf(p)(X) = clf(q)(X)]                          (87)
                      d−
                       kl (p, q) = E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))| clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X)]                         (88)
Consider the following sublemma.
Sublemma B.3.1. For any q ∈ Qϵclf , if dkl (p, q) < L(ϵ) then
                                                           dkl (p, q)
                                        dclf (p, q) ≤                                                  (89)
                                                        L(ϵ) − dkl (p, q)
where
                                          L(ϵ) =        inf d− (p, q)                                  (90)
                                                      q∈Qϵclf ,p kl

The bound in equation 85 directly follows from the above sublemma. This is proved as follows.
                              inf dclf (p, q) = infϵ dclf (p, q)
                             q∈Qclf                   q∈Qclf

                                                                 dkl (p, q)
                                                ≤ infϵ
                                                      q∈Qclf L(ϵ) − dkl (p, q)

                                                         inf q∈Qϵclf dkl (p, q)
                                                ≤
                                                      supq∈Qϵclf L(ϵ) − dkl (p, q)
                                                         inf q∈Qϵclf dkl (p, q)
                                                =
                                                      L(ϵ) − inf q∈Qϵclf dkl (p, q)
                                                         d(p, Qϵclf )
                                                =
                                                      L(ϵ) − d(p, Qϵclf )
                       νL(ϵ)
Finally d(p, Qϵclf ) ≤ (1+ν) gives us inf q∈Qclf dclf (p, q) ≤ ν, and thus ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ ν/|Sj |+ηj .
Now we proof sublemma B.3.1. First note that,
                       dkl (p, q) = dclf (p, q)d−                             +
                                                kl (p, q) + (1 − dclf (p, q))dkl (p, q)                (91)
Now
                                   dkl (p, q) − dclf (p, q)d−
                                                            kl (p, q)
                       d+
                        kl (p, q) =
                                            1 − dclf (p, q)
                                   dkl (p, q) − dclf (p, q)L(ϵ)
                                 ≤
                                          1 − dclf (p, q)
                                                                              dclf (p, q)
                                 ≤ dkl (p, q) + (dkl (p, q) − L(ϵ))
                                                                            1 − dclf (p, q)
                                 < dkl (p, q)
Further,
                                                  dkl (p, q) − d+ kl (p, q)
                                      dclf (p, q) =
                                                  d−
                                                   kl (p, q) −  d +
                                                                  kl (p, q)
                                                         dkl (p, q)
                                                ≤ −
                                                  dkl (p, q) − d+ kl (p, q)
                                                       dkl (p, q)
                                                <
                                                  L(ϵ) − dkl (p, q)


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now we are only left to prove the form of L(ϵ) given in equation 81.
Recall Λϵ was defined in equation 12 as
              Λϵ := {q : X → ∆k | for each x, ∃y : q(x)y ≥ (1 + ϵ)q(x)k for k ̸= y}                       (92)
                            K
For a distribution u ∈ ∆ , let cj (u) refer to the top j’th class, i.e. c1 (u), . . . cK (u) is a permutation
of [K] s.t. uc1 (u) ≥ . . . ucK (u) . Let tj (u) refer to the corresponding probability i.e. tj (u) = ucj (u) .
Let λϵ = {u ∈ ∆K : t1 (u) ≥ (1 + ϵ)tj (u) ∀j > 1}. This is connected to Λϵ as
                                      Λϵ = {q : X → ∆K : ∀x, q(x) ∈ λϵ }
Now
              L(ϵ) =      inf d− (p, q)                                                                   (93)
                        q∈Qϵclf ,p kl

                    =     inf        E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))| clf(p)(X) ̸= clf(q)(X)]                          (94)
                        q∈Qϵclf ,p

                    = inf E[                inf          DKL (u||p(X))| clf(p)(X) ̸= c1 (u)]              (95)
                        h∈H,p        u∈λϵ ,c1 (u)=h(X)

                   (where H = {h : ρclf (gj , h) ≤ ηj })                                                  (96)
                    = inf E[                 inf                          DKL (u||v)]                     (97)
                        h∈H      u∈λϵ :c1 (u)=h(X),v∈∆K :c1 (v)̸=c1 (u)

                    =                 inf            DKL (u||v)                                           (98)
                        u∈λϵ ,v∈∆K :c1 (v)̸=c1 (u)

                    =     inf        DKL (u||v) : c1 (v) ̸= c1 (u), t1 (u) ≥ (1 + ϵ)tj (u) ∀j > 1         (99)
                        u,v∈∆K

Now without loss of generality, let cj (u) = j. With some abuse of notation, we also use u, v to
refer to the minimizer of objective in equation 99. The minimizer exists since the constraints induce
closed sets. Then first we will prove that
                                            cj (v) = cj (u) = j for j ≥ 3                               (100)
Assume the contrary. Then there exists k ≥ 3 such that vk > v2 . This implies
                           (u2 − uk ) log(vk /v2 ) > 0                                                  (101)
                    u2 log(1/v2 ) + uk log(1/vk ) > u2 log(1/vk ) + uk log(1/v2 )                       (102)
                 u2 log(u2 /v2 ) + uk log(uk /vk ) > u2 log(u2 /vk ) + uk log(uk /v2 )                  (103)
                          DKL (u||v) > DKL (u||v ′ )                                                    (104)
        ′
where v is defined as
                              v2′ = vk , vk′ = v2 , vj′ = vj for j ̸= k, 2                    (105)
But u, v was the minimizer of the objective in equation 99, which contradicts the above implication
in equation 104.
Since c1 (u) = 1 ̸= c1 (v), we get c1 (v) = 2, and c2 (v) = 1. To recap we have
                                 cj (u) = j                                                             (106)
                                 c1 (v) = 2, c2 (v) = 1, cj (v) = j for j ≥ 3                           (107)
Next we will prove that
                                                         v1 = v2                                        (108)
Let
                                                  x = (v2 − v1 )/2                                      (109)
                                                  y = (v2 + v1 )/2                                      (110)
Since c1 (v) = 2, v2 ≥ v1 and so x, y ≥ 0. We have
                                                        v1 = y − x                                      (111)
                                                        v2 = y + x                                      (112)
                                                  K
                                                  X
                                                        vj = 1 − 2y                                     (113)
                                                  j=3



                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now,
                                                                                         K
                                                                                         X
                   L(ϵ) = u1 log(u1 /y − x) + u2 log(u2 /y + x) +                              uj log(uj /vj )
                                                                                         j=3

                ∇x L(ϵ) = u1 /(y − x) − u2 (y + x)
                          u1 (y + x) − u2 (y − x)
                        =
                                  y 2 − x2
                          x(u1 + u2 ) + y(u1 − u2 )
                        =
                                   y 2 − x2
                        >0
Thus L(ϵ) is minimized for x = 0.
Next, we have the following inequality
                              n
                              X                           n
                                                          X                 n
                                                                            X            n
                                                                                         X
                                    ai log(ai /bi ) ≥ (         ai ) log(
                                                                        bi )      ai /                                 (114)
                              i=1                         i=1       i=1     i=1
                                                                   Pn
This follows Jenson’s inequality, given a discrete distribution f : i=1 fi = 1, we have
                                   X n                    Xn
                                               fi log(ti ) ≥ log(           fi ti )
                                         i=1                         i=1
                         Pn
Substituting fi = ai /    i=1 ai , and ti = bi /ai , we get the required inequality. We use this inequality
to have
                             K
                             X                            K
                                                          X              XK      K
                                                                                 X
                                   uj log(uj /vj ) ≥ (          uj ) log(   uj /   vj )                                (115)
                             j=3                          j=3               j=3          j=3
This gives us

                                                                                               1 − u1 − u2
         L(ϵ) ≥ u1 log(u1 /v1 ) + u2 log(u2 /v2 ) + (1 − u1 − u2 ) log                                                 (116)
                                                                                               1 − v1 − v2
We had v1 = v2 . So, substituting v1 = v2 = y, we have

                                                                                                     1 − u1 − u2
          L(ϵ) ≥ f (y) = u1 log u1 /y + u2 log u2 /y + (1 − u1 − u2 ) log
                                                                                                        1 − 2y
                                                    2(1 − u1 − u2 )
                ∇y f (y) = −u1 /y − u2 /y +
                                                        1 − 2y
                            2y − u1 − u2
                         =
                                1 − 2y
                            2(1 − u1 − u2 )
                ∇2y f (y) =                 >0
                               (1 − 2y)2
Thus f (y) is minimized for ∇y f (y) = 0, giving y = v1 = v2 = (u1 + u2 )/2. Substituting in
equation 116, we get
                      L(ϵ) ≥ u1 log(2u1 /(u1 + u2 )) + u2 log(2u2 /(u1 + u2 ))                                         (117)

Let x = (u1 − u2 )/2 (and thus u1 = y + x, u2 = y − x) we have
                    L(ϵ) ≥ f (x) = (y + x) log(1 + x/y) + (y − x) log(1 − x/y)
                        ∇x f (x) = log(1 + x/y) − log(1 − x/y) > 0
Since u1 ≥ (1 + ϵ)u2 , we have y + x ≥ (1 + ϵ)(y − x), thus f (x) is minimized for x = yϵ/(2 + ϵ).
Using y = (u1 + u2 )/2, we have
       L(ϵ) ≥ (u1 + u2 ) ((1 + ϵ)/(2 + ϵ) log(2(1 + ϵ)/(2 + ϵ)) + 2y/(2 + ϵ) log(2/(2 + ϵ)))

                u1 + u2
            =              ((1 + ϵ) log(1 + ϵ) − (2 + ϵ) log(1 + ϵ/2))
                 2+ϵ


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now to bound u1 + u2 , consider the following.
Since uj ≤ u2 for j ≥ 3, we have
                                                    K
                                                    X
                                     (K − 1)u2 ≥          uj = 1 − u1
                                                    j=2
                                                  1 − u1
                                             u2 ≥
                                                  K −1
                                                  1 + u1 (K − 2)
                                        u1 + u2 ≥
                                                      K −1
Further since u1 ≥ (1 + ϵ)uj for j ≥ 2, we have,
                                                             K
                                                             X
                                     (K − 1)u1 ≥ (1 + ϵ)           uj
                                                             j=2
                                                  (1 + ϵ)(1 − u1 )
                                             u1 ≥
                                                      K −1
                                                   1+ϵ
                                             u1 ≥
                                                  K +ϵ
Substituting back we get
                                                          2+ϵ
                                           u1 + u2 ≥
                                                          K +ϵ
Substituting in the bound for L(ϵ) we finally get

                                    (1 + ϵ) log(1 + ϵ) − (2 + ϵ) log(1 + ϵ/2)
                          L(ϵ) ≥                                                              (118)
                                                      K +ϵ
Now to prove L(ϵ) is strictly increasing and positive for ϵ > 0, we have L(0) = 0 and

                       ∇ϵ L(ϵ) = ∇ϵ f (ϵ)/(K + ϵ) − f (ϵ)/(K + ϵ)2
                                 (K − 1) log(1 + ϵ) − (K − 2) log(1 + ϵ/2)
                               =
                                                  (K + ϵ)2
                               >0



Proposition B.4. Given Q = Λϵ ∩Qclf for Λϵ defined in equation 12 and Qclf defined in equation 5,
for any conditional distribution p, the optimal projection q ∗ = arg inf q∈Q E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))] can
be found as follows,

1. Solve for optimal clf(q ∗ ) as

                   clf(q ∗ ) = arg min EX [ProjKL (p(X); ∆K
                                                          h(X),ϵ )] : ρclf (gj , h) ≤ ηj      (119)
                              h∈X →Y

   where

                                    ∆K          K

                                     y,ϵ = r ∈ ∆ | ry ≥ (1 + ϵ)rk , ∀k ̸= y ,
                         ProjKL (u; S) = inf DKL (r||u).                                      (120)
                                           r∈S


2. Solve for an optimal distribution q ∗ given the optimal clf(q ∗ ). For each x,

                             q ∗ (x) = arg min DKL (r||p(x)) : r ∈ ∆K,ϵ
                                                                    clf(q ∗ )(x)              (121)
                                            r


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                               SK
Proof. Given Λϵ = {q ∈ X → ∆K | ∀x, q(x) ∈                            K
                                                                 k=1 ∆k,ϵ }. We have

        q ∗ = arg min E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))]
                 q∈Q

          = arg min E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))] : q ∈ Qclf
                 q∈Λϵ

          = arg min E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))] : ρ(gj , clf(q)) ≤ ηj ∀j ∈ [m]
                 q∈Λϵ

          = arg min min E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))] : ρ(gj , h) ≤ ηj , h = clf(q)
                 q∈Λϵ    h∈X →Y

          = arg min min
                    ′
                                 min E[DKL (q ′ (X)||p(X))] : ρ(gj , h) ≤ ηj , h = clf(q ′ )
                 q:q=q ′ q ∈Λϵ h∈X →Y

          = arg min min          ′
                                    min E[DKL (q ′ (X)||p(X))] : ρ(gj , h) ≤ ηj , h = clf(q ′ )
                 q:q=q ′ h∈X →Y q ∈Λϵ

                                                        ′                             ′
          = arg min min                 min E[DKL (q (X)||p(X))] : clf(q ) = h                    : ρ(gj , h) ≤ ηj
                 q:q=q ′ h∈X →Y         q ′ ∈Λϵ

          = arg min         min E           min DKL (uX ||p(X)) : uX ∈ ∆K
                                                                        h(X),ϵ )                      : ρ(gj , h) ≤ ηj
             q:q(x)=ux h∈X →Y              uX ∈∆K


Thus
                              q ∗ (x) = arg min DKL (u||p(X)) : u ∈ ∆K
                                                                     h∗ (X),ϵ                                            (122)
                                              u∈∆K

where

             ∗
            h = arg min E          min DKL (uX ||p(X)) : uX ∈ ∆K
                                                               h(X),ϵ )                       : ρ(gj , h) ≤ ηj           (123)
                    h∈X →Y        uX ∈∆K


Since u∗x ∈ ∆K                          ∗     ∗             ∗       ∗        ∗         ∗     ∗
             h∗ (x),ϵ , it implies clf(u ) = h , and since q (x) = ux , clf(q ) = clf(u ) = h . Thus



                        clf(q ∗ ) = min E[ProjKL (p(X); ∆K
                                                         h(X),ϵ )] : ρ(gj , h) ≤ ηj                                      (124)
                                    h∈X →Y

and
                            q ∗ (x) = arg min DKL (u||p(X)) : u ∈ ∆K
                                                                   clf(q ∗ )(X),ϵ                                        (125)
                                             u∈∆K


Proposition B.5. For Qdist defined in equation 16, we have d(p, Qdist ) = 0 if and only if p ∈ Qdist .
Furthermore, for any ν > 0 there exists δ(ν) > 0 such that if d(p, Qdist ) < δ(ν) then ρdist (gj , p) ≤
ηj + ν/|Sj |, where |Sj | = PX (Sj ) is the size of coverage set Sj of weak labeler gj with respect to
marginal distribution PX . In particular δ(ν) = ν 2 /2.
Rephrasing we get the following bound:
                                                               p
                                    ρdist (gj , p) ≤ ηj +          2d(p, Qdist )/|Sj |


Proof. Define E(p) = minq∈Qdist EX [dT V (p(X), q(X))], where dT V is the TV distance:
                                                                   K
                                                                   X
                                           dT V (u, v) = 1/2 ·           |uk − vk |                                      (126)
                                                                   k=1

First, we prove the following

                         ρdist (gj , p) ≤ ηj + 2 min EX [dT V (p(X), q(X))]/|Sj |                                        (127)
                                                     q∈Qdist


                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                      X
ρdist (gj , p) = E[             p(X)gj (X) |X ∈ Sj ]                                                               (128)
                  k̸=gj (X)
                      X                                                            X
             = E[               p(X)gj (X) − q(X)gj (X) |X ∈ Sj ] + E[                       q(X)gj (X) |X ∈ Sj ] for all q
                  k̸=gj (X)                                                      k̸=gj (X)
                                                                                                                   (129)
                      X                                               X
             ≤ E[         |p(X)k − q(X)k |X ∈ Sj ] + E[                       q(X)gj (X) |X ∈ Sj ]                 (130)
                      k                                           k̸=gj (X)
                      X
             ≤ E[         |p(X)k − q(X)k |I(X ∈ Sj )]/|Sj | + ρdist (gj , q)                                       (131)
                      k
                      X
             ≤ E[         |p(X)k − q(X)k |]/|Sj | + ρdist (gj , q)                                                 (132)
                      k
ρdist (gj , p) ≤ 2E[dT V (p(X), q(X))]/|Sj | + ρdist (gj , q)                                                      (133)
The above holds for all q. Thus
                ρdist (gj , p) ≤ min 2E[dT V (p(X), q(X))]/|Sj | + ρdist (gj , q)                                  (134)
                                   q∈Qdist

                                ≤ min 2E[dT V (p(X), q(X))]/|Sj | + max ρdist (gj , q)                             (135)
                                   q∈Qdist                                         q∈Qdist

                                ≤ 2 min E[dT V (p(X), q(X))]/|Sj | + ηj                                            (136)
                                     q∈Qdist

                                                                                                                   (137)

Further using Pinsker’s Inequality
                                                             p
                                          dT V (u, v) ≤       DKL (u||v)/2
we have
                     E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] = E[dT V (q(X), p(X))]                                                   (138)
                                              p
                                          ≤ E[ DKL (q(X)||p(X))/2]                                                 (139)
                                            p
                                          ≤ E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))]/2 (from Jenson’s)                                  (140)
                                                    p
              min E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] ≤ min          E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))]/2                                        (141)
             q∈Qdist                        q∈Qdist
                                            r
                                          ≤    min E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))]/2                                           (142)
                                                           q∈Qdist
                                                       p
                                                   ≤       d(p, Qdist )/2                                          (143)
                            2
Finally d(p, Qdist ) ≤ ν /2 implies minq∈Qdist E[dT V (p(X), q(X))] ≤ ν/2, and thus ρdist (gj , p) ≤
ν/|Sj | + ηj .
Proposition B.6. Given Qdist as defined in equation 16, for any conditional distribution p, the
                                                                                ∗
optimal projection q ∗ = arg minq∈Qdist E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))] is given by q ∗ = pλ where
                                                     X
                             pλ (x)y := Zλ (x) exp(        λ)p(x)y                       (144)
                                                                  j:gj (x)=y
                                                                  ∗
Zλ (x) is the normalization constant. The optimal λ is given by the following optimization:
                                  Xm
                       λ∗ = min        λj s.t. ρdist (gj , pλ ) ≤ ηj ∀j ∈ [m]               (145)
                                    λ≥0
                                          j=1


  P The problem is a convex optimization with affine constraints since ρdist (gj , q) =
Proof.
E[ y̸=gj (X) q(X)y ]. To restate it is,
                                                 min       E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))]                                     (146)
                                               q∈X →∆K
                                                 X
                                     s.t. E[               q(X)y ] ≤ ηj ∀j ∈ [m]                                   (147)
                                               y̸=gj (X)



                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In terms of unconstrained variable q ∈ X → RK , this becomes
                                                  K
                                                  X
                                     min     E[         q(X)k log(q(X)k /p(X)k )]                                (148)
                                   q∈X →RK
                                                  k=1
                                                    X
                                        s.t. E[               q(X)y ] ≤ ηj ∀j ∈ [m]                              (149)
                                                  y̸=gj (X)
                                                              K
                                                              X
                                                                    q(x)y = 1 for all x                          (150)
                                                              y=1

                                           q(x)y ∈ [0, 1] for all x, and y ∈ [K]                                 (151)
Since log is undefined for nonpositive values and assuming p(x)y > 0 for all x, y, we only need to
consider q(x)y ∈ R+ , thus we can ignore the constraint q(x)y ≥ 0. q(x)y ≤ 1 also follows from
              PK
the constraint y=1 q(x)y = 1. Hence the constraint q(x)y ∈ [0, 1] can be ignored. Rephrasing we
have
                                                  K
                                                  X
                                     min     E[         q(X)k log(q(X)k /p(X)k )]                                (152)
                                   q∈X →RK
                                         +        k=1
                                        s.t. E[q(X)gj (X) ] ≥ 1 − ηj ∀j ∈ [m]                                    (153)
                                                              K
                                                              X
                                                                    q(x)k = 1 for all x                          (154)
                                                              k=1

Here we subtracted from 1, both sides of the inequality constraint.
Now we form the lagrangian L(q, λ, µ) where λ ∈ Rm  + , a Lagrange multiplier for each inequality
constraint, and µ ∈ X → R, the Lagrange multiplier for equality constraints.
                            K
                            X
        L(q, λ, µ) =E[            q(X)k log(q(X)k /p(X)k )]
                            k=1
                                            K
                                            X                      m
                                                                   X
                          + E[µ(X)(1 −            q(X)k )] +              λj (1 − ηj − E[q(X)gj (X) |X ∈ Sj ])
                                            k=1                     j=1

We have
                        min          max          L(q, λ, µ) = min E[DKL (q(X)||p(X))]
                      q∈X →RK
                            +
                              λ∈Rm
                                 + ,µ∈X →R                            q∈Qdist

Since the optimization is convex, a point (q ∗ , λ∗ , µ∗ ) that satisfies the KKT conditions is optimal.
KKT stationarity condition implies that
                                       ∇q L(q ∗ , λ∗ , µ∗ ) = 0                             (155)
                                          PK
where derivative of an objective L(g) = E[ k=1 f (g(X, k))] where f : R → R is a scalar function,
with respect to a function g in X × [K] → R is defined using methods in calculus of variation as a
function in X × [K] → R
                        ∇g L(g)(x, y) = E[δ(X = x)f ′ (g(X, y))] = d(x)f ′ (g(x, y))                             (156)
where d is the probability density associated with marginal distribution P on X . Thus we have
                                                                      X
 ∇q L(q ∗ , λ∗ , µ∗ )(x, y) = d(x)(1 + log q ∗ (x)y /p(x)y − µ∗ (x) −   λ∗j I(y = gj (x))) = 0 (157)
                                                                                      j

               ∗
                   (x)y = 1, we can eliminate µ∗ (x) to get q ∗ (x)y for x in support of P (d(x) > 0)
        P
Using     yq
                                                            X
                                 q ∗ (x)y = Zλ∗ (x) exp(            λ∗j )p(x)y                       (158)
                                                                    j:gj (x)=y


                                                              26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Zλ∗ (x) is the normalization constant
                                            XK                     X
                               Zλ∗ (x) = 1/(   exp(                          λ∗j )p(x)y )                       (159)
                                                   y=1          j:gj (x)=y

Complementary slackness condition on the inequality constraints imply
                        λ∗i (1 − ηi − E[q ∗ (X)gi (X) |X ∈ Si ]) = 0 ; ∀i ∈ [m]                                 (160)
Singling out λ∗i from expression of q ∗ (x)y in equation 158, q ∗ (x)gi (x) becomes
                                    exp(λ∗i + j̸=i:gj (x)=gi (x) λ∗j )p(x)gi (x)
                                                 P
   ∗
  q (x)gi (x) =
                 exp(λ∗i + j̸=i:gj (x)=gi (x) λ∗j )p(x)gi (x) + y̸=gi (x) exp( j:gj (x)=y λ∗j )p(x)y
                          P                                    P                P

                                                                                                                (161)
or
                     q ∗ (x)gi (x) = exp(λ∗i )fi (x)/(exp(λ∗i )fi (x) + 1 − fi (x))                             (162)
where
                                   X                                XK                X
             fi (x) = exp(                        λ∗j )p(x)gi (x) /(   exp(                      λ∗j )p(x)y )   (163)
                             j̸=i:gj (x)=gi (x)                      y=1         j̸=i:gj (x)=y
fi depends on λ∗j for j ̸= i but dependence is dropped for convenience.
The complementary slackness condition in equation 160 now becomes
                                                 exp(λ∗i )fi (X)

                   ∗
                 λi 1 − η i − E                                      |X ∈ Si    =0                              (164)
                                        exp(λ∗i )fi (X) + 1 − fi (X)
            h                                i
                   t·fi (X)
Let ℓ(t) = E t·fi (X)+1−f    i (X)
                                   |X ∈  S i   . We have

                         δ                   fi (X)(1 − fi (X))
                            ℓ(t) = E                              |X ∈ Si >0                                    (165)
                         δt              (tfi (X) + 1 − fi (X))2
and
                        δ2               −2(fi (X))2 (1 − fi (X))

                            ℓ(t)  =  E                             |X ∈ Si <0                                   (166)
                       δt2                (tfi (X) + 1 − fi (X))3
(We assume p(x)y ∈ (0, 1) and thus fi (x) ∈ (0, 1) to get the above inequalities.)
Therefore, ℓ is a strictly increasing and concave function in t, and thus ℓ(exp(λ)) is strictly increas-
ing in λ. Thus from complementary slackness condition in equation 164, if ℓ(exp(0)) ≥ 1 − ηi then
λ∗i = 0, else λ∗i = λ : ℓ(exp(λ)) = 1 − ηi . Together this can be written as
                                     λ∗i = min λ : ℓ(exp(λ)) ≥ 1 − ηi                                           (167)
                                             λ≥0
or
                                                exp(λ)fi (X)
                  λ∗i = min λ : E                                   |X ∈ Si ≥ 1 − ηi                            (168)
                        λ≥0               exp(λ)fi (X) + 1 − fi (X)

Plugging back fi defined in equation 163, and using definition of pλ , this is
                                  λ∗i = min λ : E[pλ (X)gi (X) ] ≥ 1 − ηi                                       (169)
                                           λ≥0

where λi = λ, and λj = λ∗j for j ̸= i. Or equivalently
                                                        m
                                                        X
                                  λ∗i = arg min               λj : ρ(gi , pλ ) ≤ ηi                             (170)
                                            λi ≥0       j=1

where λj = λ∗j for j ̸= i.
And thus combining for all i we get,
                                              m
                                              X
                          λ∗ = arg min                 λj : ρ(gj , pλ ) ≤ ηj ∀j ∈ [m]                           (171)
                                      λ≥0        j=1


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition B.7. Given the optimization problem
                                             m
                                             X
                            λ∗ = arg min            λj : ρ(gj , pλ ) ≤ ηj ∀j ∈ [m]                       (172)
                                     λ≥0     j=1

The solution found by the following alternating minimization procedure is optimal if the outer loop
converges (The inner loop (equation 174) always converges).
Start with λ = 0. Then repeat until convergence:

     1. Pick j ∈ [m], either randomly or in a round robin fashion.
     2. Solve for
                                          λj = arg min λ : ρ(gj , pλ−j ) ≤ ηj                            (173)
                                                       λ
          where λ−j = [λ1 . . . λj−1 , 0, λj+1 , λm ] as follows:
                                Start: λj = 0
            Repeat until convergence: λj ← λj + log(1 + (1 − ηj − τj (hj ))+ /τj (hj (1 − hj )))
                                       τj (h) = E[h(X)|X ∈ Sj ]
                                                                                             (174)

          where hj (x) = pλ (x)gj (x) .

Proof. First, we show that the solution to the constrained optimization in equation 173 with respect
to λ for a fixed λ−j can be found by the iterative algorithm described in equation 174. The LHS of
the constraint in equation 173, ρ(gj , pλ−j ) is a function of the form
                       E[exp(λ)fj (X)/(exp(λ)fj (X) + 1 − fj (X))|X ∈ Sj ]                               (175)
where                             X                               X          X
            fj (x) = exp(                        λk )p(x)gj (x) /(  exp(                 λk )p(x)y )
                            k̸=j:gk (x)=gj (x)                   y       k̸=j:gk (x)=y

which is strictly increasing and concave in exp(λ) as proved in equation 165.                          Suppose
E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ] < 1 − ηj . Then λj can also be written as
                       λj = min λ : E[hj (X; λt + λ, λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ] ≥ 1 − ηj
                               λ≥0

We have
   hj (x; λt + λ, λ−j ) = exp(λ)hj (x; λt , λ−j )/(exp(λ)hj (x; λt , λ−j ) + 1 − hj (x; λt , λ−j ))
Letting µ(s) = E[hj (X; log s + λt , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ]. This is of the form in 175 and is strictly
increasing and concave in s as proved in equation 165, and equation 166 respectively. λj is thus
given as exp(s), s > 1 s.t. µ(s) = 1 − ηj . If a differentiable function µ is strictly increasing and
concave we have for any s1 , s2
                          µ(s1 ) < µ(s1 + (µ(s2 ) − µ(s1 ))/µ′ (s1 )) < µ(s2 )                           (176)

Observe that s = s1 + (µ(s2 ) − µ(s1 ))/µ′ (s1 ) is also one iteration of the Newton-Raphson method
to solve for s′ : µ(s′ ) = µ(s2 ) starting with s = s1 .
Using s1 = 1 and s2 : µ(s2 ) = 1 − ηi , we get
                            µ(1) < µ(1 + (1 − ηi − µ(1))/µ′ (1)) < 1 − ηi                                (177)

We have µ(1) = E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ] and µ′ (1) = E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )(1 −
hj (X; λt , λ−j ))|X ∈ Sj ] Thus
                                      (1 − ηi − E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ])

              t+1     t
             λ     = λ + log 1 +                                                       (178)
                                 E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )(1 − hj (X; λt , λ−j ))|X ∈ Sj ]

                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


satisfies
              E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ]) < E[hj (X; λt+1 , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ]) < 1 − ηi             (179)
                             t
In particular given λ , we apply one step update of Newton-Raphson method on
E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ] to get λt+1 and thus subsequently use hj (; λt+1 , λ−j ) to apply the
next update. Convergence of these updates is faster than directly applying Newton’s method on the
starting function E[hj (X; λ0 = 0, λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ] which is
                                          (1 − ηi − E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ])

            t+1           t
      exp(λ ) = exp(λ ) + 1 +                                                                (180)
                                     E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )(1 − hj (X; λt , λ−j ))|X ∈ Sj ]
or
                                    exp(−λt )(1 − ηi − E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ])

                t+1      t
            λ         = λ + log 1 +                                                                (181)
                                    E[hj (X; λt , λ−j )(1 − hj (X; λt , λ−j ))|X ∈ Sj ]
This results in a lower update since λt > 0 or exp(−λt ) < 1.
Now we show that if the alternating minimization converges it leads to the optimal solution λ∗ .
Suppose the algorithm converges but the solution λ found is not optimal. This implies that λ satisfies
all of the constraints, but the KKT complementary slackness condition given in equation 164 is
violated. Since E[hj (X; λ, λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ] is a strictly increasing function in λ, and λj solves for λ in
equation 173 given λ−j , if λj > 0, then the equality must be satisfied, otherwise λj can be reduced
(since λj > 0) without violating the inequality constraint. Thus either E[hj (X; λ, λ−j )|X ∈ Sj ] =
1 − ηj or λj = 0 which satisfies the KKT complementary slackness condition.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    C OMPACT VERSION OF OUR ALGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Learning from weak labeler constraints
  Input: Unlabeled data {xi }ni=1 , weak labelers {gj }m   j=1 and the corresponding error bounds
  {ηj }mj=1 . A smooth real-valued function f : X →   R K
                                                          .
  wij :=Pgj (xi ) ∈ [K] ∪ {∅}                                                           // Weak labels
  cj := i sij                                                                              // Coverage
  for each epoch do
     zi ← f (xi )                                                                              // Logits
     pi ← σ(zi )      P                                                                // Probabilities
     ej ← (1 − ηj − i:wij ̸=∅ pi /cj )+                                         // Error in constraints
             P
     dj ← i:wij ̸=∅ pi (1 − pi )/cj
     λj ← log(1 + ej /dPj )               // One step parallel newton update to find λ (equation 22)
     (hi )k ← (zi )k + j λj I(wij = k)               // Logits of projected distribution (equation 22)
                Pn
     loss ← n1 i=1 ℓce (zi , σ(hi ))                                             // Cross entropy loss
     f ← update(f, R(f ) + α · loss)                         // Gradient descent update (equation 10)
  end for


                                                  30
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    0.007   0.011       0.016        0.024    0.009   0.007       0.009        0.017
            10
# samples = 100
 # constraints
            20      0.004   0.004       0.007        0.011    0.001   0.000       0.001        0.001
                    0.001   0.001       0.001        0.002    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000   0.030
            40



                    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000
            80


                    0.009   0.010       0.023        0.028    0.007   0.006       0.009        0.015   0.025
            10
# samples = 200
 # constraints


                    0.003   0.005       0.005        0.010    0.001   0.003       0.000        0.002
            20


                    0.001   0.002       0.002        0.003    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000
            40


                                                                                                       0.020
                    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000
            80


                    0.012   0.013       0.032        0.027    0.005   0.006       0.009        0.015
            10


                                                                                                       0.015
# samples = 400
 # constraints


                    0.003   0.006       0.007        0.012    0.002   0.001       0.003        0.004
            20


                    0.002   0.002       0.002        0.003    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000
            40


                                                                                                       0.010
                    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000
            80


                    0.007   0.019       0.017        0.024    0.003   0.005       0.010        0.014
            10
# samples = 800


                                                                                                       0.005
 # constraints


                    0.004   0.005       0.009        0.010    0.002   0.002       0.003        0.003
            20


                    0.002   0.001       0.002        0.004    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000
            40


                    0.001   0.000       0.000        0.000    0.000   0.000       0.000        0.000
            80


                      2       4              8        16          2     4              8        16
                                # classes                                 # classes
                             max
                              j
                                  (gj , q)       j                     max
                                                                        j
                                                                            (gj , q)       j


   Figure 3: Max error in satisfying convex approximation of constraints (maxj ρdist (gj , q)−ηj ), (left)
   vs max error in satisfying classifier constraints (maxj ρ(gj , clf(q)) − ηj ), (right) averaged over 100
   runs of random draws of p and weak labelers, where q = π(p, Qdist ), i.e. the projection q is found
   by projecting p on constraints on distribution as described in section 3.2.


   D              A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON SOLVING THE ILP


   D.1            S OLVING THE ILP THROUGH LP


   For the particular ILP in equation 13, we have empirically found that the optimal solution of the
   relaxed LP is mostly integral, and approximating the non-integer by its integral solution almost
   always satisfies the constraints (the error in constraint satisfaction ρclf (gj , clf(q)) − ηj ).
   In Figure 4 and 5, we show the performance of solving the ILP after LP relaxation. We used
   ‘scipy.linprog’ in Python to solve the LP. In particular, Figure 4 shows that the constraints are sat-
   isfied well (the error ρclf (gj , clf(q)) − ηj is small), and 5 shows that only a small fraction of the
   variables (one variable for each unlabeled data x) are non-integral.


                                                             31
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         # samples = 100                         # samples = 200
                0.004   0.001       0.001   0.001    0.002      0.002       0.002     0.002
  40 20 10

                                                                                                   0.0040
# constraints



                0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000
                                                                                                   0.0035
                0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000        0.0030
                0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000        0.0025
    80


                         # samples = 400                         # samples = 800                   0.0020
                0.001   0.001       0.001   0.001    0.001      0.001       0.001     0.001
  40 20 10


                                                                                                   0.0015
# constraints


                0.001   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.001      0.000      0.000      0.000
                                                                                                   0.0010
                0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000        0.0005
                0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000    0.000      0.000       0.000     0.000        0.0000
    80


                  2       4           8       16       2          4           8         16
                            # classes                               # classes



 Figure 4: Max error in satisfaction of classifier constraints (maxj ρ(gj , clf(q)) − ηj ), averaged over
 100 runs of random draws of p and weak labelers, where q = π(p, Qclf ), i.e. the projection q is
 found by projecting p on the constraints on classifier through LP relaxation of the ILP described in
 3.5.


                         # samples = 100                         # samples = 200
                0.010   0.010       0.004   0.003    0.007      0.011       0.005     0.006
  40 20 10


                                                                                                   0.010
# constraints


                0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.001      0.000      0.000      0.000

                0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000        0.008
                0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000
    80


                                                                                                   0.006
                         # samples = 400                         # samples = 800
                0.005   0.006       0.005   0.004    0.003      0.004       0.003     0.002
  40 20 10


                                                                                                   0.004
# constraints


                0.003   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.003      0.001      0.000      0.000
                                                                                                   0.002
                0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000

                0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000    0.000      0.000       0.000     0.000        0.000
    80


                  2       4           8       16       2          4           8         16
                            # classes                               # classes



 Figure 5: Fraction of non-integral points after solving the LP relaxed version of ILP averaged over
 100 runs of random draws of p and weak labelers.


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   2.22

                                   1.98
      Max Ratio of KL Divergence


                                   1.73

                                   1.49

                                   1.24

                                   1.00
                                          2             4                8                  16       32            64
                                                                             # of classes
                                                                        Epsilon Values
                                                       = 0.1            = 0.2           = 0.3         = 0.4
                                                                           Methods
                                                               Approximation         Gradient Descent


Figure 6: Max of DKL (h||p)/DKL (h∗ ||p) over 1000 uniformly random draws of p. h denotes the
solution of 182 found by approximation (equation 184) or gradient descent (20 steps after initial ap-
proximation) and h∗ denotes the optimal solution as found by “cvxpy.CLARABEL” convex solver.


D.2                     E STIMATION OF THE COST VECTOR
                          ∗
ProjKL (p(x); ∆K
               y,ϵ ) and q (x) from equation 14, and equation 15 requires solving an optimization
problem. We expand the DKL term to have

                                                       K
                                                       X
                                                min          hi log(hk /p(x)k ) s.t. hy ≥ (1 + ϵ)hk , ∀k ̸= y           (182)
                                                h∈∆K
                                                       i=k


which can be solved by a black box convex solver. However, it can also be reparameterized in
λ ∈ RK−1
     +    to get an unconstrained optimization as,
                                                                                                          X
                                              hk = exp(−λk )/Z for k ̸= y, hy = (1 + ϵ)/Z; Z =                hk        (183)
                                                                                                          k


The objective is no longer convex in λ but projected gradient descent (projection to RK−1
                                                                                      +   ) can still
be used to find a local minima. In particular, we find the approximation

                                                                 λi = log(max p(x)j /p(x)i )                            (184)
                                                                              j


yields h for which DKL (h||p(x)) is empirically found to be within a small constant factor from the
optimal. This can further be used as a starting point for gradient descent, which then results in
a solution close to optimal. In Figure 6, we show empirically that our approximation is within a
constant factor from the optimal as found by ‘cvxpy.CLARABEL’ convex solver in Python, and a
few iterations of projected gradient descent after this approximation find a solution very close to the
optimal.


                                                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E      C ONVEX APPROXIMATION OF THE CONSTRAINT ON CLASSIFIER WITH THE
       CONSTRAINT ON DISTRIBUTION

We remarked that the constraint sets Qj,dist that impose constraints on distribution, i.e.
                               Qj,dist = {q ∈ X → ∆K | ρdist (gj , q) ≤ ηj }                        (185)
can be considered as a convex approximation to the constraint sets Qj,clf that impose constraints on
classifiers, i.e.
                         Qj,clf = {q ∈ X → ∆K | ρclf (gj , clf(q)) ≤ ηj }                     (186)

First, we note that for distributions that are very confident on one label, i.e. for any x, there is a y,
such that p(x)y > 1 − ϵ for a small ϵ, we can quantify the extent of approximation.
Lemma E.1. If for any x there is a y, such that p(x)y > 1 − ϵ, then
                                      ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ ρdist (gj , p)/(1 − ϵ)
and
                                  ρdist (gj , p) ≤ ρclf (gj , clf(p))(1 − ϵ) + ϵ
Thus any p that satisfies ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ (ηj − ϵ)/(1 − ϵ) lies in Qj,dist and any p ∈ Qj,dist
satisfies ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ ηj /(1 − ϵ).

Proof.
                            X
        ρdist (g, p) = E[          p(X)k |X ∈ S, clf(p)(X) = g(X)] Pr(clf(p)(X) = g(X)|X ∈ S)
                         k̸=g(X)
                             X
                     + E[             p(X)k |X ∈ S, clf(p)(X) ̸= g(X)] Pr(clf(p)(X) ̸= g(X)|X ∈ S)
                            k̸=g(X)

                      ≤ ϵ(1 − ρclf (g, clf(p))) + ρclf (g, clf(p))
         ρdist (g, p) ≤ ρclf (g, clf(p))(1 − ϵ) + ϵ
         ρdist (g, p) ≥ 0 + (1 − ϵ)ρclf (g, clf(p))
    ρclf (g, clf(p)) ≤ ρdist (g, p)/(1 − ϵ)
We dropped subscript j for convenience. Substituting ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ (ηj − ϵ)/(1 − ϵ) in the
bound for ρclf , we get ρdist (gj , p) ≤ ηj . Similarly, substituting ρdist (gj , p) ≤ ηj in the bound for
ρclf , we get ρclf (gj , clf(p)) ≤ ηj /(1 − ϵ).

The above lemma suggests that if the true distribution makes confident predictions, (which is often
the case for many real-world classification setting), then imposing a constraint on the distribution
is close to imposing a constraint on classifier. However, this is only a sufficient condition and the
convex approximation can be good without such a condition as well.
In Figure, 3 we show the maximum error in satisfaction of any classifier constraint
maxj ρclf (gj , clf(q)) − ηj for p sampled uniformly at random when we use the method for pro-
jecting on constraints on distribution, i.e. q = π(p, Qdist ). The data for weak labelers was generated
randomly by first drawing Sj such that |Sj | ∼ N (0.6, 0.3) and error bound ηj ∼ N (0.3, 0.3) and
then choosing weak labels uniformly at random such that their expected error in Sj is ηj . To estimate
the projection π(p, Qdist ), 20 steps of alternating minimization in a round-robin fashion (iterating
over all constraints one by one) is performed to find λ (proposition B.7), where each step for each
constraint i is optimized for 10 steps to find λi given current the iterate λ−i .

F      E STIMATING ACCURACY BOUND FROM THE VALIDATION SET
Our algorithm needs some estimate of the error bounds ηj . Often they are not given but we have a
small validation set with true labels, which can be leveraged to get bounds.
One can be tempted to estimate ηj for each labeler gj separately from available labels in its coverage
region Sj . This approach is problematic since many weak labelers have a small coverage set Sj such


                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that it is unlikely to have coverage in the validation set. Indeed if the validation set was large enough
to have good coverage for all weak labelers, supervised learning may perform well enough rendering
any additional information provided by weak labeler constraints uninformative. We consider two
ways to alleviate this problem of low coverage.
First, we consider a prior distribution on weak labeler errors ηj and then compute a Bayesian pos-
terior from the labeled set (and use its mean as the estimate of the bound ηj ). When there are no
labels in the coverage, the posterior remains the same as the prior. One example of a prior is a Beta
prior β(α, β) under which observing k incorrect out of n samples induces the posterior with mean
(k + α)/(n + α + β). This can also be viewed as domain experts providing a general prior belief
about errors instead of individual error estimates/ bounds for each weak labeler.
Second, we consider a shared parameterization of errors as ηj = hϕ (gj , Sj ) and then treat ϕ as a
hyperparameter to be tuned on the validation set. A simple instance of this shared parameterization
is a common bound ηj = ϕ , i.e. hϕ (·) = ϕ. This can also be viewed as domain experts pro-
viding relative information about errors, such as the average errors of different weak labelers are
similar/correlated.


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
G.1    DATASET STATISTICS

         Dataset            Num classes        Num labelers       Mean Accuracy       Mean Coverage
         Youtube            2                  10                 0.83 ± 0.14         0.17 ± 0.09
         IMDB               2                  5                  0.71 ± 0.15         0.24 ± 0.31
         Bioresponse        2                  20                 0.64 ± 0.09         0.17 ± 0.20
         Yelp               2                  8                  0.74 ± 0.09         0.18 ± 0.20
         CDR                2                  33                 0.72 ± 0.13         0.06 ± 0.12
         Chemprot           10                 26                 0.47 ± 0.17         0.06 ± 0.07
         Semeval            9                  164                0.77 ± 0.40         0.01 ± 0.03
         Trec               6                  68                 0.73 ± 0.37         0.03 ± 0.08

Table 2: Dataset statistics includes the number of classes, the number of weak labelers, and the mean
accuracy and coverage of the weak labelers.


G.2    E RROR IN SATISFACTION OF CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                                 ∗
Table G.2 shows the errors in satisfaction of classifier constraints for our trained classifier fclf , when
                                                         j         ∗
projecting on Qclf (row Ourclf (T ) in table 1) as ∆clf , and fdist when projecting on Qdist (row
Our(T ) in table 1) as ∆jdist .
                                            ∆jclf = (ρclf (gj , fclf
                                                                 ∗
                                                                     )) − ηj )+                           (187)
                                         ∆jdist = (ρclf (gj , fdist
                                                               ∗
                                                                    )) − ηj )+                            (188)
                                                  Xm
                                      meanj ∆j =      w j ∆j                                              (189)
                                                  j=1
                                                                      Xm
                                                 where wj = |Sj |/          |Sj |                         (190)
                                                                      j=1

For most datasets, we see that almost all constraints are satisfied. Despite projecting on Qdist ,

                   Bio           CDR          Chem         IMDB         Semeval     Trec       Yelp       Youtube
 # Classes         2             2            10           2            9           6          2          2
 # Labelers        20            33           26           5            164         68         8          10
 meanj ∆jdist      0.00.0        0.00.0       0.00.0       0.020.02     0.00.0      0.00.0     0.00.0     0.00.0
 meanj ∆jclf       0.00.0        0.00.0       0.020.01     0.050.01     0.00.0      0.020.01   0.010.0    0.010.01
 maxj ∆jdist       0.080.15      0.070.07     0.190.29     0.110.05     0.00.01     0.120.06   0.030.01   0.010.01
 maxj ∆jclf        0.030.01      0.050.05     0.280.22     0.120.03     0.050.03    0.550.29   0.060.01   0.040.03

                         Table 3: Mean and Max error in satisfaction of constraints

∆jdist which measures error in satisfying classifier constraint is small, indicating that projecting on
distribution works well empirically for satisfying constraints on classifier.

G.3    E XPERIMENT DETAILS OF SOLVING THE ILP

In table 1, we also reported our results for the method of projecting on the constraint on classifiers
through solving the ILP in 3.5, as Ourclf (T ). We did not have access to the true conditional distribu-
tion, and so we could not estimate accuracy bounds with respect to the target Bayes optimal classifier
equation 1. Instead, we use the same bounds as estimated from training labels by interpreting them
as noisy bounds with respect to the target classifier.


                                                         36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We use the python function “scipy.linprog’ to solve the ILP and estimate the projection. ϵ in 12
was set to 0.2. The cost vector ProjKL (p(X); ∆K  y,ϵ ) of the ILP is estimated as described in D.2, in
particular we use the approximation λk = log(maxj p(x)j /p(x)k ) for λk in equation 183. To limit
the number of constraints in the linear program, we use stochastic gradient descent with a batch size
of 1000. We take a single gradient step in each iteration of the alternating minimization in 3.2.


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H     E RROR GUARANTEE INSIDE THE COVERAGE OF WEAK LABELERS

Theorem H.1. Let H1 , . . . , Hk be constraints of the form Hj = {h : X → [K] | ρclf (gj , h) ≤ ηj },
T with different constant weak labels, gj (X) = j − 1 for all j = 1, . . . , K, then for any f ∈
each
  j Hj , we have

                                k
                                X                          Pr(Sj )           X                   Pr(Bσ )
                  errS (f ) ≤         (ηj + errSj (gj ))           −                (2|σ| − 3)           .         (191)
                                j=1
                                                           Pr(S)                                 Pr(S)
                                                                       σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                                                         |σ|≥2

              Sk                      T              T                  c
when S =          j=1 Sj , Bσ = (         i∈σ Si ) ∩ (   i∈{1,...,k}\σ Si ) are minterms.



Proof. (Theorem 4.5 Let Bσ = ( i∈σ Si ) ∩ ( i∈{1,...,k}\σ Sic ) be minterms. For simplicity, we
                                   T            T

denote Bj = B{j} and write Pr(f (X) ̸= f ∗ (X); B) = Pr(X ∈ {x ∈ X | f (x) ̸= f ∗ (x)} ∩ B).
Since the weak labelers gj (x) are constant and different for each gj , without loss of generality, we
assume that gj (x) = j − 1 for any x ∈ Sj and for all j = 1, . . . , k. Intuitively, Bj are regions in Sj
with no other conflicting weak labels. We observe that

errS (f ) Pr(X ∈ S)                                                                                                (192)
= Pr(f (X) ̸= f ∗ (X); S)                                                                                          (193)
     k
     X                                                                       k
                                                                             [
 =         Pr(f (X) ̸= f ∗ (X); Bj ) + Pr(f (X) ̸= f ∗ (X); S −                    Bj )   (Bi ∩ Bj = ∅, i ̸= j)
     j=1                                                                     j=1
                                                                                                                   (194)
     k
     X                                                                                        k
                                                                                              [
 ≤         Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Bj ) + Pr(f ∗ (X) ̸= j − 1; Bj ) + Pr(X ∈ S −                         Bj )   (△ inequality
     j=1                                                                                     j=1
                                                                                                                   (195)
              T
Since f ∈         j Hj , for j = 1, . . . , k, we have

              Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Sj ) ≤ ηj Pr(X ∈ Sj )                                                             (196)
              Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Bj ) + Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Sj − Bj ) ≤ ηj Pr(X ∈ Sj )                              (197)
              Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Bj ) ≤ ηj Pr(X ∈ Sj ) − Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Sj − Bj ).                             (198)

Similarly, since f ∗ ∈ j Hj , for j = 1, . . . , k, we also have
                      T


           Pr(f ∗ (X) ̸= j − 1; Bj ) ≤ errSj (gj ) Pr(Sj ) − Pr(f ∗ (X) ̸= j − 1; Sj − Bj ).                       (199)

Substitute these inequalities to the above, we have
                                k
                                X
    errS (f ) Pr(X ∈ S) ≤              (ηj + errSj (gj )) Pr(X ∈ Sj ) − Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Sj − Bj )               (200)
                                 j=1
                                                                                              k
                                                                                              [
                                             ∗
                                 − Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Sj − Bj ) + Pr(X ∈ S −                        Bj )           (201)
                                                                                              j=1

The region Sj − Bj is the area in Sj with at least one other conflicting region, we can write this as
a combination of minterms that represent each weak label in each region,
                                                     [
                                    Sj − Bj =               Bσ                                 (202)
                                                              σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                                               j∈σ,|σ|≥2


                                                              38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore,
      k
      X
            Pr(f (X) ̸= j − 1; Sj − Bj )                                                                        (203)
      j=1
      k
      X
  =         Pr(X ∈ Sj − Bj ) − Pr(f (X) = j − 1; Sj − Bj )                                                      (204)
      j=1
      k
      X                               k
                                      X        X
  =         Pr(X ∈ Sj − Bj ) −                           Pr(f (X) = j − 1; Bσ )           (from equation 202) (205)
      j=1                             j=1 σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                           j∈σ,|σ|≥2
      k
      X                                    X         X
  =         Pr(X ∈ Sj − Bj ) −                           Pr(f (X) = j − 1; Bσ )                                 (206)
      j=1                             σ⊆{1,...,k}, j∈σ
                                        |σ|≥2
      k
      X                                    X
  =         Pr(X ∈ Sj − Bj ) −                       Pr(f (X) + 1 ∈ σ; Bσ )          (label starts from 0)      (207)
      j=1                             σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                        |σ|≥2
      k
      X                                    X
  ≥         Pr(X ∈ Sj − Bj ) −                       Pr(X ∈ Bσ )                                                (208)
      j=1                             σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                        |σ|≥2

The second to last step holds from the fact that for each σ, we will see Bσ , |σ| times for each element
j ∈ σ in terms of Pr(f (X) = j − 1; Bσ ). The same argument also holds for f ∗ . Substitute this
back to the equation equation 200
                                k
                                X                                                  k
                                                                                   X
      errS (f ) Pr(X ∈ S) ≤               (ηj + errSj (gj )) Pr(X ∈ Sj ) − 2              Pr(X ∈ Sj − Bj )      (209)
                                    j=1                                             j=1

                                                X                                                 k
                                                                                                  [
                                    +2                        Pr(X ∈ Bσ ) + Pr(X ∈ S −                  Bj ).   (210)
                                          σ⊆{1,...,k},|σ|≥2                                       j=1

Finally, we can write each term as a combination of Bσ ,
                                                 k
                                                 [                 X
                              Pr(X ∈ S −              Bj ) =                  Pr(X ∈ Bσ ),                      (211)
                                                j=1            σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                                                 |σ|≥2

                          k
                          X                                        X
                                Pr(X ∈ Sj − Bj ) =                           |σ| Pr(X ∈ Bσ )                    (212)
                          j=1                                 σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                                                |σ|≥2

Substitute in, we have the result,
                              k
                              X                                                   X
  errS (f ) Pr(X ∈ S) ≤             (ηj + errSj (gj )) Pr(X ∈ Sj ) −                       (2|σ| − 3) Pr(X ∈ Bσ ).
                              j=1                                              σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                                                                 |σ|≥2
                                                                                                                (213)
or in short, we write
                              k
                              X                          Pr(Sj )          X                      Pr(Bσ )
                errS (f ) ≤         (ηj + errSj (gj ))           −                  (2|σ| − 3)           .      (214)
                              j=1
                                                         Pr(S)                                   Pr(S)
                                                                      σ⊆{1,...,k},
                                                                        |σ|≥2


                                                              39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I     E XTENDING THE ERROR GUARANTEE TO THE AREA OUTSIDE OF THE
      WEAK LABELERS COVERAGE WITH A SMOOTHNESS PROPERTY

To prove Theorem 4.6, we rely on the following observation.
Lemma I.1. Let f be an L-Lipschitz function w.r.t. a metric d. For any distribution P, Q we have
                               EX∼P [f (X)] − EY ∼Q [f (Y )] ≤ Wd (P, Q)                         (215)
where Wd (P, Q) is a Wasserstein distance between P, Q where the cost function is given by d.

Proof. For any distribution P, Q and a transport plan T : X × X between P, Q, we have
                                                  Z                 Z
               EX∼P [f (X)] − EY ∼Q [f (Y )] = f (x)p(x)dx − f (y)q(y)dy                         (216)
                  Z Z                          Z Z
               =         f (x)T (x, y)dydx −        f (y)T (x, y)dxdy                            (217)
                  Z Z                                     Z Z
               =         |f (x) − f (y)|T (x, y)dydx ≤ L        d(x, y)T (x, y)dydx.             (218)

When T is the optimal transport plan, the right-hand side term is the smallest, which is the definition
of the Wasserstein distance Wd (P, Q).

The following Theorem is a generalization of Theorem 4.6.
Theorem I.2. Let P be a joint distribution over X × Y such that Pr(Y = y | X = x) is L-Lipschitz
w.r.t. a metric d where for all k = 1, . . . , K and x1 , x2 ∈ X ,
                  | Pr(Y = k | X = x1 ) − Pr(Y = k | X = x2 )| ≤ Ld(x1 , x2 ),                   (219)
                                                                f S (f ) = Pr(f (X) ̸= Y | X ∈ S),
For any set S and f we write an error of f with respect to P as err
then for any subsets C, D ⊆ X , we have


                          gD (f ) ≤ err
                         err         gC (f )(1 + tf (C, D)) + Luf (C, D)                         (220)
when
                                   PrC (f (X) = k | X ∈ C) − Pr(f (X) = k | X ∈ D)
              tf (C, D) = sup |                                                    |             (221)
                              k                 Pr(f (X) = k | X ∈ C)
and                        X
             uf (C, D) =          Pr(f (X) = k)Wd (PX|C∩{x|f (x)=k} , PX|D∩{x|f (x)=k} ),        (222)
                                  D
                              j
Wd is a Wasserstien distance and we denote PX|A for a distribution PX condition on X ∈ A.

Proof. First, we write an error term as a combination of errors for each prediction of f (x),
           f D (f ) = Pr(f (X) ̸= Y | X ∈ D)
           err                                                                                   (223)
                        K
                        X
                    =         Pr(f (X) ̸= Y | f (X) = k, X ∈ D) Pr(f (X) = k | X ∈ D)            (224)
                        k=1
                        K
                        X
                    =         Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k, X ∈ D) Pr(f (X) = k | X ∈ D).               (225)
                        k=1


We observe that
       | Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k, X ∈ D) − Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k, X ∈ C)|                          (226)
        = | Pr(Y = k | f (X) = k, X ∈ D) − Pr(Y = k | f (X) = k, X ∈ C)|                         (227)
        = |EX∼PX|D∩{x|f (x)=k} [Pr(Y = k | X)] − EX∼PX|C∩{x|f (x)=k} [Pr(Y = k | X)]|            (228)
       ≤ LWd (PX|D∩{x|f (x)=k} , PX|C∩{x|f (x)=k} )                                              (229)


                                                    40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the second to last line, we can think of Pr(Y = k|X) as a function of X for which we can then
apply Lemma I.1 to achieve the last line. For compactness of our notation, we denote PrC (·) =
PrX (· | X ∈ C). Substitute this back to the equation above, we have
                     K
                     X
        gD (f ) ≤
       err                 Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k) Pr(f (X) = k)                                  (230)
                           C                      D
                     k=1
                     K
                     X
                 +       |Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k) − Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k)| Pr(f (X) = k)         (231)
                           D                          C                      D
                     k=1
                     K
                     X
                 ≤         Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k) Pr(f (X) = k)                                  (232)
                           C                      D
                     k=1
                     K
                     X
                 +         LWd (PX|D∩{x|f (x)=k} , PX|C∩{x|f (X)=k} ) Pr(f (x) = k)              (233)
                                                                      D
                     k=1
                     K
                     X
                 =         Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k) Pr(f (X) = k) + Luf (C, D).                    (234)
                           C                      D
                     k=1

Finally, we also observe that
      K
      X
            Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k) Pr(f (X) = j)                                                 (235)
            C                          D
      k=1
      K
      X                                                    PrD (f (X) = k) − PrC (f (X) = k)
  =         Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k) Pr(f (X) = k)(1 +                                         ) (236)
            C                          C                            PrC (f (X) = k)
      k=1
      K
      X                                                    PrD (f (X) = k) − PrC (f (X) = k)
  ≤         Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k) Pr(f (X) = k)|1 +                                         |   (237)
            C                          C                            PrC (f (X) = k)
      k=1
       K
       X                                                         PrD (f (X) = k) − PrC (f (X) = k)
  ≤(        Pr(Y ̸= k | f (X) = k) Pr(f (X) = k))(1 + sup |                                        |)
             C                         C                     k            PrC (f (X) = k)
      k=1
                                                                                               (238)
  =err
   f C (f )(1 + tf (C, D))                                                                       (239)
Combine with the above, we have
                                gD (f ) ≤ err
                               err         gC (f )(1 + tf (C, D)) + Luf (C, D)                   (240)


                                                      41
