Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P REFERENCE E LICITATION
FOR O FFLINE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Alizée Pace                                                          Bernhard Schölkopf
 ETH AI Center, ETH Zürich                                            MPI for Intelligent Systems &
 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen                                ELLIS Institute Tübingen
 alizee.pace@ai.ethz.ch

 Gunnar Rätsch                                        Giorgia Ramponi
 ETH Zürich                                           University of Zürich



                                            A BSTRACT
         Applying reinforcement learning (RL) to real-world problems is often made chal-
         lenging by the inability to interact with the environment and the difficulty of de-
         signing reward functions. Offline RL addresses the first challenge by consider-
         ing access to an offline dataset of environment interactions labeled by the reward
         function. In contrast, Preference-based RL does not assume access to the reward
         function and learns it from preferences, but typically requires an online interaction
         with the environment. We bridge the gap between these frameworks by explor-
         ing efficient methods for acquiring preference feedback in a fully offline setup.
         We propose Sim-OPRL, an offline preference-based reinforcement learning al-
         gorithm, which leverages a learned environment model to elicit preference feed-
         back on simulated rollouts. Drawing on insights from both the offline RL and
         the preference-based RL literature, our algorithm employs a pessimistic approach
         for out-of-distribution data, and an optimistic approach for acquiring informative
         preferences about the optimal policy. We provide theoretical guarantees regarding
         the sample complexity of our approach, dependent on how well the offline data
         covers the optimal policy. Finally, we demonstrate the empirical performance of
         Sim-OPRL in various environments.


1   I NTRODUCTION
While reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto, 2018) achieves excellent performance in var-
ious decision-making tasks (Kendall et al., 2019; Mirhoseini et al., 2020; Degrave et al., 2022), its
practical deployment remains limited by the requirement of direct interaction with the environment.
This can be impractical or unsafe in real-world scenarios. For example, patient management and
treatment in intensive care units involve complex decision-making that has often been framed as
a reinforcement learning problem (Raghu et al., 2017; Komorowski et al., 2018). However, the
timing, dosage, and combination of treatments required are critical to patient safety, and incorrect
decisions can lead to severe complications or death, making the use of traditional RL algorithms
unfeasible (Gottesman et al., 2019; Tang and Wiens, 2021). Offline RL emerges as a promising
solution, allowing policy learning from entirely observational data (Levine et al., 2020).
Still, a challenge with Offline RL is its requirement for an explicit reward function. Quantifying
the numerical value of taking a certain action in a given environment state is challenging in many
applications (Yu et al., 2021). Preference-based RL offers a compelling alternative, relying on com-
parisons between different actions or trajectories (Wirth et al., 2017) and being often easier for hu-
mans to provide (Christiano et al., 2017). In medical settings, for instance, clinicians may be queried
for feedback on which trajectories lead to favorable outcomes. Unfortunately, most algorithms for
preference acquisition require environment interaction (Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022; Lindner
et al., 2021) and are therefore not applicable to the offline setting.
Lack of environment interaction and reward learning are thus two critical challenges for real-world
RL deployment that are rarely tackled jointly. In this work, we address the problem of prefer-


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ence elicitation for offline reinforcement learning by asking: What trajectories should we sample
to minimize the number of human queries required to learn the best offline policy? This presents a
challenging problem as it combines learning from offline data and active feedback acquisition, two
frameworks that require opposing inductive biases for conservatism and exploration, respectively.
To the best of our knowledge, the only strategy proposed in prior work is to acquire feedback directly
over samples within an offline dataset of trajectories (Shin et al., 2022, Offline Preference-based Re-
ward Learning (OPRL)). We propose an alternative solution that queries feedback on simulated
rollouts by leveraging a learned environment model. Our offline preference-based reinforcement
learning algorithm, Sim-OPRL, strikes a balance between conservatism and exploration by combin-
ing pessimism when handling states out-of-distribution from the observational data (Jin et al., 2021;
Zhan et al., 2023a), and optimism in acquiring informative preferences about the optimal policy
(Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022). We study the efficiency of our approach through both theo-
retical and empirical analysis, demonstrating the superior performance of Sim-OPRL across various
environments.
Our contributions are the following: (1) In Section 3, we first formalize the new problem setting
of preference elicitation for offline reinforcement learning, which allows for complementing of-
fline data with preference feedback. This framework is crucial for real-world RL applications
where direct environment interaction is unsafe or impractical and reward functions are challeng-
ing to design manually, yet experts can be queried for their knowledge. (2) In Section 5, we provide
theoretical guarantees on eliciting preference feedback over samples from an offline dataset, comple-
menting work of Shin et al. (2022). (3) Next, in Section 6, we propose our own efficient preference
elicitation algorithm based on simulated rollouts in a learned environment model, and establish
its improved theoretical guarantees. (4) Finally, we develop a practical implementation of our al-
gorithm and demonstrate its empirical efficiency and scalability across various decision-making
environments.

2      R ELATED W ORK
Our problem setting shares similarities with Offline RL and Preference-based RL, which we sum-
marize below. We position ourselves relative to our closest related works in Table 1 and extend our
discussion in Appendix B.
Offline RL. Offline Reinforcement Learning has gained significant traction in recent years, as the
practicality of training RL agents without environment interaction makes it relevant to real-world
applications (Levine et al., 2020). However, learning from observational data only is a source of
bias in the model, as the data may not cover the entire state-action space. Offline RL algorithms
therefore output pessimistic policies, which has been shown to minimize suboptimality (Jin et al.,
2021). Model-based approaches show particular promise for their sample efficiency (Yu et al., 2020;
Kidambi et al., 2020; Rigter et al., 2022; Zhai et al., 2024; Uehara and Sun, 2021). In this work, we
study the setting where reward signals are unavailable and must be estimated by actively querying
preference feedback.
Preference-based RL. Rather than accessing numerical reward values for each state-action pair as
in traditional online RL, preference-based RL learns the reward model through collecting pairwise
preferences over trajectories (Wirth et al., 2017). Different preference elicitation strategies have
been proposed for this framework, generally based on knowing the transition model exactly or on
having access to the environment for rollouts (Christiano et al., 2017; Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2022; Lindner et al., 2021; Zhan et al., 2023b; Sadigh et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020). Prior
theoretical and empirical work (Lindner et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022) show that, in this setting,
the most efficient preference elicitation strategy is to actively reduce the set of candidate optimal
                        Table 1: Comparison of related work on preference elicitation.

    Framework                       Offline   Policy-Based Sampling   Robustness Guarantees   Practical Implementation
    PbOP (Chen et al., 2022)          ✗                ✓                       ✓                         ✗
    MoP-RL (Liu et al., 2023)         ✗                ✗                       ✗                         ✓
    REGIME (Zhan et al., 2023b)       ✗                ✓                       ✓                         ✗
    FREEHAND (Zhan et al., 2023a)     ✓                ✗                       ✓                         ✗
    OPRL (Shin et al., 2022)          ✓                ✗                       ✗                         ✓
    Sim-OPRL (Ours)                   ✓                ✓                       ✓                         ✓


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


policies, rather maximize information gain on the reward function – our theoretical and empirical
results reach the same conclusion for the offline setting.
Offline Preference-based RL. The development of preference-based RL algorithms based on of-
fline data only is critical to settings where environment interaction is not feasible for safety and
efficiency reasons. Still, this framework remains largely unexplored in the literature. While Zhu
et al. (2023); Zhan et al. (2023a) demonstrate the value of pessimism in offline preference-based re-
inforcement learning, they do not consider how to query feedback actively. On the other hand, Shin
et al. (2022) propose an empirical comparison of different preference sampling trajectories from an
offline trajectories buffer. In Section 5, we provide a theoretical analysis of their approach, then
propose an alternative sampling strategy based on simulated trajectory rollouts in Section 6, which
benefits from both theoretical motivation and superior empirical performance.

3     P ROBLEM FORMULATION
3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Markov Decision Process. We consider the episodic Markov Decision Process (MDP), defined by
the tuple M = (S, A, H, T, R), where S is the state space, A is the action space, H is the episode
length, T : S × A → ∆S is the transition function, R : S × A → R is the reward function. We
assume an initial state s0 , but our analysis generalizes to a fixed initial state distribution. At time t,
the environment is at state st ∈ S and an agent selects an action at ∈ A. The agent then receives a
reward R(st , at ) and the environment transitions to state st+1 ∼ T (·|st , at ). We describe an agent’s
behavior through a policy function π : S → ∆A , such that π(a|s) is the probability of taking action
a in state s. Let τ = (s0 , a0 , . . . sH , aH ) denote the trajectory of state-action pairsPof an interaction
episode with the environment. With an abuse of notation, we also write R(τ ) = t R(st , at ). Let
dπT denote the distribution of trajectories (or state-action pairs, overloading notation) induced by
                                                                                                        π
rolling out policy π in transition model T . We denote the expected return of policy π as VT,R              =
                      ∗                    π
Eτ ∼dπT [R(τ )], and π = argmaxπ VT,R denotes the optimal policy in M.
Preference-based Reinforcement Learning. Rather than observing rewards for each state and
action, we receive preference feedback over trajectories. For a pair of trajectories (τ1 , τ2 ), we obtain
binary feedback o ∈ {0, 1} about whether τ1 is preferred to τ2 . We define the preference function
PR and assume that preference labels follow the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry, 1952):
                                                     exp(R(τ1 ))
       PR (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) := P (o = 1|τ1 , τ2 ) =                             = σ(R(τ1 ) − R(τ2 )),            (1)
                                               exp(R(τ1 )) + exp(R(τ2 ))
where ≻ denotes a preference relationship and σ is a monotonous increasing link function. Within
this framework, preference elicitation refers to the process of sampling preferences to obtain infor-
mation about both the preference function and the system dynamics (Wirth et al., 2017).

3.2   O FFLINE P REFERENCE E LICITATION
                                                                                           π
We assume access to an observational dataset of trajectories Doffline = {τ : τ ∼ dTβ }, where πβ is
an unknown behavioural policy in M. As in Offline RL, we do not have access to the environment
to observe transition dynamics or rewards under alternative action choices. We assume not to have
access to the reward function, but we can query preference feedback from a human to generate a
dataset of preferences Dpref = {(τ1 , τ2 , o)}.
Optimality Criterion. Based only on our offline dataset Doffline , our goal is to recover a policy
π̂ ∗ that minimizes suboptimality in the true environment with as few human preference queries as
                ∗
possible. Let πoffline denote the optimal offline policy estimated based on the offline data, with access
to the true reward function R, and let ϵT denote its suboptimality. Since preference elicitation only
allows us to estimate the reward function, we do not aim to achieve a suboptimality less than ϵT
– although this is not formally a lower bound for our problem, as shown in Appendix A.3. Our
objective is then formalized as follows.
Definition 3.1 (Optimality Criterion of Offline Preference Elicitation). Let π ∗ be the optimal policy
in M and π̂ ∗ be the estimated optimal policy based on an offline dataset Doffline and Np > 0
preference queries. Let ϵT be the inherent suboptimality assuming access to the true reward function.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We say that a sampling strategy is (ϵ, δ, Np )-correct if for every ϵ ≥ ϵT , with probability at least
                        π∗     π̂ ∗
(1 − δ), it holds that VT,R − VT,R  ≤ ϵ.
Our work is the first to formalize this important problem, which faces the challenge of balancing
exploration when actively acquiring feedback and bias mitigation in learning from offline data.
Function classes. We estimate the reward function and transition kernel with general function ap-
proximation; let FR and FT denote the classes of functions considered respectively. We also assume
a policy class Π. Our theoretical analysis also requires the following assumptions and definitions,
which are standard in preference-based RL (Chen et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2023a).
Assumption 3.1 (Realizability). The true reward function belongs to the reward class: R ∈ FR .
The true transition function belongs to the transition class: T ∈ FT . The optimal policy belongs to
the policy class: π ∗ ∈ Π.
Assumption 3.2 (Boundedness). The reward function is bounded: 0 ≤ R̃(τ ) ≤ Rmax for all R̃ ∈
FR and all trajectories τ .
Definition 3.2 (ϵ-bracketing number). Let F be a class of real functions f : X → R. We say (l, u)
is an ϵ-bracket if l(x) ≤ u(x) and |u(x) − l(x)|1 ≤ ϵ for all x ∈ X . The ϵ-bracketing number of
F, denoted NF (ϵ), is the minimal number of ϵ-brackets (ln , un )N n=1 needed so that for any f ∈ F,
there is a bracket i ∈ [N ] containing it, meaning li (x) ≤ f (x) ≤ ui (x) for all x ∈ X .
Let NFR (ϵ) and NFT (ϵ) denote the ϵ-bracketing numbers of FR and FT respectively. This measures
the complexity of the function classes (Geer, 2000). For instance, with linear rewards FR := {R :
τ → θT ϕ(τ )}, the ϵ-bracket number is bounded by log NFR (ϵ) ≤ O(d log BG               ϵ ), where ∥θ∥2 ≤ B
and ∥ϕ(τ )∥2 ≤ G ∀τ ∈ T , and d is the dimension of the feature space (Zhan et al., 2023a).
Definition 3.3 (Transition concentrability coefficient, Zhan et al. (2023a)). The concentrability co-
efficient w.r.t. transition classes FT and the optimal policy π ∗ is defined as:
                                                                                            
                                             E (s,a)∼d π ∗ [|T (·|s, a) − T̃ (·|s, a)|1 ]
                    CT (FT , π ∗ ) = sup  q           T                                     ,
                                    T̃ ∈FT   E(s,a)∼Doffline [|T (·|s, a) − T̃ (·|s, a)|21 ]

The concentrability coefficient measures the coverage of the optimal policy in the offline
dataset. Note that CT is upper-bounded by the density-ratio coefficient: CT (FT , π ∗ ) ≤
                ∗        π
sup(s,a)∈S×A dπT (s, a)/dTβ (s, a), where πβ is the behavioural policy underlying Doffline .

4    O FFLINE P REFERENCE - BASED RL WITH P REFERENCE E LICITATION
In this section, we propose a general framework for offline preference-based reinforcement learning.
The next two sections propose two different preference elicitation strategies. As learning must be
carried out in two distinct stages, with environment dynamics based on Doffline and reward learning
on Dpref , we adopt a model-based approach which we summarize in Algorithm 1.
Model Learning. We first leverage the offline data to learn a model of the environment dynamics,
fitting a transition model T̂ and an uncertainty function uT through maximum likelihood:
                                                                h                 i
                           T̂ = argmaxT̃ ∈FT E(s,a,s′ )∼Doffline log T̃ (s′ |s, a) ,
                         uT (s, a) = max |T̃1 (·|s, a) − T̃2 (·|s, a)|1 · Rmax ,
                                     T̃1 ,T̃2 ∈T
                                        h                                i
where T = {T̃ ∈ FT | E(s,a,s′ )∼Doffline log T̂ (s′ |s, a)/T̃ (s′ |s, a) ≤ βT }, defining a confidence
set over the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE), and βT is a margin hyperparameter.
Iterative Preference Elicitation and Reward Learning. As with the transition model, our algo-
rithm estimates the reward function R̂ and its uncertainty function through maximum likelihood
over iteratively collected preference data Dpref :
         R̂   = argmaxR̃∈FR E(τ1 ,τ2 ,o)∼Dpref [o log PR̃ (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) + (1 − o) log PR̃ (τ2 ≻ τ1 )] ,
       uR (τ ) =     max |R̃1 (τ ) − R̃2 (τ )|1 ,
                   R̃1 ,R̃2 ∈R



                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Offline Preference-based Reinforcement Learning with Preference Elicitation
Input: Observational trajectories dataset Doffline . Significance δ ∈ (0, 1), preference budget Np .
Output: π̂ ∗
 1: Estimate T̂ and uT via maximum likelihood over the observational data Doffline .
 2: Dpref ← ∅.
 3: for k = 1, ...Np do
 4:      Generate trajectory pairs (τ1 , τ2 ).                        ▷ Preference Elicitation: Sections 5 and 6
 5:      Collect preference label o for (τ1 , τ2 ).
 6:      Dpref ← Dpref ∪ {(τ1 , τ2 , o)}.
 7:      Estimate R̂ and uR via maximum likelihood over the preference data Dpref .
 8: end for
 9: π̂ ∗ ← argmaxπ∈Π Eτ ∼dπ [R̂(τ ) − uR (τ ) − uT (τ )]
                            T̂


where R = {R̃ ∈ FR | E(τ1 ,τ2 ,o)∼Dpref log PR̂ (τ1 ≻ τ2 )/PR̃ (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) ≤ βR } defines the confi-
dence set and βR is a hyperparameter. We also define preference uncertainty between two trajecto-
ries τ1 , τ2 :
                    uPR (τ1 , τ2 ) = max |PR̃1 (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) − PR̃2 (τ1 ≻ τ2 )|1 .                (2)
                                        R̃1 ,R̃2 ∈R


The choice of trajectory sampling strategy for preference elicitation in line 4 (Algorithm 1) is critical
to efficiently obtaining an ϵ-optimal policy. We present two possible strategies in Sections 5 and 6.
Pessimistic Policy Optimization. Finally, our algorithm outputs a policy π̂ ∗ that is optimal while
ensuring robustness to modeling error. This means optimizing for the worst-case value function over
the remaining transition and reward uncertainties (Levine et al., 2020):
                                    π̂ ∗ = argmaxπ∈Π          min        VT̃π,R̃ .                           (3)
                                                           T̃ ∈T ,R̃∈R

Based on this objective, we define the pessimistic transition and reward models as follows:
T̂inf , R̂inf = argminT̃ ∈T ,R̃∈R maxπ∈Π VT̃π,R̃ . Our analysis provides a worst-case robustness guar-
antee when considering well-calibrated confidence intervals, as detailed in Sections 5.1 and 6.1. In
other words, following prior work (Chen et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2023a), our theoretical analysis
assumes that modeling elements can be identified with no optimization error. We then complement
this algorithmic framework with a flexible practical implementation in Section 6.3.

5     P REFERENCE E LICITATION FROM O FFLINE T RAJECTORIES
A first strategy for preference elicitation without environment interaction is to sample trajectories
directly from the offline dataset. Shin et al. (2022) propose this approach as Offline Preference-based
Reward Learning (OPRL), and design a uniform and uncertainty-sampling variant:
          OPRL Uniform Sampling:                                                    τ1 , τ2 ∼ Doffline
          OPRL Uncertainty Sampling:                       τ1 , τ2 = argmaxτ1 ,τ2 ∈Doffline uPR (τ1 , τ2 )
We provide a theoretical analysis of the performance of OPRL.

5.1   T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES .

We obtain the following result, proven in Appendix A.4. The suboptimality of the estimated policy
π̂ ∗ is bounded by the policy evaluation error for the optimal policy π ∗ . This error decomposes into
a term depending on transition model estimation, and one on reward model estimation.
Theorem 5.1. For any δ ∈ (0, 1], let βT = cMLE            T log(HNFT (1/No )/δ)/No and βR =
cMLE
 R log(NFR (1/Np )/δ)/Np , where No = H|Doffline | is the number of observed transitions in the
observational dataset and cMLET , cR
                                    MLE
                                        are universal constants. The policy π̂ ∗ estimated by Algo-
rithm 1, with preference elicitation based on offline trajectories, achieves the following suboptimal-


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ity with probability 1 − δ:
                                             s                                                                s
    π∗        π̂ ∗                     ∗         cT            H           1                              ∗       cR            1           1
V        −V          ≤ HRmax CT (FT , π )            log         NFT                 + 2ακCR (FR , π )               log          NFR                 ,
                                                 No            δ           No                                     Np            δ           Np
                       |                          {z                             }     |                           {z                             }
                                        transition term ϵT                                                    reward term

 where α = 1 for uniform sampling or α ≤ 1 for uncertainty sampling, CR is a concentrability
measure for the reward function, κ = supr∈[−Rmax ,Rmax ] σ′1(r) measures the degree of non-linearity
of the link function, and cT , cR are universal constants.
In the special case where both the transition and reward functions are learned on a fixed initial pref-
erence dataset (no preference elicitation; |Doffline | = 2Np ), we recover Theorem 1 from Zhan et al.
(2023a). Importantly, the coefficient α allows us to motivate the superior efficiency of uncertainty
sampling over uniform sampling, observed empirically in Shin et al. (2022) and in our own ex-
periments (Section 7). Uncertainty sampling learns accurate reward models with fewer preference
queries when α < 1, but can perform like uniform sampling in harder problems (α = 1).

6        P REFERENCE E LICITATION FROM S IMULATED T RAJECTORIES
We now propose our alternative strategy for generating trajectories for offline preference elicitation:
Simulated Offline Preference-based Reward Learning (Sim-OPRL). This method simulates tra-
jectories (τ1 , τ2 ) by leveraging the learned environment model. This overcomes a limitation of
OPRL, which is only designed to reduce uncertainty about the reward functions in R, by instead re-
ducing uncertainty about which policies are plausibly optimal. Our approach is inspired by efficient
online preference elicitation algorithms (Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022), which we modify for
practical implementation. We account for the offline nature of our problem by avoiding regions that
are out of the distribution of the data: the sampling strategy is optimistic with respect to uncertainty
in rewards, but pessimistic with respect to uncertainty in transitions.
We summarize our approach to generating simulated trajectories for preference elicitation in Al-
                                                                                                   ∗
gorithm 2. First, we construct a set of candidate optimal policies Πoffline , containing policy πoffline
(optimal policy under the pessimistic model and the true reward function) with high probability –
as demonstrated in Appendix A.5.2. Next, within this set of candidate policies, we identify the
two most exploratory policies π1 , π2 , chosen to maximize preference uncertainty uPR . Finally, we
roll out these policies within our learned transition model to generate a trajectory pair (τ1 , τ2 ) for
preference feedback.

Algorithm 2 Preference Elicitation through Simulated Trajectory Sampling.
Input: Pessimistic transition model T̂inf . Reward confidence set R and preference uncertainty function uPR .
Output: (τ1 , τ2 )
 1: Estimate optimal offline policy set: Πoffline = {π | ∃R̃ ∈ R : π = argmaxπ∈Π Eτ ∼dπ R̃(τ ) }
                                                                                                                    T̂inf
 2: Identify exploratory policies: π1 , π2 = argmaxπ1 ,π2 ∈Πoffline Eτ1 ∼dπ1 ,τ2 ∼dπ2 [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]
                                                                                            T̂inf     T̂inf
 3: Rollouts in model: τ1 ∼ dπT̂1 , τ2 ∼ dπT̂2 .
                                       inf             inf


We first provide a theoretical analysis of the performance of Sim-OPRL, before proposing a practical
implementation of our entire preference elicitation and policy optimization algorithm.

6.1      T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES

We decompose suboptimality in a similar way to Section 5.1, but obtain a reward suboptimality term
                                                                             ∗
that depends on the learned dynamics model instead of the true one, and on πoffline instead of π ∗ :
                                   ∗         ∗                 ∗       ∗               π∗            π∗
                               V π − V π̂ ≤ (VT,R
                                              π
                                                  − VT̂π ,R ) + (VT̂ offline − V offline ) .                                                     (4)
                                            |     {z inf } | inf ,R {z T̂inf ,R̂inf }
                                                       transition term ϵT                   reward term
Analysis of the suboptimality due to transition error is identical to above, but the reward term is thus
significantly different. By design, our sampling strategy ensures good coverage of preferences over
  ∗
πoffline within the learned environment model, which eliminates the concentrability term for the
reward CR . We refer the reader to Appendix A.5 for the proof of Theorem 6.1.


                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 6.1. For any δ ∈ (0, 1], let βT = cMLE               T log(HNFT (1/No )/δ)/No and βR =
cMLE
 R    log(N  FR (1/N p )/δ)/Np , where   N o  =  H|D  offline | is the number of observed transitions in
the observational dataset and cMLET  , cMLE
                                        R    are universal     constants. The policy π̂ ∗ estimated by Al-
gorithm 1, with a preference sampling strategy based on rollouts in the learned transition model,
achieves the following suboptimality with probability 1 − δ:
                                    s                                       s
  π ∗
          π̂ ∗
                                  ∗      cT        H             1             cR         1        1
V − V ≤ HRmax CT (FT , π )                   log     NFT                + 2κ       log      NFR           .
                                         No        δ            No             Np         δ        Np
                 |                        {z                          } |                {z             }
                                     transition term ϵT                             reward term

 where κ = supr∈[−Rmax ,Rmax ] σ′1(r) measures the degree of non-linearity of the link function, and
cT , cR are universal constants.

6.2   D ISCUSSION

Our theoretical results demonstrate that the learned policy can achieve performance comparable to
the optimal policy, and thus satisfy our optimality criterion in Definition 3.1, provided it is covered
by the offline data (CT (FT , π ∗ ), CR (FR , π ∗ ) < ∞). Following our analysis, a suboptimal dataset
requires more preferences to achieve a certain policy performance, as the concentrability terms CT
or CR are large. Empirical results in Section 7 confirm that sample efficiency is worse when the
behavioral policy is more suboptimal.
Offline Trajectories vs. Simulated Rollouts. While both OPRL and Sim-OPRL depend on the
offline dataset for estimating environment dynamics, they induce different suboptimality in model-
ing preference feedback. Simulated rollouts are designed to achieve good coverage of the optimal
                 ∗
offline policy πoffline , which avoids wasting preference budget on trajectories with low rewards or
high transition uncertainty. In contrast, as shown in Zhan et al. (2023a), due to the dependence
of preferences on full trajectories, the reward concentrability term CR in Theorem 5.1 can be very
large. While sampling from the offline buffer is not sensitive to the quality of the transition model,
good coverage of the optimal policy is needed from both transition and preference data to achieve
low suboptimality.
Transition vs. Preference Model Quality. Our theoretical analysis also suggests an interesting
trade-off in the sample efficiency of our approach, depending on the accuracy of the transition model.
The width of the confidence interval reduces as significance parameter δ or dataset size increase,
or as function class complexity NFT decreases. For a target suboptimality gap ϵ, provided the
                          ∗
optimal offline policy πoffline has a gap ϵT < ϵ, then the number of preferences required is of the
order of O(log(1/δ)/(ϵ − ϵT )2 ). A more accurate transition model should therefore require fewer
preference samples to achieve a given suboptimality, which we again confirm empirically.

6.3   P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION

We now complete the general algorithmic framework discussed above with a possible implementa-
tion strategy, allowing for empirical validation. In fact, with minor changes to the following frame-
work, our paper also proposes a feasible implementation of related theoretical algorithms (Chen
et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2023a). We refer the reader to Appendix C for further detail.

Model Learning and Policy Optimization. Following prior work in offline reinforcement learn-
ing (Yu et al., 2020), we train ensembles of NT and NR neural network models for the transition
and reward functions on different bootstraps of the data (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), denoted
{T̂1 , . . . T̂NT } and {R̂1 , . . . R̂NR }. We estimate MLE and uncertainty functions as follows:
                          NT
                        1 X
       T̂ (·|s, a) =          T̂i (·|s, a); uT (s, a) = max |T̂i (·|s, a) − T̂j (·|s, a)|1 · Rmax
                       NT i=1                          i,j∈[[1,NT ]]

                          NT
                        1 X
         R̂(s, a) =           R̂i (s, a); uR (s, a) = max |R̂i (s, a) − R̂j (s, a)|1
                       NR i=1                        i,j∈[[1,NR ]]


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Each R̂i in the ensemble has an associated preference function defined by the Bradley-Terry model,
with σ as the sigmoid function. We obtain preference uncertainty through variation over the en-
semble as in Equation (2). Recall that transition and reward models are trained on Doffline and Dpref
respectively; for computational efficiency, we sample preferences in batches of to reduce the number
of reward model updates needed.
We approximate the pessimistic objective in Equation (3) by penalizing the reward function with the
uncertainty, as in Lagrangian formulations of model-based offline RL (Yu et al., 2020; Rigter et al.,
2022). We solve for the following objective with a traditional reinforcement learning algorithm:
                 π̂ ∗ = argmaxπ∈Π E(s,a)∼dπ [R̂(s, a) − λR uR (s, a) − λT uT (s, a)],                (5)
                                            T̂

where hyperparameters λT , λR control the degree of conservatism. Note that in our theoretical anal-
ysis, this was achieved through parameters βT , βR which affect the width of the confidence intervals
uR and uT , but their exact value cannot be estimated. We show in Appendix A.2 that Equation (5)
indeed lower bounds the true value function, under well-calibrated uncertainty estimates.

Near-Optimal Policy Set and Exploratory Policies. Sim-OPRL requires constructing Πoffline , a
set of near-optimal policies within a pessimistic model of the environment. Following Lindner et al.
(2021), we obtain a policy model for each element R̂i of the reward ensemble. Policy models are
optimized to maximize returns under the transition model T̂ and the reward function R̂i − λT uT ,
ensuring pessimism w.r.t transitions. Next, the most exploratory policies are identified by generating
rollouts of each candidate policy within the learned model T̂ . The trajectories (τ1 , τ2 ) induced
by different policies and maximizing the preference uncertainty function uPR (τ1 , τ2 ) are used for
preference feedback. We refer the reader to Appendix C for further detail.

7   E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our preference elicitation strategy, Sim-OPRL,
across a range of offline reinforcement learning environments and datasets. We demonstrate its
superior performance over OPRL, as expected from our theoretical analysis.
Since our closest related works do not propose any experimental validation (Chen et al., 2022;
Zhan et al., 2023a), we propose a practical implementation of Preference-based Optimistic Planning
(PbOP) in Appendix C; this elicitation method queries feedback over trajectory rollouts in the true
environment (Chen et al., 2022). We also compare against OPRL (Shin et al., 2022) with uniform
                                                                      ∗
and uncertainty-sampling. Finally, we report the performance of πoffline   and π ∗ as upper bounds for
the performance of our algorithm: the former is trained in the learned transition model with access
to the true reward, and the latter has full knowledge of both transition and reward function.
We compare different preference elicitation strategies on a range of environments detailed in Ap-
pendix D. Among others, we explore environments from the D4RL benchmark (Fu et al., 2020)
identified as particularly challenging offline preference-based reinforcement learning tasks (Shin
et al., 2022), as well as a medical simulation designed to model the evolution of patients with sep-
sis (Oberst and Sontag, 2019). As detailed in Appendix D, these environments consist of high-
dimensional state spaces with continuous or discrete action spaces, follow complex transition dy-
namics, and have sparse or non-linear rewards and termination conditions. This makes them repre-
sentative of the challenge of learning a reward function and learning offline in a real-world appli-
cation. In particular, the sepsis simulation environment is commonly used in medically-motivated
offline RL work (Tang and Wiens, 2021; Pace et al., 2023), and highlights another advantage of Sim-
OPRL over OPRL: it does not require feedback on real trajectories from the observational dataset.
In a sensitive setting such as healthcare where data access is carefully controlled, it may be attractive
to query experts about synthetic trajectories rather than real samples.
Performance against State-of-the-Art. Performance and sample complexity results with different
preference elicitation methods are given in Figure 1 and Table 2. Within the offline approaches,
Sim-OPRL consistently achieves better environment returns than OPRL with much fewer preference
queries. In line with our theoretical analysis, our empirical results therefore demonstrate that policy-
based sampling in Sim-OPRL is more efficient than maximizing information gain on the reward
function (uncertainty-based OPRL), which echoes similar conclusions reached in prior work on
online preference elicitation (Lindner et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022).


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Sample complexity Np under different preference elicitation strategies, to reach a suboptimality
gap of ϵ = 20 over normalized returns. Mean and 95% confidence interval over 6 experiments. The best-
performing offline method is highlighted in bold, ✗ marks when the target suboptimality could not be achieved.
Note that PbOP has an advantage by having access to direct interaction with the environment.
                      Environment                                            OPRL Uniform                                        OPRL Uncertainty                                                        Sim-OPRL (Ours)                                 PbOP (Online)
                      Star MDP                                                       32 ± 4                                              30 ± 4                                                                   4±2                                           4±2
                      Gridworld                                                     105 ± 11                                             66 ± 7                                                                   49 ± 7                                       32 ± 4
                      MiniGrid-FourRooms                                             92 ± 7                                              53 ± 5                                                                   41 ± 5                                       25 ± 3
                      HalfCheetah-Random                                            108 ± 9                                              71 ± 8                                                                  50 ± 10                                       36 ± 3
                      Sepsis Simulation                                                ✗                                                642 ± 72                                                                225 ± 46                                      75 ± 11

                      100                                                                                           100                                                                                                               100
Environment returns


                                                                                              Environment returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                Environment returns
                       80                                                                                           80                                                                                                                 80


                       60                                                                                           60                                                                                                                 60


                       40                                                                                           40                                                                                                                 40


                       20     OPRL Uncertainty                           OPRL Uniform
                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                                 20
                              Sim-OPRL (Ours)                            PbOP (Online)
                        0                                                                                             0                                                                                                                 0
                         0   10           20                        30         40                                      0         20         40                          60          80                                                   0   20         40      60        80

                                  Number of Preferences                                                                               Number of Preferences                                                                                       Number of Preferences


                              (a) StarMDP.                                                                                       (b) Gridworld.                                                                                         (c) MiniGrid-FourRooms.
                                                             100                                                                                                         100
                                       Environment returns


                                                                                                                                                  Environment returns

                                                             80                                                                                                              80


                                                             60                                                                                                              60


                                                             40                                                                                                              40


                                                             20                                                                                                              20


                                                               0                                                                                                              0
                                                                0                        50                                100                                                 0                         1000                         2000   3000

                                                                               Number of Preferences                                                                                                      Number of Preferences


                                                               (d) HalfCheetah-Random.                                                                                             (e) Sepsis Simulation.

Figure 1: Environment returns under different preference elicitation strategies. Mean and 95% confidence
interval over 6 experiments. Environment returns are normalized between 0 and 100. Only OPRL and Sim-
OPRL are fully offline.

As an upper bound for the performance of our algorithm, we include baselines that have access
to the environment: we report the performance of the optimal policy π ∗ , as well as that of an
algorithm querying feedback over optimistic rollouts in the real environment (Chen et al., 2022,
PbOP). In Figure 1, the PbOP method naturally reaches a superior policy with fewer samples as it
allows environment interaction and can thus improve its estimate of the transition model in parallel
to learning the preference function. As supported by our theoretical analysis, this result stresses the
importance of having a high-quality transition model to make our method effective. We explore this
in more detail in our following ablations.
Algorithm Ablations. We conduct ablations for our al-
                                                             100
gorithm on a simple tabular MDP, with results in Fig-
                                                                                                                                                                                   Environment returns


ure 2. This example (transition and reward details de-        80

ferred to Appendix D) illustrates the importance of pes-
                                                              60
simism with respect to the transition model. Even with
                           ∗
access to true rewards, πoffline is pessimistic to avoid the  40
                                                                       Sim-OPRL (Ours)
out-of-distribution state, as it is unclear how to reach it.           Sim-OPRL, no pessimism in output policy
                                                              20
Thus, in Figure 2, we see a drop in performance if pes-                Sim-OPRL, no pessimism in rollouts
                                                                       Sim-OPRL, no optimism in rollouts
simism is not applied to the output policy (purple lines).     0
This confirms the theoretical insights from Zhu et al.          0    10       20          30         40

(2023); Zhan et al. (2023a), who demonstrate the impor-                 Number of Preferences

tance of pessimism in offline preference-based RL prob- Figure 2: Algorithm ablations (StarMDP).
lems. Pessimism is also crucial in simulated rollouts, to
avoid wasting preference budget on regions of low confidence — as value estimates are inaccurate
in any case. This is reflected in lower performance without pessimism w.r.t the transition model


                                                                                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                             50                                                                             50
                                                          OPRL Uncertainty


    Number of Preferences


                                                                                   Number of Preferences
                                                          Sim-OPRL (Ours)
                             40                                                                             40


                             30                                                                             30


                             20                                                                             20


                             10                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                      OPRL Uncertainty
                                                                                                                                      Sim-OPRL (Ours)
                              0                                                                              0
                                  0               50                    100                                      1   2      5   10    2       5     100

                                      Number of Offline Trajectories

                            (a) As a function of offline dataset size.                                     (b) As a function of dataset optimality.

Figure 3: Preference sample complexity Np as function of the properties of the observational data, to reach
a suboptimality gap of ϵ = 20 over normalized environment returns (Star MDP). Mean and 95% confidence
intervals over 6 experiments. × marks when the target suboptimality could not be achieved.

in Figure 2 (brown line), and which could be seen as the naive adaptation of online preference
elicitation methods to our setting (Chen et al., 2022; Lindner et al., 2022). We also note the im-
portance of optimism with respect to the reward uncertainty, both in OPRL in Figure 1 and in our
own model-based rollouts in Figure 2.
Transition vs. Preference Model Quality. Next, we empirically study the trade-off between transi-
tion and preference model performance in our problem setting. Still in the Star MDP, in the low-data
regime, the error ϵT incurred in estimating the value function due to the misspecification of the tran-
sition model is large. As dictated by our theoretical analysis and as visualized in Figure 3a, this
significantly increases the number of preference samples Np required to achieve good final perfor-
mance. At the other end of the spectrum, if the offline dataset is large and allows modeling the tran-
sition model accurately, then ϵT is small and the number of preference samples Np needed shrinks.
We observe a similar trend for both Sim-OPRL and our OPRL uncertainty-sampling baseline.
We also measure how the coverage of the optimality of the dataset affects performance in our set-
ting. In Figure 3b, we vary the behavioral policy πβ underlying the offline data, ranging from
optimal (density ratio coefficient = 1) to highly suboptimal (large density ratio coefficient). The
concentrability terms CT and CR are challenging to measure as they require considering entire
function classes, but we report the accuracy of the maximum likelihood estimate for both models
in Appendix E. We observe that preference elicitation methods perform best when the data is close
to optimal (with the exception of a fully optimal, non-diverse dataset making reward learning from
preferences challenging). More preference samples are required if the observational dataset has poor
coverage of the optimal policy (large CT (FT , π ∗ )), as the transition and reward models become less
accurate for the trajectory distribution of interest. We also validate this conclusion on HalfCheetah
datasets of varying optimality in Appendix E.

8      C ONCLUSION
Our work shows the potential of integrating human feedback within the framework of offline RL.
We address the challenges of preference elicitation in a fully offline setup by exploring two key
methods: sampling from the offline dataset (Shin et al., 2022, OPRL) and generating model rollouts
(Sim-OPRL). By employing a pessimistic approach to handle out-of-distribution data and an opti-
mistic strategy to acquire informative preferences, Sim-OPRL balances the need for robustness and
informativeness in learning an optimal policy.
We provide theoretical guarantees on the sample complexity of both approaches, demonstrating that
performance depends on how well the offline data covers the optimal policy. Empirical evalua-
tions on various environments confirm the practical effectiveness of our algorithm, as Sim-OPRL
consistently outperforms OPRL baselines in all settings.
Overall, our approach not only advances the state-of-the-art in offline preference-based RL but also
takes a significant step toward improving the practical utility of offline RL. This opens up new
avenues for real-world applications of RL in healthcare, robotics, and manufacturing, where interac-
tion with the environment is challenging but domain experts can be queried for feedback. Looking
forward, a natural extension will be to explore alternative sources of information from experts, still
without direct environment interaction.


                                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Erdem Biyik and Dorsa Sadigh. Batch active preference-based learning of reward functions. In Aude
  Billard, Anca Dragan, Jan Peters, and Jun Morimoto, editors, Proceedings of The 2nd Conference
  on Robot Learning, volume 87 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 519–528.
  PMLR, 29–31 Oct 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v87/biyik18a.
  html.
Erdem Bıyık, Malayandi Palan, Nicholas C Landolfi, Dylan P Losey, and Dorsa Sadigh. Asking easy
  questions: A user-friendly approach to active reward learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04365,
  2019.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Daniel Brown, Russell Coleman, Ravi Srinivasan, and Scott Niekum. Safe imitation learning
  via fast Bayesian reward inference from preferences. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh, ed-
  itors, Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1165–1177. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/brown20a.html.
Xiaoyu Chen, Han Zhong, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Liwei Wang. Human-in-the-loop:
  Provably efficient preference-based reinforcement learning with general function approximation.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3773–3793. PMLR, 2022.
Yifang Chen, Shuohang Wang, Ziyi Yang, Hiteshi Sharma, Nikos Karampatziakis, Donghan Yu,
  Kevin Jamieson, Simon Shaolei Du, and Yelong Shen. Cost-effective proxy reward model con-
  struction with on-policy and active learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02119, 2024.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, Lucas Willems,
 Salem Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld: Mod-
 ular & customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems 36, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 2023.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco
  Carpanese, Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, et al. Mag-
  netic control of tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–
  419, 2022.
Steven Diamond and Stephen Boyd. Cvxpy: A python-embedded modeling language for convex
  optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(83):1–5, 2016.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
Sara A Geer. Empirical Processes in M-estimation, volume 6. Cambridge university press, 2000.
Omer Gottesman, Fredrik Johansson, Matthieu Komorowski, Aldo Faisal, David Sontag, Finale
 Doshi-Velez, and Leo Anthony Celi. Guidelines for reinforcement learning in healthcare. Nature
 medicine, 25(1):16–18, 2019.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pages 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Joey Hejna and Dorsa Sadigh. Inverse preference learning: Preference-based rl without a reward
  function. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alex Kendall, Jeffrey Hawke, David Janz, Przemyslaw Mazur, Daniele Reda, John-Mark Allen,
  Vinh-Dieu Lam, Alex Bewley, and Amar Shah. Learning to drive in a day. In 2019 international
  conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 8248–8254. IEEE, 2019.

Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. Morel: Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  21810–21823, 2020.

Changyeon Kim, Jongjin Park, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. Pref-
  erence transformer: Modeling human preferences using transformers for rl. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.00957, 2023.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Matthieu Komorowski, Leo A Celi, Omar Badawi, Anthony C Gordon, and A Aldo Faisal. The arti-
 ficial intelligence clinician learns optimal treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care. Nature
 medicine, 24(11):1716–1720, 2018.

Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017.

Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, and Pieter Abbeel. Pebble: Feedback-efficient interactive rein-
  forcement learning via relabeling experience and unsupervised pre-training. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.05091, 2021.

Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.

David Lindner, Matteo Turchetta, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Kamil Ciosek, and Andreas Krause. In-
  formation directed reward learning for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:3850–3862, 2021.

David Lindner, Andreas Krause, and Giorgia Ramponi. Active exploration for inverse reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5843–5853, 2022.

Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforce-
  ment learning not scary? In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 5175–5220. PMLR, 2022a.

Runze Liu, Fengshuo Bai, Yali Du, and Yaodong Yang. Meta-reward-net: Implicitly differentiable
  reward learning for preference-based reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:22270–22284, 2022b.

Yi Liu, Gaurav Datta, Ellen Novoseller, and Daniel S Brown. Efficient preference-based rein-
  forcement learning using learned dynamics models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 2921–2928. IEEE, 2023.

Luckeciano C Melo, Panagiotis Tigas, Alessandro Abate, and Yarin Gal. Deep bayesian active
  learning for preference modeling in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10023,
  2024.

Azalia Mirhoseini, Anna Goldie, Mustafa Yazgan, Joe Jiang, Ebrahim Songhori, Shen Wang,
  Young-Joon Lee, Eric Johnson, Omkar Pathak, Sungmin Bae, et al. Chip placement with deep
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10746, 2020.

Michael Oberst and David Sontag. Counterfactual off-policy evaluation with gumbel-max structural
 causal models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4881–4890. PMLR,
 2019.

                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In
  S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Alizée Pace, Hugo Yèche, Bernhard Schölkopf, Gunnar Ratsch, and Guy Tennenholtz. Delphic
  offline reinforcement learning under nonidentifiable hidden confounding. In The Twelfth Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Jongjin Park, Younggyo Seo, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. Surf:
  Semi-supervised reward learning with data augmentation for feedback-efficient preference-based
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10050, 2022.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.
Aniruddh Raghu, Matthieu Komorowski, Imran Ahmed, Leo Celi, Peter Szolovits, and Marzyeh
  Ghassemi. Deep reinforcement learning for sepsis treatment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09602,
  2017.
Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, and Nick Hawes. Rambo-rl: Robust adversarial model-based offline
 reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:16082–16097,
 2022.
Dorsa Sadigh, Anca D Dragan, Shankar Sastry, and Sanjit A Seshia. Active preference-based learn-
  ing of reward functions. 2018.
Aadirupa Saha, Aldo Pacchiano, and Jonathan Lee. Dueling rl: Reinforcement learning with tra-
  jectory preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages
  6263–6289. PMLR, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Daniel Shin, Anca Dragan, and Daniel S Brown. Benchmarks and algorithms for offline preference-
  based reward learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Shengpu Tang and Jenna Wiens. Model selection for offline reinforcement learning: Practical con-
  siderations for healthcare settings. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pages 2–35.
  PMLR, 2021.
Masatoshi Uehara and Wen Sun. Pessimistic model-based offline reinforcement learning under
 partial coverage. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Nils Wilde, Dana Kulić, and Stephen L Smith. Active preference learning using maximum regret.
  In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages
  10952–10959. IEEE, 2020.
Christian Wirth, Riad Akrour, Gerhard Neumann, and Johannes Fürnkranz. A survey of preference-
  based reinforcement learning methods. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(136):1–46,
  2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chao Yu, Jiming Liu, Shamim Nemati, and Guosheng Yin. Reinforcement learning in healthcare:
  A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 55(1):1–36, 2021.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:14129–14142, 2020.
Yuanzhao Zhai, Yiying Li, Zijian Gao, Xudong Gong, Kele Xu, Dawei Feng, Ding Bo, and Huaimin
  Wang. Optimistic model rollouts for pessimistic offline policy optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.05899, 2024.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Nathan Kallus, Jason D Lee, and Wen Sun. Provable offline
 reinforcement learning with human feedback. In ICML 2023 Workshop The Many Facets of
 Preference-Based Learning, 2023a.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. How to query human feedback
 efficiently in rl? In ICML 2023 Workshop The Many Facets of Preference-Based Learning,
 2023b.
Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, and Jiantao Jiao. Principled reinforcement learning with human feed-
  back from pairwise or k-wise comparisons. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pages 43037–43067. PMLR, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T HEORETICAL D ETAILS
This appendix provides proofs for the presented theorems and lemmas. In subsection A.1, we pro-
vide details on how we define the maximum likelihood estimators and confidence intervals of the
preference and transition models. In subsection A.2 we provide the proof that our uncertainty-
penalized objective in Equation (5) lower bounds the true value function and thus forms a valid
pessimistic framework. In Appendix A.3, we show that the suboptimality of our offline preference
elicitation framework is not lower-bounded by the performance of the optimal offline policy. In
Appendix A.4, we provide our proof of theorem 5.1, analyzing the suboptimality of preferences
sampled from an offline dataset. Finally, in Appendix A.5, we prove Theorem 6.1, which analyzes
the suboptimality of preference sampling over simulated rollouts.

A.1   M AXIMUM L IKELIHOOD AND C ONFIDENCE I NTERVALS

Let Fg denote a function class over X → ∆Y , where X , Y are measurable sets, and g ∈ Fg denotes
a function to be estimated.
Let ĝ denote the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of g based on a dataset D = {(xn , y n )}N
                                                                                              n=1 :
ĝ = argmaxg̃∈Fg E(x,y)∼D log(g̃(y|x)). We construct the confidence set around the MLE as follows:

                                                         ĝ(y|x)
                           G = {g̃ ∈ Fg | E(x,y)∼D log             ≤ β}
                                                         g̃(y|x)
Lemma A.1 (MLE Guarantee, Lemma 1 in Zhan et al. (2023a)). Let δ ∈ (0, 1] and define the event
E that g ∈ G. If
                                      cMLE       1         1
                                 β=        log     NFg           ,
                                        N        δ        N
where cM LE > 0 is a universal constant, then P (E) ≥ 1 − δ/2.

Proof. The proof follows that of Lemma 1 in Zhan et al. (2023a) and uses Cramér-Chernoff’s
method.
Let B̄ be a 1/N -bracket of Fg with |B̄|1 = NFg (1/N ). Denote the set of all right brackets in B̄ by
B̃ = {b : ∃b′ s.t.[b′ , b] ∈ B̄}. For b ∈ B̃, we have:
                       "         N
                                                    !#    N
                                        b(y n |xn )                          b(y n |xn )
                                X                        Y
                   E exp            log                =     E exp log
                                n=1
                                        g(y n |xn )      n=1
                                                                             g(y n |xn )
                                                          N
                                                                 b(y n |xn )
                                                         Y
                                                       =     E
                                                         n=1
                                                                 g(y n |xn )
                                                          N
                                                               "               #
                                                         Y       X
                                                                             n
                                                       =     E       b(y|x )
                                                       n=1      y
                                                                     N
                                                 ≤ (1 + 1/N ) ≤ e.
as samples in D as i.i.d. We use the Tower property in the third step and the fact that b is a 1/N -
bracket for Fg in the fourth: there exists g ′ ∈ Fg such that ∥g(·|x) − b(·|x)∥1 ≤ 1/N and thus
∥b(·|x)∥1 ≤ 1 + 1/N , for all x ∈ X .
Then by Markov’s inequality, for any δ ∈ (0, 1], we have:
          N
                                     !       "        N
                                                                         !#
         X       b(y n |xn )                         X       b(y n |xn )
     P       log             > log(δ) ≤ E exp            log                · exp(− log(1/δ))
         n=1
                 g(y n |xn )                         n=1
                                                             g(y n |xn )
                                          ≤ eδ.

By union bound, we have for all b ∈ B̃,
                       N                                                       !
                               b(y n |xn )

                       X                                     1           1
                  P        log             > cM LE log         NFg                 ≤ δ/2,
                       n=1
                               g(y n |xn )                   δ           N


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where cM LE > 0 is a universal constant.
Finally, for all g̃ ∈ Fg , there exists b ∈ B̃ such that g(·|x) ≤ g̃(·|x) for all x ∈ X . As a result, for
all g̃ ∈ Fg , we have:
                           N                                           !
                                  g̃(y n |xn )

                         X                                   1         1
                     P        log      n |xn )
                                               > cM LE log     NFg             ≤ δ/2.
                         n=1
                                  g(y                        δ        N



Under this event E, we have g ∈ G with probability 1 − δ/2. A confidence interval constructed via
loglikelihood also incurs a bound on the total variation (TV) distance between g and g̃ ∈ G:
Lemma A.2 (TV-distance to MLE). Under the event E, we have, with probability 1 − δ, for all
g̃ ∈ G:
                                                2
                                                       c        1       1
                      Ex∼D ∥g(·|x) − g̃(·|x)∥1 ≤          log     NFg        ,                (6)
                                                      N         δ      N
where c > 0 is a universal constant.

Proof. The proof follows that of Liu et al. (2022a), Proposition 14.

This guarantees that the true function is within an interval around the MLE estimate with high
probability.
We apply these lemmas to our MLE estimates of transition and reward functions in Algorithm 1 to
obtain the following guarantees.
Let ER denote the event R ∈ R and ET denote the event T ∈ T , R and T denote the respective
confidence sets around the MLE. By Lemma A.1, events ER and ET have probability 1 − δ/2 if
we choose βR = cMLE                                     MLE
                   R log(NFR (1/Np )/δ)/Np and βT = cT log(HNFT (1/No )/δ)/No , where
 MLE  MLE
cR , cT are universal constants.

A.2    M ODEL - BASED P ESSIMISM AND U NCERTAINTY P ENALTIES

Lemma A.3 (Telescoping Lemma). For any reward model R ∈ FR , and any two transition models
T, T̂ ∈ FT :
                                                                            
                                      X
              π
             VT,R − VT̂π,R ≤ Eτ ∼dπ     ∥T (·|sj , aj ) − T̂ (·|sj , aj )∥1  · Rmax
                                         T̂
                                              sj ,aj ∈τ


Proof. The proof follows that of Lemma 4.1 in Yu et al. (2020) or Lemma 4 in Zhan et al. (2023a).
Let Wj be the expected return under policy π, with transition model T̂ for the first j steps, then
transition model T for the rest of the episode. We have:
                                                          H−1
                                                          X
                                     π
                                    VT,R − VT̂π,R =             Wj − Wj+1 .
                                                          j=0

Now,
                                                                        π

                        Wj = Rj + Esj ,aj ∼π,T̂ Esj+1 ∼T (·|sj ,aj ) [VT,R  (sj+1 )]
                                                h                                  i
                                                                       π
                       Wj+1 = Rj + Esj ,aj ∼π,T̂ Esj+1 ∼T̂ (sj ,aj ) [VT,R (sj+1 )]

where Rj is the expected return of the first j steps taken in T̂ . Therefore,
                                h                                                                        i
                                                        π                                    π
    Wj − Wj+1 = Esj ,aj ∼π,T̂ Esj+1 ∼T (·|sj ,aj ) [VT,R    (sj+1 )] − Esj+1 ∼T̂ (sj ,aj ) [VT,R (sj+1 )]
                                h                                           i
                 ≤ Esj ,aj ∼π,T̂ ∥T (·|sj , aj ) − T̂ (·|sj , aj )∥1 · Rmax


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


under the boundedness assumption for R. Finally, we have:
                    H−1
                    X
   π
  VT,R − VT̂π,R =         Wj − Wj+1
                    j=0
                    H−1
                    X                  h                                                                        i
                                                               π                                    π
                =         Esj ,aj ∼π,T̂ Esj+1 ∼T (·|sj ,aj ) [VT,R (sj+1 )] − Esj+1 ∼T̂ (sj ,aj ) [VT,R (sj+1 )]
                    j=0
                    H−1
                    X                  h                                           i
                ≤         Esj ,aj ∼π,T̂ ∥T (·|sj , aj ) − T̂ (·|sj , aj )∥1 · Rmax
                    j=0
                                                                                    
                                   X
                = Eτ ∼dπ                  ∥T (·|sj , aj ) − T̂ (·|sj , aj ) · Rmax ∥1 
                          T̂
                               sj ,aj ∈τ


Lemma A.4 (Pessimistic Transition Model). Under event ET , for all π ∈ Π, R̃ ∈ FR :
                                                 VT̂π,R̃−u ≤ VT,
                                                              π
                                                                 R̃
                                                                    .
                                                             T



Proof.
                                    π
                                   VT, R̃
                                          = VT̂π,R̃ − (VT̂π,R̃ − VT,
                                                                  π
                                                                     R̃
                                                                        )
                                                       h     i
                                          ≥ Eτ ∼dπ R̃(τ ) − Eτ ∼dπ [uT (τ )]
                                                    T̂                   T̂
                                                       h                 i
                                          = Eτ ∼dπ R̃(τ ) − uT (τ )
                                                    T̂
                                                                                           P
where we have used the telescoping lemma (Lemma A.3), and where uT (τ ) =                    (s,a)∈τ uT (s, a) ≥
P
  (s,a)∈τ ∥T̂ (·|s, a) − T (·|s, a)∥1 · Rmax under event ET .

Lemma A.5 (Pessimistic Reward Model). Under event ER , for all π ∈ Π, T̃ ∈ FT :
                                                 VT̃π,R̂−u ≤ VT̃π,R .
                                                             R



Proof.
                        VT̃π,R = VT̃π,R̂ − (VT̃π,R̂ − VT̃π,R )
                                            h     i              h         i
                               = Eτ ∼dπ R̂(τ ) − Eτ ∼dπ R̂(τ ) − R(τ )
                                         T̃                   T̃
                                            h                 i
                               ≥ Eτ ∼d R̂(τ ) − uR (τ )
                                         π
                                         T̃
                                                                   P
where we have used the fact that |R̂(τ ) − R(τ )|1 ≤                s,a∈τ |R̂(s, a) − R(s, a)|1                     =
P
         u
  (s,a)∈τ R (s, a) = uR (τ ) under event    E R .

Combining the above two lemmas gives the following result:
Corollary A.1. Under events ET and ER , for all π ∈ Π:
                                               VT̂π,R̂−u −u ≤ VT,R
                                                               π
                                                                   .
                                                         T       R


This justifies the overall objective considered in our pessimistic policy optimization procedure in
Section 6.3.

A.3      S UBOPTIMALITY LOWER BOUND : A COUNTEREXAMPLE
     ∗
Let πoffline = argmaxπ∈Π minT̃ ∈T VT̃π,R denote the optimal offline policy, which has access to the
                                                                                         π            ∗      π∗
ground-truth reward function. In this section, we ask whether its suboptimality ϵT = VT,R    − VT,R
                                                                                                  offline

                                                               ∗
is a lower bound for the suboptimality of our learned policy π̂ after preference elicitation.


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                           s1              R=1


                                                                 8)
                                                              0.
                                                          0,
                                                     (a
                                                     s0


                                                      (a
                                                         1
                                                          ,0
                                                            .6
                                                                           s2


                                                              )
                                                                                           R=0

Figure 4: Tabular MDP. The environment starts in state s0 and has horizon H = 1. Transition probabilities
from state s0 are given for the two binary actions a0 , a1 (which send the agent to the other state with comple-
mentary probability).


Counterexample. Consider the MDP illustrated in Figure 4. The value function for the optimal
                                                       π∗
policy π ∗ , which consists of taking action a0 , is: VT,R = 0.8 · 1 + 0.2 · 0 = 0.8.
Now assume the following MLE estimate and uncertainty function for both the transition and reward
models:
                    T̂ (s1 |s0 , a0 ) = 0.5;                                                         uT (s0 , a0 ) = 0.4
                    T̂ (s1 |s0 , a1 ) = 0.5;                                                       uT (s0 , a1 ) = 0.1
                    r̂(s1 ) = r̂(s2 ) = 0.5;                                               uR (s1 ) = uR (s2 ) = 0.5
Assuming access to the learned transition model and the true reward function, we pessimistically
estimate the value of both actions:
                                        VT̂a0 ,R = 0.1 · 1 + 0.9 · 0 = 0.1
                                               inf

                                        VT̂a1 ,R = 0.6 · 0 + 0.4 · 1 = 0.4
                                               inf


Thus, we have: Π∗offline (s0 ) = argmaxa VT̂a ,R = a1 . The offline policy picks the suboptimal action
                                             inf
since the worst-case returns of this action are lower than those estimated for a0 . Evaluating this
                                             ∗
                                          πoffline
policy in the real environment, we get VT,R        = 0.6 · 0 + 0.4 · 1 = 0.4.
We now estimate the optimal policy in the learned transition and reward model. Applying pessimism
with respect to both models, we get an equal estimated value of 0 for both actions a0 and a1 . If policy
                                                                                                 ∗
                                                                               π̂ ∗            πoffline
optimization converges to π̂ ∗ = a0 , we achieve optimal performance with VT,R      = 0.8 > VT,R        .
                                         π                ∗           π∗
This example demonstrates that ϵT = VT,R     −VT,R
                                                 offline
                                                         = 0.4 is not a lower bound for the suboptimality
     ∗              ∗
of π̂ , as policy π̂ can achieve better performance (even optimal performance in this case) if errors
in transition and reward model estimation compensate each other.

A.4     S UBOPTIMALITY OF OPRL: P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

A.4.1    S UBOPTIMALITY D ECOMPOSITION
Recall that T̂inf , R̂inf = argminT̃ ∈T ,R̃∈R VT̂π,R̂ denote the pessimistic transition and reward models,
such that π̂ ∗ = argmaxπ∈Π VT̂π ,R̂ . We have:
                                  inf   inf

                             ∗          ∗                 ∗                ∗
                         V π − V π̂ = VT,R
                                       π      π̂
                                           − VT,R
                                                              ∗                ∗                 ∗          ∗
                                                  π
                                              = (VT,R − VT̂π ,R̂ ) − (VT,R
                                                                       π̂
                                                                           − VT̂π ,R̂ )
                                                                           inf       inf                   inf   inf
                                                  π∗                   π̂ ∗ ∗                               ∗
                                              ≤ (VT,R − VT̂π ,R̂ ) − (VT,R  − VT̂π̂ ,R̂ )
                                                            inf inf               inf  inf
                                                          ∗                ∗
                                                 π
                                              ≤ VT,R − VT̂π ,R̂ ,                                                          (7)
                                                                       inf         inf


                                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                  ∗
where we have first used the optimality of π̂ ∗ (stating that VT̂π̂ ,R̂                          ≥ VT̂π ,R̂ , for all π) and then
                                                                                 inf       inf           inf   inf
                                           ∗                        ∗
the pessimism principle (stating that VT̂π̂ ,R̂ ≤ VT,R
                                                   π̂
                                                       ).
                                          inf       inf

Finally, we decompose the last term above as follows:
                            ∗       ∗           ∗                   ∗                  ∗             ∗
                        V π − V π̂ ≤ (VT,
                                       π
                                          R̂inf
                                                − VT̂π ,R̂ ) + (VT,R
                                                                  π     π
                                                                     − VT, R̂inf
                                                                                 )                                           (8)
                                                      inf inf
                                     |          {z            } |    {z          }
                                                transition term                        reward term

We further analyze each term in the following sections.

A.4.2    A NALYSIS OF THE TRANSITION TERM
In this section, we now upper bound the transition term defined in Equation (8).
Lemma A.6 (Lemma 4, Zhan et al. (2023a)). Under the event ET , with probability 1 − δ, we have
for all T̃ ∈ T , for all R̃ ∈ GR , for all π:
                                                           s
                                                             cT       H      1
            EdT [R̃(τ )] − Ed [R̃(τ )] ≤ HRmax CT (FT , π)
               π               π                                log     NFT        ,
                               T̃                            No       δ      No
where cT > 0 is a constant.

Proof. From the telescoping lemma (Lemma A.3), we have:
                                                                                 
                                            X
            π
          VT, R̃
                 − VT̃π,R̃ ≤ Rmax Eτ ∼dπT    ∥T (·|sj , aj ) − T̃ (·|sj , aj )∥1 
                                                sj ,aj ∈τ
                                              h                            i
                            ≤ HRmax E(s,a)∼dπT ∥T (·|s, a) − T̃ (·|s, a)∥1
                                               q
                            ≤ HRmax CT (FT , π) E(s,a)∼Doffline [∥T (·|s, a) − T̃ (·|s, a)∥21 ]

Under event ET , by Lemma A.2, we have, with probability 1 − δ, for all T̃ ∈ T :

                                                        2     1           H      1
             E(s,a)∼Doffline [∥T (·|s, a) − T̃ (·|s, a)∥1 ] ≤    cT log     NFT
                                                              No          δ      No

This concludes our proof.



A.4.3    A NALYSIS OF THE REWARD TERM
Next, we upper bound the reward term defined in Equation (8).
                                                                               π
As in Zhan et al. (2023a), we consider the following value function: VT,R          = Eτ ∼dπT [R(τ )] −
Eτ ∼dpref [R(τ )], where dpref is a fixed reference trajectory distribution. This baseline subtraction,
which doesn’t affect either the optimal policy or the analysis of the transition term, is needed as the
approximated confidence set is based on the uncertainty in preference between two trajectories, not
in the reward of a single one.
Definition A.1 (Preference concentrability coefficient). The concentrability coefficient w.r.t. reward
classes FR , a target policy π ∗ and a reference trajectory distribution dpref is defined as:
                                                Eτ1 ∼dπ∗ ,τ2 ∼dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]
                             CR (FR , π ∗ ) =                  T

                                                          Eτ1 ,τ2 ∼Doffline [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]

Note that, for the purpose of our analysis, our definition differs from that of Zhan et al. (2023a) who
instead consider the max ratio of difference in rewards term: |R(τ1 ) − R(τ2 ) − R̃(τ1 ) + R̃(τ2 )|1
over the entire function class FR .


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma A.7. Let trajectories for preference elicitation be sampled uniformly from the offline
dataset. Under the event ER , with probability 1 − δ, we have for all T̃ ∈ GT , for all R̃ ∈ R,
for all π:                                        s
                  π ∗
                          π ∗                        cR       1         1
                 VT,R − VT,R̂ ≤ 2ακCR (FR , π)          log     NFR          ,
                              inf                   Np        δ        Np
where cR > 0 is a constant and κ = supr∈[−Rmax ,Rmax ] σ′1(r) measures the degree of non-linearity of
the sigmoid function.

Proof.
         ∗       ∗
      π      π
     VT,R − VT, R̂
                   = Eτ ∼dπ∗ [R(τ )] − Eτ ∼dpref [R(τ )] − Eτ ∼dπ∗ [R̂inf (τ )] + Eτ ∼dpref [R̂inf (τ )]
                     inf            T                                              T

                           = Eτ1 ∼dπ∗ ,τ2 ∼dpref [R(τ1 ) − R(τ2 )] − (R̂inf (τ1 ) − R̂inf (τ2 ))]
                                     T

                           ≤ κEτ1 ∼dπ∗ ,τ2 ∼dpref [|PR (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) − PR̂inf (τ1 ≻ τ2 )|1 ]
                                         T

                           ≤ κEτ1 ∼dπ∗ ,τ2 ∼dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]
                                         T

                           = κCR (FR , π ∗ )Eτ1 ,τ2 ∼Doffline [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]                                (9)

where κ = supr∈[−Rmax ,Rmax ] σ′1(r) measures the degree of non-linearity of the sigmoid function. In
the first inequality, we have applied the mean value theorem, under Assumption 3.2. In the second
inequality, we have used the definition of uncertainty function uPR as we know R̂inf ∈ R.
Now, under event ER , by Lemma A.2, we have, with probability 1 − δ for all R̃ ∈ R:
                                                                s
                                                          2       cR       1       1
        E(τ1 ,τ2 )∼Dpref [∥PR (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) − PR̃ (τ1 ≻ τ2 )∥1 ] ≤      log     NFR         ,                   (10)
                                                                  Np       δ       Np
where cR > 0 is a constant. This implies the following upper bound for the preference uncertainty
function:                                                s
                                                           cR       1       1
                   E(τ1 ,τ2 )∼Dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )] ≤ 2      log     NFR                    (11)
                                                           Np       δ       Np

Under uniform sampling, the distribution of preferences in Dpref is that of the offline dataset:
                           E(τ1 ,τ2 )∼Doffline [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )] = E(τ1 ,τ2 )∼Dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]

Thus,                                                             s
                       π    ∗
                              π         ∗                             cR           1           1
                      VT,R − VT, R̂inf
                                       ≤ 2κCR (FT , π)                   log         NFR                 .
                                                                      Np           δ           Np



Lemma A.8. Let trajectories for preference elicitation be sampled through uncertainty sampling
from the offline dataset. Under the event ER , with probability 1 − δ, we have for all T̃ ∈ GT , for all
R̃ ∈ R, for all π:
                                                      s
                     π∗      π∗                         cR        1         1
                   VT,R − VT,R̂ ≤ 2ακCR (FT , π)            log     NFR            ,
                                inf                     Np        δ        Np
where cR > 0 is a constant and α ≤ 1.

Proof. The proof follows closely that of Lemma A.7. We introduce the preference concentrability
coefficient defined for a general preference dataset:

                                   ′
                                                      Eτ1 ∼dπ∗ ,τ2 ∼dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]
                                  CR (FT , π ∗ ) =            T

                                                         Eτ1 ,τ2 ∼Dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]

                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We start from Equation (9):
                       ∗         ∗
                     π      π
                    VT,R − VT, R̂
                                  ≤ κEτ1 ∼dπ∗ ,τ2 ∼dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]
                                     inf                      T
                                               ′
                                           = κCR (FR , π ∗ )Eτ1 ,τ2 ∼Dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]
                                                             s
                                                 ′         ∗     cR          1            1
                                           ≤ 2κCR (FR , π )          log       NFR
                                                                 Np          δ           Np

where we have used Equation (11).
Now consider the dataset of uncertainty-sampled preferences Dpref . By definition, we have:
                        Eτ1 ,τ2 ∼Dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )] ≥ Eτ1 ,τ2 ∼Doffline [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]

                  ′
Thus, we have: CR   (FR , π ∗ ) ≤ CR (FR , π ∗ ). In other words, we can write: CR
                                                                                 ′
                                                                                   (FR , π ∗ ) =
           ∗
αCR (FR , π ), where α ≤ 1. This concludes our proof.

We now conclude the proof of Theorem 5.1 under events ER and ET .
From Lemma A.6, we upper bound the transition term:
                                                                                    s
               π∗              ∗                                                        cT            H                 1
              VT, R̂inf
                        − VT̂π ,R̂ ≤ HRmax CT (FT , π ∗ )                                  log          NFT
                              inf inf                                                   No            δ                 No

From Lemmas A.7 and A.8, we upper bound the reward term:
                                               s
                π∗     π∗                    ∗    cR        1       1
              VT,R − VT,R̂ ≤ 2ακCR (FR , π )          log     NFR         ,
                          inf                    Np         δ       Np

where α = 1 for uniform sampling or α ≤ 1 for uncertainty sampling.
Combining with Equation (8), we obtain Theorem 5.1.

A.5     S UBOPTIMALITY OF S IM -OPRL: P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6.1

A.5.1    S UBOPTIMALITY D ECOMPOSITION
We decompose the suboptimality slightly differently to Equation (7), introducing the optimal
                                                                                    ∗
offline policy (optimal in the pessimistic model under the true reward function): πoffline =
              π
argmaxπ∈Π VT̂ ,R .
              inf

                            ∗              ∗          ∗            ∗
                        V π − V π̂ = VT,R
                                      π      π̂
                                          − VT,R
                                                   π      ∗       π∗       π̂                 ∗        π∗
                                               = (VT,R − VT̂ offline
                                                               ,R̂
                                                                     ) − (VT,R − VT̂ offline
                                                                                       ,R̂
                                                                                             )
                                                                    inf       inf                       inf   inf

                                                   π∗      π∗                π̂ ∗        ∗
                                               ≤ (VT,R − VT̂ offline   ) − (VT,R  − VT̂π̂ ,R̂ )
                                                            inf ,R̂inf                  inf  inf

                                                  π   ∗           π∗
                                               ≤ VT,R − VT̂ offline
                                                              ,R̂ inf       inf

                                                   π∗         ∗            ∗      π∗
                                               = (VT,R − VT̂π ,R ) + (VT̂π ,R − VT̂ offline   )
                                                             inf          inf      inf ,R̂inf

                                                   π      ∗             ∗                π∗            π∗
                                               ≤ (VT,R − VT̂π ,R ) + (VT̂ offline − VT̂ offline )                                 (12)
                                                             inf         inf ,R           ,R̂
                                                 |     {z        } |              {z inf inf }
                                                     transition term                          reward term
                                                                                          ∗
where we have followed the same analysis as in Appendix A.4.1 and used the optimality of πoffline
in the last inequality.
The analysis of the transition term is identical to the above (Appendix A.4.2). We analyze the reward
term next.


                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5.2       A NALYSIS OF THE REWARD TERM
Lemma A.9 (Optimal Offline Policy In Set). Let Πoffline denote the following set of near-optimal
pessimistic policies, under the pessimitic transition model T̂inf and the reward confidence set R:

                       Πoffline = {π | π = argmaxπ∈Π Eτ ∼dπ R̃(τ ) ∀R̃ ∈ R}
                                                                                                  T̂inf

                          ∗
Under event ER , we have πoffline ∈ Πoffline .

                                 ∗          ∗
Proof. Recall the definition of πoffline : πoffline = argmaxπ∈Π VT̂π ,R . Note that there is no need to
                                                                      inf
                                                 π
consider the preference baseline term in V when building Πoffline since it is independent of the
                                                      ∗
policy. Under event ER , we have R ∈ R. Thus, πoffline    ∈ Πoffline .
Lemma A.10. Under event ER , we have, with probability 1 − δ:
                                           s
                       ∗
                     πoffline    ∗
                               πoffline       cR        1       1
                   VT̂ ,R − VT̂ ,R̂ ≤ 2κ         log      NFR
                      inf       inf    inf    Np        δ       Np

Proof.
            π∗             π∗
         VT̂ offline
               ,R
                     − VT̂ offline
                             ,R̂
             inf             inf        inf
                                   ∗                      ∗           ∗               ∗
                    = (VT̂π ,R − VT̂π ,R̂ ) + (VT̂π ,R̂ − VT̂π ,R̂ )
                                  inf                    inf         inf           inf    inf

                    =E         π∗                     [R(τ )] − Eτ ∼dpref [R(τ )] − E               π∗            [R̂inf (τ )] + Eτ ∼dpref [R̂inf (τ )]
                           τ ∼d offline                                                     τ ∼d offline
                               T̂inf                                                                T̂inf


                    =E                  π∗                     [R(τ1 ) − R(τ2 )] − E                      π∗                  [R̂inf (τ1 ) − R̂inf (τ2 )]
                           τ1 ∼d offline ,τ2 ∼dpref                                             τ1 ∼d offline ,τ2 ∼dpref
                                        T̂inf                                                             T̂inf

                    ≤ κE                      π∗                [PR (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) − PR̂inf (τ1 ≻ τ2 )],
                              τ1 ∼d offline ,τ2 ∼dpref
                                              T̂inf


where κ = supr∈[−Rmax ,Rmax ] σ′1(r) measures the degree of non-linearity of the sigmoid function. We
have applied the mean value theorem, under Assumption 3.2.
As Rinf ∈ R, we have: PR (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) − PR̂inf (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) ≤ uPR (τ1 , τ2 ).
Let dpref correspond to the distribution of the preference data, which consists of rollouts from ex-
ploratory policies within the learned environment model: dpref = dT̂π1 /2 + dT̂π2 /2. Recall that the
                                                                        inf         inf
                                                    ∗
near-optimal policy set Πoffline includes policy πoffline (Lemma A.9) and that π1 , π2 are the two more
exploratory policies within this set:
             E     π∗
                    offline
                                 [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )] ≤   max Eτ1 ∼dπ1          π
                                                                              [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )].
                     τ1 ∼d               ,τ2 ∼dpref                            π1 ,π2 ∈Πoffline                    T̂ ,τ2 ∼d 2
                             T̂                                                                                             T̂



Now, under event ER , by Lemma A.2, we have, with probability 1 − δ for all R̃ ∈ R:

                                                               2     cR       1        1
          E(τ1 ,τ2 )∼Dpref [∥PR (τ1 ≻ τ2 ) − PR̃ (τ1 ≻ τ2 )∥1 ] ≤       log     NFR          ,
                                                                    Np        δ        Np
where cR > 0 is a constant. This implies the following upper bound for the preference uncertainty
function:                                                 s
                                                            cR        1         1
                     E(τ1 ,τ2 )∼Dpref [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )] ≤ 2      log     NFR          .
                                                            Np        δ        Np

Thus, we obtain:
                                                                               s
                                           π∗            π∗                        cR                1                   1
                                         VT̂ offline − VT̂ offline   ≤ 2κ             log              NFR                         .
                                            inf ,R        inf ,R̂inf               Np                δ                   Np
                                                                           2
The resulting sample complexity of O( κϵ2d ) matches that of active preference learning within a
known environment (Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022).



                                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now conclude the proof of Theorem 6.1 under events ER and ET .
From Lemma A.6, we upper bound the transition term:
                                                 s
                   π∗         ∗                                      cT           H           1
                  VT,R − VT̂π ,R ≤ HRmax CT (FT , π ∗ )                 log         NFT                 .
                             inf                                     No           δ           No

From Lemma A.10, we upper bound the reward term:
                                          s
                       ∗
                     πoffline   ∗
                              πoffline       cR       1       1
                   VT̂ ,R − VT̂ ,R̂ ≤ 2κ        log     NFR         .
                      inf      inf    inf   Np        δ       Np

Combining with Equation (12), we obtain Theorem 6.1.


B    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

    Table 3: Comparison of broader related work on preference elicitation and preference-based RL.

 Framework                             Offline   Policy-based Sampling   Robustness Guarantees     Practical Implementation
 P REFERENCE - BASED D EEP RL
    D-REX (Brown et al., 2020)           ✓                ✗                        ✗                          ✓
    PEBBLE (Lee et al., 2021)            ✗                ✗                        ✗                          ✓
    MRN (Liu et al., 2022b)              ✗                ✗                        ✗                          ✓
    SURF (Park et al., 2022)             ✗                ✗                        ✗                          ✓
    PT (Kim et al., 2023)                ✗                ✗                        ✗                          ✓
    IPL (Hejna and Sadigh, 2024)         ✓                ✗                        ✗                          ✓
 P REFERENCE E LICITATION
    PbOP (Chen et al., 2022)             ✗                ✓                       ✓                           ✗
    REGIME (Zhan et al., 2023b)          ✗                ✓                       ✓                           ✗
    FREEHAND (Zhan et al., 2023a)        ✓                ✗                       ✓                           ✗
    OPRL (Shin et al., 2022)             ✓                ✗                       ✗                           ✓
    MoP-RL (Liu et al., 2023)            ✗                ✗                       ✗                           ✓
    Max. Regret (Wilde et al., 2020)     ✗                ✓                       ✗                           ✓
    Biyik and Sadigh (2018)              ✗                ✗                       ✓                           ✓
    Bıyık et al. (2019)                  ✗                ✗                       ✓                           ✓
    Sim-OPRL (Ours)                      ✓                ✓                       ✓                           ✓


In this section, we position this work against additional related literature. We summarize our analysis
in Table 3.
First, we note that significant prior work on preference-based reinforcement learning is centered on
improving preference modeling or policy optimization for a fixed (uncertainty-based or uniform)
preference elicitation strategy (all methods in the top half of Table 3). This focus is orthogonal
to our work, and could certainly be combined with our preference elicitation method for optimal
performance.
Next, comparing with other preference elicitation methods in Table 3 (bottom half), we find that
almost all works consider a setting with online environment interaction, which makes them in-
compatible with our problem setting. Online environment exploration eliminates the need for pes-
simism against transition dynamics (Levine et al., 2020), whereas we show that it is essential for
both theoretical and empirical performance in the offline setting.
The uncertainty-based preference elicitation strategy adopted in most practical PbRL algorithms is
to minimize uncertainty about preferences, or to maximize information gain about the reward
function. From prior theoretical and empirical work (Chen et al., 2022; Lindner et al., 2021), we
know that this strategy is often suboptimal compared to actively reducing the set of candidate optimal
policies, and both our theoretical and experimental results confirm this.
Finally, note that ours is the first work to provide both a theoretical and empirical analysis of the
sample complexity of preference elicitation in the fully offline setting.


                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Beyond Offline Reinforcement Learning. With our community’s recent surge in interest in
preference-based reinforcement learning for its application to language model alignment (Stien-
non et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022), we foresee many possible applications and extensions of
our work beyond offline RL. Sample efficiency in preference collection is of paramount importance
in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF): recent works consider active learning
pipelines based on uncertainty sampling to improve efficiency (Chen et al., 2024; Melo et al., 2024),
similar to OPRL. The insights from our work suggest that a model-based elicitation strategy like
Sim-OPRL, designed to simulate responses from near-optimal policies, might perform even better.
We believe this line of future work could prove critical to the language model alignment community.

C    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We trained all models on two 64-core AMD processors or a single NVIDIA RTX2080Ti GPU. The
total wall-clock time for running all experiments presented in this paper amounted to less than 72
hours.

Transition and Reward Function Training. For all baselines, transition and reward models were
implemented as linear classifiers (for the Star MDP), as two-layer perceptions with ReLU activation
and hidden layer dimension 32 (Gridworld, Sepsis, MiniGrid environments), or as 5-layer MLPs
with ReLU activations and hidden sizes [512, 256, 128, 64, 32] for the HalfCheetah environments.
Training was carried out for two or one epochs for the transition and reward models respectively,
with the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) and a learning rate of 10−3 .
We provide a more detailed practical algorithm for Sim-OPRL in Algorithm 3. For both our method
and baselines relying on uncertainty sets (OPRL and PbOP), we estimated uncertainty sets by train-
ing models initialized with different random seeds on different bootstraps of the data (sampling 90%
of the data with replacement). We consider ensembles of size |T | = |R| = 5 for both transition and
reward models. Hyperparameters λT , λR control the degree of pessimism in practice and could be
considered equivalent to adjusting margin parameters βT , βR in our conceptual algorithm proposed
in Section 4. Since the exact values prescribed by our theoretical analysis cannot be estimated, the
user must set these parameters themselves. Hyperparameter optimization in offline RL is a chal-
lenging problem (Levine et al., 2020); for our experiments, we simply set λT = 0.5, λR = 0.1
(StarMDP, Gridworld) and λT = λR = 1 for the Sepsis environment.

Near-Optimal Policy Set and Exploratory Policies. Both Sim-OPRL and PbOP require con-
structing a set of near-optimal policies within a learned model of the environment. Note that the
PbOP algorithm in Chen et al. (2022) proposes to construct the near-optimal policy set by consider-
ing all policies that have a preference greater than 1/2 over all other policies in Π, under a transition
and preference uncertainty bonus. This is infeasible to estimate in practice; we modified the algo-
rithm to allow for practical implementation. The motivation in building the set of plausibly optimal
policies remains the same, but the theoretical guarantees may not hold.
We build Πoffline by maintaining a policy model for all R̃ ∈ R, i.e., each element of the reward
ensemble. Policy models are optimized to maximize returns under the transition model T̂ and the
reward function R̃ − λT uT (Sim-OPRL) or R̃ + λT uT (PbOP). Next, the most exploratory poli-
cies are identified by generating 10 rollouts of each of the candidate policies within the learned
(SimOPRL) or true (PbOP) model. The trajectories (τ1 , τ2 ) maximizing the preference uncertainty
function uPR (τ1 , τ2 ) are used for preference feedback. In PbOP, the trajectories are then added to
the trajectories buffer and the transition model is retrained for 20 (Star MDP, Gridworld) or 200
steps (Sepsis).

Preference Feedback Collection. Preference labels are provided through the ground-truth reward
function associated with every environment. As stated in Section 4, for computational efficiency, we
sample preferences in batches of 4 (Star MDP, Gridworld) or 100 (Sepsis) to reduce the number of
model updates needed.

Policy Optimization. Policy optimization stages, both in estimating optimal policy sets in Sim-
OPRL and PbOP and in outputting final policies, are carried out exactly through linear programming


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Sim-OPRL: Practical Algorithm
Input: Observational trajectories dataset Doffline . Hyperparameters λT , λR .
Output: π̂ ∗
 1: Train an ensemble T of transition models via bootstrapping on the observational data Doffline :
                        1 X
         T̂ (·|s, a) =       T̃ (·|s, a); uT (s, a) = max |T1 (·|s, a) − T2 (·|s, a)|1 · Rmax
                       |T |                             T1 ,T2 ∈T
                           T̃ ∈T

 2: Dpref ← ∅.
 3: for k = 1, ...Np do
 4:     Estimate optimal offline policy set:

              Πoffline = {π | π = argmaxπ∈Π E(s,a)∼dπ R̃(s, a) − λT uT (s, a) ∀R̃ ∈ R}
                                                           T̂


 5:     Identify exploratory policies: π1 , π2 = argmaxπ1 ,π2 ∈Πoffline Eτ1 ∼dπ1 ,τ2 ∼dπ2 [uPR (τ1 , τ2 )]
                                                                              T̂       T̂
 6:     Rollouts in model: τ1 ∼ dπT̂1 , τ2 ∼ dT̂π2 .
 7:     Collect preference label o for (τ1 , τ2 ).
 8:     Dpref ← Dpref ∪ {(τ1 , τ2 , o)}.
 9:     Train an ensemble R of reward models via bootstrapping of the preference data Dpref :
                           1 X
               R̂(s, a) =            R̃(s, a); uR (s, a) = max |R1 (s, a) − R2 (s, a)|1
                          |R|                              R1 ,R2 ∈R
                                R̃∈R

10: end for
11: π̂ ∗ ← argmaxπ∈Π E(s,a)∼dπ [R̂(s, a) − λR uR (s, a) − λT uT (s, a)]
                                   T̂


for the Star MDP and Gridworld using cvxopt (Diamond and Boyd, 2016), based on code from
Lindner et al. (2021), using Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2017) implemented
in stable-baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021) for the Sepsis and MiniGrid environments, and
Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018) for HalfCheetah. In the latter case, after every preference
collection episode, reward and policy models were trained from the checkpoint of the previous
iteration, for only 20 steps to minimize computation.

Baselines and Ablations. We implement both OPRL baselines within our model-based offline
preference-based algorithm described in Section 4. Uncertainty sampling is taking the pair with
maximum preference uncertainty over 45 pairs for every sample, to reduce the load of computing
preference uncertainty over the entire trajectory buffer.
Our ablation study for Figure 2 is conducted as follows. For Sim-OPRL without pessimism in the
output policy, we output the policy that maximizes the value function under the MLE estimate of
the transition and reward function, T̂ and R̂, after preference acquisition. For Sim-OPRL without
pessimism in the simulated rollouts, we estimate the optimal policy set Πoffline in the MLE estimate of
the transition model instead of its pessimistic counterpart. Finally, for Sim-OPRL without optimism
in the simulated rollouts, we generate rollouts from any two policies in Πoffline instead of the most
explorative ones.

D     E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS
Star MDP. We illustrate the transition dynamics underlying the Star MDP in Figure 5. Transition
probabilities are 0.9 for all depicted solid arrows, and leave the state unchanged otherwise. Other
actions also keep the state unchanged with probability 1. Episodes have length H = 3 and start
from s0 . Unless specified otherwise, the offline dataset Doffline consists of 40 trajectories which only
cover states (s0 , s1 , s3 ) and (s3 , s1 , s2 ).
Preferences collected over samples from the offline dataset learn slowly about the negative reward in
the bottom state, as it is always included in the sampled trajectories. Instead, simulated rollouts can
query a direct comparison between the optimal path and one that includes it. This example illustrates


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                s4        R = 10


                                                                                     a3
                                                                           a2
                        💰💰                                            a0                  a0
                                                               s0               s1             s2
            start
                                       💰                              a1                  a1
                                                                                               R=6


                                                                                     a3
                                                                           a2
                          💣                                                     s3        R = −1

Figure 5: Star MDP. Transition probabilities are 0.9 for all solid arrows. Omitted actions or complementary
transitions keep the state unchanged.



                                       Start              −1   −1

                                                          −1   −1

                                                20

                                                               10

Figure 6: Gridworld environment. Rewards at every state are indicated if non-zero. Transition probabilities
are 0.9. Thick lines indicate an obstacle, through which state transitions have probability zero.



clearly why querying feedback over simulated rollouts achieves better environment returns than over
samples from the offline buffer.


Gridworld. We illustrate the gridworld environment in Figure 6. The environment consists of a
4 × 4 grid with states associated with different rewards, including a negative-reward region in the
top-right corner, a high-reward but unreachable state, and a moderate-reward state at the bottom right
corner. Each episode starts in the top-left corner. Transition probabilities for each of the four actions
(top, left, bottom, right) are 0.9 for the intended direction, and 0.1 for the others; and
action stay remains in the current state with probability 1. Transitions beyond the grid limits or
through obstacles have probability zero, with the remainder of the probability mass for each action
being distributed amongst other directions equally. The offline dataset contains 150 episodes and
the behavioral policy is ϵ-optimal with noise ϵ = 0.1. Episodes have length H = 10.


MiniGrid-FourRooms. We also conduct experiments on the minigrid-fourrooms-v0
D4RL dataset (Fu et al., 2020), ignoring all reward information in the offline dataset. In this en-
vironment, the agent must navigate a maze consisting of four interconnected rooms and reach a
green goal square (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023). Agent and goal squares are randomly placed at
the beginning of every episode.


HalfCheetah-Random. The halfcheetah-random-v2 dataset is also part of the D4RL
benchmark (Fu et al., 2020). Our choice is motivated by Shin et al. (2022) who identify it as a
particularly challenging offline preference-based reinforcement learning task. The dataset consists
of 1 million transitions induced by a random policy in the MuJoCo environment Halfcheetah-v2,
which rewards agents if they move forward. The observation space is 17-dimensional.


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Transition dynamics of the sepsis simulator environment (Oberst and Sontag, 2019). Table
adapted from (Tang and Wiens, 2021).

 Step           Variable           Current   New         Change     Variable Affected        Effect
                                                                        Heart Rate           high → normal w.p. 0.5
                                      -       on           -
                                                                  Systolic Blood Pressure    high → normal w.p. 0.5
    1          Antibiotics
                                                                        Heart Rate           normal → high w.p. 0.1
                                     on       off    withdrawn
                                                                  Systolic Blood Pressure    normal → high w.p. 0.5
                                      -       on           -           Oxygen Saturation     low → normal w.p. 0.7
    2          Ventilation
                                     on       off    withdrawn         Oxygen Saturation     normal → low w.p. 0.1
                                                                                             low → normal w.p. 0.7 (non-diabetic)
                                                                                             normal → high w.p. 0.7 (non-diabetic)
    3         Vasodilators
                                                                  Systolic Blood Pressure    low → normal w.p. 0.5 (diabetic)
                                      -       on           -                                 low → high w.p. 0.4 (diabetic)
                                                                                             normal → high w.p. 0.9 (diabetic)
                                                                                             very low, low → normal, normal → high,
                                                                        Blood Glucose
                                                                                             high → very high w.p. 0.5 (diabetic)
                                                                                             normal → low w.p. 0.1 (non-diabetic)
                                                                                             high → normal w.p. 0.1 (non-diabetic)
                                     on       off    withdrawn    Systolic Blood Pressure
                                                                                             normal → low w.p. 0.05 (diabetic)
                                                                                             high → normal w.p. 0.05 (diabetic)
    4          Heart Rate                                         Vitals spontaneously fluctuate when not affected
    5    Systolic Blood Pressure                                  by treatment (either enabled or withdrawn),
                                             fluctuate
    6      Oxygen Saturation                                      the level fluctuates ±1 w.p. 0.1, except:
    7        Blood Glucose                                        glucose fluctuates ±1 w.p. 0.3 (diabetic).


Sepsis Simulation. The sepsis simulator (Oberst and Sontag, 2019) is a commonly used en-
vironment for medically-motivated RL work (Tang and Wiens, 2021). We use the original au-
thors’ publicly available code: https://github.com/clinicalml/gumbel-max-scm/
tree/sim-v2/sepsisSimDiabetes (MIT license). The state space consists of 1,440 dis-
crete states based on different observational variables (heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen concentra-
tion, glucose, diabetes status). The action space consists of three binary treatment options (antibiotic
administration, vasopressor administration, and mechanical ventilation). The complex transition dy-
namics of the environment determine how each treatment affects the value of each vital sign, and
are summarized in Table 4; these were designed to reflect patients’ physiology (Oberst and Sontag,
2019). The ground truth reward function is sparse and only assigns a positive reward of +1 to sur-
viving patients and a negative reward of −1 if death occurs (3 or more abnormal vitals) during their
stay. The offline trajectories dataset includes 10,000 episodes following an ϵ-optimal policy with
noise ϵ = 0.1 and the episode length is H = 20.


E       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

We include additional results in this section.
In Figure 7, we report the accuracy of the transition and preference model achieved for the Star MDP
as we vary the size of optimality of the offline dataset. Accuracy is measured against all possible
state transitions and over 100 pairs of random trajectories (random combinations of the 5 states and
4 actions in a sequence of H = 3). This complements our analysis in Section 7 and fig. 3. We
see a steady improvement in both transition and reward model quality as we increase the amount of
observational data in Figure 7a, which explains the observed dependence of Np on No in Figure 3a.
In Figure 7b, we notice low model performance at both extremes of the x-axis. When the dataset is
fully optimal, we find that all trajectories involve the same sequence of actions and states, so learning
a transition or reward model from this data is challenging. We reach a similar conclusion at the other
end of the spectrum at high density ratios, where the coverage the optimal states reduces. We reach
highest performance for both models at intermediate values, when diversity of the observational data
is high.
Still, it is important to stress that the highest accuracy of both models does not necessarily translate
to the best-performing policy: good performance on the distribution induced by the optimal policy
is more important, as formalized by the concentrability coefficients.


                                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                            1.0
           1.0

                                                                                            0.8
           0.8

                                                                                            0.6


                                                                                 Accuracy
           0.6
Accuracy


           0.4                                                                              0.4


           0.2                                                                              0.2          Transition
                                          Transition
                                          Reward (OPRL Uncertainty)                                      Reward (OPRL Uncertainty)
                                          Reward (Sim-OPRL)                                              Reward (Sim-OPRL)
           0.0                                                                              0.0
                 0       20       40         60         80        100                             100                         101                       102
                          Number of Offline Trajectories                                                Density ratio coefficient d * (s, a)/d (s, a)
                 (a) As a function of offline dataset size.                                       (b) As a function of optimal coverage.

Figure 7: Transition and preference model accuracy as function of the properties of the observational data
(Star MDP). Preference elicitation is carried out until 10 preferences are queried. Mean and 95% confidence
intervals over 20 experiments. Note that the transition model is the same for the two methods, as they have
access to the same dataset.

Table 5: Sample complexity Np with Sim-OPRL as a function of dataset optimality, to reach a suboptimal-
ity gap of ϵ = 20 over normalized returns for the D4RL HalfCheetah environment. Mean and 95% confidence
interval over 6 experiments.

                     Offline Dataset                           OPRL Uniform                  OPRL Uncertainty                    Sim-OPRL
                     HalfCheetah-Random                               108 ± 9                            71 ± 8                      50 ± 10
                     HalfCheetah-Medium                               63 ± 8                             49 ± 6                      36 ± 8
                     HalfCheetah-Medium-Expert                        47 ± 8                             45 ± 6                       30 ± 8

Table 6: Policy performance for a fixed preference budget (Np = 30) for different D4RL HalfCheetah
datasets. Normalized environment returns, mean and 95% confidence interval over 6 experiments.

                     Offline Dataset                           OPRL Uniform                  OPRL Uncertainty                    Sim-OPRL
                     HalfCheetah-Random                                 17 ± 7                          47 ± 10                      49 ± 9
                     Halfcheetah-Medium                                 43 ± 6                           63 ± 6                      69 ± 7
                     Halfcheetah-Medium-Expert                          57 ± 6                           72 ± 6                      80 ± 6


To complement the analysis with a more complex environment, we also ran different preference
elicitation algorithms on D4RL HalfCheetah datasets of varying optimality. In Table 5, we report the
number of preference samples needed to achieve a target suboptimality with these different datasets.
We reach the same conclusion as above: fewer preferences are needed as the dataset becomes more
optimal.
In Table 6, we report policy performance for a fixed preference budget. With a fixed preference
budget, policies learned from suboptimal observational datasets achieve lower returns, due to the
worse quality of the transition model. Shin et al. (2022) reach similar conclusions when evaluating
policy performance under different OPRL methods (in their Table 2).


F                B ROADER I MPACT

Better preference elicitation strategies for offline reinforcement learning have the potential to facili-
tate and improve decision-making in real-world safety-critical domains like healthcare or economics,
by reducing reliance on direct environment interaction and reducing human effort in providing feed-
back. Potential downsides could include the amplification of biases in the offline data, potentially
leading to suboptimal or unfair policies. Thorough evaluation is therefore crucial to mitigate this
before deploying models in such real-world applications. In addition, human preferences may not


                                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


be fully captured by binary comparisons. As noted in our conclusion, we hope that future work will
explore richer feedback mechanisms to better model complex decision-making objectives.


                                               29
