Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DICE: DATA I NFLUENCE C ASCADE IN D ECENTRAL -
IZED L EARNING

 Tongtian Zhu , Wenhao Li & Can Wang                              Fengxiang He
 Zhejiang University                                              University of Edinburgh
 {raiden,wenhao-li,wcan}@zju.edu.cn                               F.He@ed.ac.uk



                                           A BSTRACT
         Decentralized learning offers a promising approach to crowdsource data consump-
         tions and computational workloads across geographically distributed compute
         interconnected through peer-to-peer networks, accommodating the exponentially
         increasing demands. However, proper incentives are still in absence, considerably
         discouraging participation. Our vision is that a fair incentive mechanism relies
         on fair attribution of contributions to participating nodes, which faces non-trivial
         challenges arising from the localized connections making influence ŌĆ£cascadeŌĆØ in a
         decentralized network. To overcome this, we design the first method to estimate
         Data Influence CascadE (DICE) in a decentralized environment. Theoretically, the
         framework derives tractable approximations of influence cascade over arbitrary
         neighbor hops, suggesting the influence cascade is determined by an interplay of
         data, communication topology, and the curvature of loss landscape. DICE also
         lays the foundations for applications including selecting suitable collaborators and
         identifying malicious behaviors. Project page is available at   DICE.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have seen remarkable progress in recent years (Guo et al., 2025;
OpenAI, 2024; Dubey et al., 2024; DeepMind, 2024; Anthropic, 2024), surpassing human on key
benchmarks (Maslej et al., 2024). The compute scaling, highlighted by Ho et al. (2024) as a major
reason of the successes, is estimated by Epoch AI to increase four to five times annually in cutting-
edge models (Sevilla & Rolda╠ün, 2024). This dramatic computational demand requires substantial
financial investments; for example, training OpenAIŌĆÖs GPT-4 requires approximately $78 million in
compute costs (Maslej et al., 2024). Such exorbitant expenses are far beyond the affordability of most
smaller players, making tech giants increasingly dominant.
Currently, large-scale training and inference processes are primarily performed in expensive data
centers. Decentralized training, echoing swarm intelligence (Bonabeau et al., 1999; Mavrovouniotis
et al., 2017), offers a cost-efficient alternative avenue by crowd-sourcing computational workload
to decentralized compute nodes (Yuan et al., 2022; Jaghouar et al., 2024). One notable example
showcasing decentralized computingŌĆÖs computational potential is the Bitcoin eco-system which
virtually distributes jobs requiring instantaneous 16 GW power consumption (CCAF, 2023).
Despite profound potential advantages, contributing to decentralized training incurs non-negligible
costs for participants, raising a natural question: What motivates edge participants to engage in
decentralized training? Game theory suggests that when appropriate incentives exist, self-interested
(rational) players can be keen to contribute for socially desirable outcomes. It is thus essential to
design a proper incentive mechanism to unleash the collectively massive computational potential of
decentralized nodes. Our vision is that such incentive mechanism relies on accurate quantification of
contributions from players. This leads to the following problem:

              How to quantify individual contributions in decentralized learning?

Quantifying the contributions (or ŌĆ£influenceŌĆØ) to the learned model has been well studied in the
centralized paradigm (Koh & Liang, 2017a; Pruthi et al., 2020). However, it is still largely untouched
in understanding and measuring data influence in fully decentralized environments. Unlike centralized


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: A semantic visualization of influence cascade in decentralized learning with ResNet-18 on
CIFAR-10. The illustration depicts a 16-node communication topology (see Figure D.25), where
node sizes represent DICE-E influence scores (see Theorem 2). Influence originates from the stem
node and propagates through the network, weakening over distance, akin to ŌĆ£ripples in waterŌĆØ. This
highlights how data contribution extends beyond local nodes, shaped by the communication topology.

scenarios, where data influence is computed on a single model statically, decentralized learning relies
on localized, indirect communications on a perhaps sparse network ŌĆō the influence of data on one
node impacts its own model, propagates to its neighbors through iterative parameter exchanges, and
cascades to multi-hop neighbors. We term this mechanism as cascading influence (see Figure 1).
Existing data influence estimators tailored for centralized settings assume that influence is computed
within a single model and do not account for its recursive propagation through parameter exchange.
As a result, they are not applicable to decentralized learning, where data influence extends beyond
direct neighbors to multi-hop neighbors.
To address this challenge, we propose a Data Influence CascadE (DICE), the first work for measuring
the influence in a decentralized learning environment. We make contributions as follows:
ŌĆó Conceptual contributions: DICE introduces the concept of a ground-truth data influence for
  decentralized learning, integrating direct and indirect contributions to capture influence propagation
  across multiple hops during training (see Definition 3).
ŌĆó Theoretical contributions: Building on this foundation, we derive tractable approximations of
  ground-truth DICE for an arbitrary number of neighbor hops, establishing a foundational framework
  to systematically characterize the flow of influence across decentralized networks. These theoretical
  results uncover, for the first time, that data influence in decentralized learning extends beyond the
  data itself and the local model, as seen in centralized training. Instead, it is a joint product of three
  critical factors: the original data, the topological importance of the data keeper, and the curvature
  information of intermediate nodes mediating propagation (see Theorem 2).
We anticipate that our DICE framework will pave the way for novel incentive mechanism designs and
the establishment of economic opportunities for decentralized learning, such as data and parameter
markets. DICE also holds significant potential to address critical challenges of identifying new
suitable collaborators, and detecting free-riders. We envision these applications will contribute to a
scalable, autonomous, and reciprocal decentralized learning eco-system.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    R ELATED WORK

Data Influence Estimation. As high-quality data becomes increasingly critical in modern machine
learning (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Penedo et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Villalobos et al., 2024),
understanding its influence has emerged as a key research direction (Sorscher et al., 2022; Grosse
et al., 2023). Data influence estimation quantifies the contribution of training data to model predictions
(Chen et al., 2024a; Ilyas et al., 2024), supporting incentive mechanisms and applications in few-shot
learning (Park et al., 2021), dataset pruning (Yang et al., 2023), distillation (Loo et al., 2023), fairness
(Li & Liu, 2022), machine unlearning (Sekhari et al., 2021), explainability (Koh & Liang, 2017b;
Grosse et al., 2023), and security (Demontis et al., 2019; Hammoudeh & Lowd, 2022).
Existing methods fall into static and dynamic categories. Static approaches, including retraining-
based methods (e.g., leave-one-out (Cook, 1977), Shapley value (Shapley, 1953), Datamodels (Ilyas
et al., 2022)) and one-point methods (e.g., influence functions (Koh & Liang, 2017b)), estimate
influence post-training. While theoretically grounded, these methods cannot characterize dynamic
influence during training. Dynamic approaches address this limitation by tracking model parameter
evolution (Charpiat et al., 2019). Notable methods include TracIn (Pruthi et al., 2020) and In-Run
Data Shapley (Wang et al., 2024), which average gradient similarities over time. Recent advances
(Nickl et al., 2023) leverage memory-perturbation equations to extend dynamic influence estimation
to various optimization algorithms. For a more detailed background, please refer to Appendix A.1.
However, existing methods primarily focus on centralized training. To the best of our knowledge, the
most closely related work is by Terashita & Hara (2022), who propose a decentralized hyper-gradient
method and offer novel insights into using hyper-gradients to compute data influence. Nevertheless,
their estimation method is static and cannot capture the influence cascade in decentralized training.
In contrast, our framework, DICE, is specifically designed for fully decentralized environments,
providing a fine-grained characterization of influence propagation unique to these settings.
Incentivized Decentralized Learning. Most existing incentive mechanisms for collaborative learning
are designed for federated learning (Zeng et al., 2021). For instance, Wang et al. (2023b) propose
an Incentive Collaboration Learning (ICL) framework to promote collaboration. Their focus is on
mechanism design rather than the precise quantification of individual contributions. In federated
learning, the Shapley value has been effectively utilized to quantify participant contributions (Jia
et al., 2019; Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Wang et al., 2019; 2020). Our approach differs fundamentally
in two key aspects: first, we focus on fully decentralized settings without central servers, although
our framework supports federated learning scenarios (see Algorithm 1); second, our work considers
influence cascade between participants, an completely new perspective that has not been explored
in existing literature. Regrading decentralized learning, we are only aware of the work by Yu et al.
(2023) presenting a blockchain-based incentive mechanism for fully decentralized learning. However,
their mechanism relies on smart contracts and differs from ours.



3    N OTATIONS AND P RELIMINARIES

This section introduces notations and essential preliminaries for decentralized learning. This work
focuses on the most studied form of decentralized learning: data parallelism with only peer-level
communication. For more detailed background, please refer to Appendix A.2.
We consider a general personalized distributed optimization problem over a connected graph G =
(V, E), where V represents the set of participants and E denotes the communication links between
them. The participants collaboratively minimize a weighted sum of local personalized objectives
(T. Dinh et al., 2020; Hanzely & Richta╠ürik, 2020):
                                             "                       #
                                                      X
                                  min         L(╬Ė) Ōē£      qk Lk (╬Ėk ) ,                       (1)
                               ╬Ė={╬Ėk ŌłłRd }kŌłłV
                                                          kŌłłV
                       P
where qk Ōēź 0 with kŌłłV qk = 1, and each local objective Lk (╬Ėk ) = Ezk Ōł╝Dk [L(╬Ėk ; zk )] is
defined by the expectation over the local data distribution Dk . Empirical risk minimization involves


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


optimizing the sample average approximation:
                                                                                    n
                                                                                    k
                                      X                                        1 X
                        L╠é(╬Ė) =             qk L╠ék (╬Ėk ) where L╠ék (╬Ėk ) =            L(╬Ėk ; zki ).                    (2)
                                                                               nk i=1
                                      kŌłłV

Here, nk is the number of samples in participant k, and {zki }ni=1
                                                                k
                                                                   are drawn from Dk .

           Server

                    Communication                                                                     Local training


                     Local training
                                                                                                           Participant


                                                                                                      Communication

         Participants

  (a) Server-based Learning                                      (b) Decentralized Learning

      Figure 2: A comparative illustration of server-based learning versus decentralized learning.
                                                                         P
Decentralized learning aims to minimize the global objective l(╬Ė) = kŌłłV qk lk (╬Ėk ) with only
local computations and gossip communications among neighboring participants (Tsitsiklis et al.,
1986; Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009). The communication protocol is governed by a weighted adjacency
matrix W Ōłł [0, 1]n├Śn , where Wk,j Ōēź 0 represents the strength of connection from participant j to
participant k, with Wk,j > 0 if (k, j) Ōłł E. This matrix characterizes the communication topology,
thereby defining how information propagatesP through the network (see Figure A.1). In this paper, W
                                               n
is designed to be row-stochastic, satisfying j=1 Wk,j = 1 for all i Ōłł V 1 . Decentralized learning
alternates between local optimization and gossip-based parameter aggregation, as shown below:

Algorithm 1 Decentralized Learning with Flexible Gossip and Optimization
Require: G = (V, E), {╬Ėk0 }kŌłłV , optimizer Ok , number of communication rounds T , and mixing
    matrix distributions W t (ŌłĆt Ōłł [T ])
 1: for t = 1 to T do in parallel for all participants k Ōłł V
 2:      Local Update:
                                                                                    t+ 1
 3:       Sample zkt Ōł╝ Dk , update parameters with optimizer Ok : ╬Ėk 2 ŌåÉ Ok (╬Ėkt , zkt )
 4:        Gossip Averaging:
                     t+ 1                                        t+ 21
 5:       Send ╬Ėk 2 to {l | Wl,k > 0} and receive ╬Ėj
                                               from {j | Wk,j > 0}.
                                                                       t+ 1
      Sample W Ōł╝ W , perform gossip averaging: ╬Ėkt+1 ŌåÉ jŌłłNin (k) Wk,j
                            t         t                             t
                                                      P
 6:                                                                   ╬Ėj 2
    End for

Remark 1. Algorithm 1 provides a flexible framework for decentralized learning with arbitrary
optimizers and randomized gossip. A special case of this framework is decentralized stochastic
gradient descent (DSGD) (Yuan et al., 2016a; Lian et al., 2017; Koloskova et al., 2020), where the
                                                               t+ 1
optimizer Ok performs a simple stochastic gradient step: ╬Ėk 2 ŌåÉ ╬Ėkt ŌłÆ ╬Ę t ŌłćL(╬Ėkt ; zkt ), with ╬Ę t
being the learning rate. Another notable special case is FedAVG (McMahan et al., 2017), which
corresponds to the standard server-based learning setting, where a central server collects and averages
model updates from all participants in each round. Mathematically, this is equivalent to using a fully
connected and uniform mixing matrix in Algorithm 1, i.e., Wk,j t
                                                                   ŌēĪ n1 11T (see Figure 2 for a visual
comparison and its connection to decentralized learning). Therefore, the framework is applicable to
both federated and decentralized learning paradigms, although our primary focus remains on fully
decentralized learning without a central server.
   1
     The weighted adjacency matrix W is typically assumed to be doubly-stochastic. The row-stochastic assumption is
weaker, yet the convergence of decentralized SGD is still guaranteed (Yuan et al., 2019; Xin et al., 2019).


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     DATA I NFLUENCE C ASCADES

In this section, we introduce DICE, a comprehensive framework for measuring data influence in
decentralized environments. Subsection 4.1 introduces the ground-truth influence measures designed
for decentralized learning and Subsection 4.2 provides their dynamic gradient-based estimations.

4.1    G ROUND - TRUTH I NFLUENCE IN D ECENTRALIZED L EARNING

To ensure a logical and coherent flow, we first introduce the fundamental concepts of data influence
in centralized settings and then discuss the significant challenges involved in extending these ideas to
decentralized environments. In conventional centralized setups, the influence of an individual data
instance can be assessed by evaluating the counterfactual change in learning performance through
leave-one-out retraining (LOO) (Cook, 1977), defined as follows:
Definition 1 (Leave-one-out Influence).

                                      ILOO (z, z ŌĆ▓ ) =L(╬Ė ŌłŚ ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ė\z
                                                                         ŌłŚ
                                                                            ; z ŌĆ▓ ),                                     (3)

where z denotes the training data instance under influence assessment, z ŌĆ▓ is the loss-evaluating
instance, ╬Ė ŌłŚ and ╬Ė\z
                   ŌłŚ
                      are the models trained on the entire dataset S and S \ {z}, respectively.

Intuitively, Equation (3) quantifies the influence of z by its individual impact on test loss reduction.
A smaller LOO value indicates a significant contribution to learning, which aligns with the concept
that the data influence is reflected in its ability to enhance model performance. LOO influence is
often considered as the ŌĆ£gold standardŌĆØ for evaluating how well influence estimators approximate the
ground-truth influence in the data influence literature (Koh & Liang, 2017b; Basu et al., 2021).
However, extending LOO to decentralized scenarios introduces non-trivial challenges due to the
distributed nature and the localized connections in decentralized learning, reflected in Equation (2)
and Algorithm 1. In centralized setups, the core idea of LOO is to link data influence to variations in
loss or parameter outcomes. In contrast, decentralized learning systems involve multiple participants
sharing model parameters through inter-participant communications. As a result, alterations in model
parameters caused by a data-level modification propagate throughout the whole network.
A natural way to measure the influence of one participant in such collaborative environments is
through evaluating its contribution to the whole community (Wang et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020), which
aligns with the customer-centric principle (Drucker, 1985) in determining value2 . In decentralized
learning, when a participant transmits its training assets (e.g., model parameters or gradients) to
neighboring participantsŌĆöakin to offering a productŌĆöthe recipients derive possible utility from
these training assets and may provide reciprocal feedback, such as sharing their own assets in return.
This dynamic positions the neighbors as ŌĆ£customersŌĆØ, thereby entrusting them with the rights to
determine the value of the assets provided by the supplier. With these insights in mind, we recognize
that assessing data influence in decentralized scenarios is far more complex, as summarized below:

 Key observations: In decentralized learning,
 1) neighbors who serves as customers hold the rights to determine data influence;
 2) data influence is not static but spreads across participants through gossips during training.

Unfortunately, existing static estimators only calculate the loss change after training and thus cannot
characterize the dynamic transmission of data influence within the whole decentralized learning
community. Based on the above discussion, we posit that a ŌĆ£gold-standardŌĆØ influence measure in
decentralized scenarios should satisfy the following requirements:
ŌĆó Quantify community-level influence: Measure the impact of training data instances on the collective
  utility of the community.
ŌĆó Depend on training dynamics: Measure the influence based on the training process to characterize
  the propagation of influence on decentralized networks.
     2
       Peter DruckerŌĆÖs customer-centric value principle from Innovation and Entrepreneurship states, ŌĆ£Quality in a product or
service is not what the supplier puts in. It is what the customer gets out of it.ŌĆØ.


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the following, we introduce the ground-truth influence measures tailored to the requirements of
decentralized environments, termed as the ground-truth influence cascade (DICE-GT).
Definition 2 (One-hop Ground-truth Influence). The one-hop DICE-GT value quantifies the influence
of a data instance zjt from participant j on a loss-evaluating instance z ŌĆ▓ within itself and its immediate
neighbors. Formally, for a given participant j Ōłł V:
                                    t+ 1

   (1)
                                                                       X
 IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = qj L(╬Ėj 2 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ ) +                     qk L(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėk\z
                                                                                                         t+1     ŌĆ▓
                                                                                                             t; z ) ,
                                                                                                            j
                         |                   {z                    } kŌłłN (1) (j)
                                                            t           out
                           direct marginal contribution of zj to j   |                    {z                       }
                                                                          indirect marginal contribution of zjt to one-hop neighbors

           t+ 12
where ╬Ėj           denotes the updated model parameters of j after training on zjt at iteration t (see Algo-
                                                                 (1)
rithm 1). For each one-hop out-neighbor k Ōłł Nout (j), ╬Ėkt+1 denotes the averaged model parameters
                                                   t+ 12                             t+1
after receiving updated parameters {╬Ėl     |Wk,l > 0} influenced by zjt , while ╬Ėk\z     t represents the
                                                                                        j
                                                              t+1                          t+ 21
model parameters of k without the influence from zjt , i.e., ╬Ėk\z                     t             t
                                                                                                       ╬Ėlt .
                                                                      P
                                                                  t =  lŌłłNout (k)\j Wk,l ╬Ėl      +Wk,j
                                                                                  j

The economic intuition behind the DICE-GT value is that it captures both the direct marginal
contribution of a data instance to itself and its subsequent impact on immediate neighbors. Specially,
                        t+ 1
the first term L(z ŌĆ▓ ; ╬Ėj 2 )ŌłÆL(z ŌĆ▓ ; ╬Ėjt ) captures the inter-node direct influence of training data instance
zjt on the test loss change at node j, which corresponds to the TracInIdeal influence in (Pruthi et al.,
2020) designed for centralized scenarios. The second term kŌłłN (1) (j) (L(z ŌĆ▓ ; ╬Ėkt+1 ) ŌłÆ L(z ŌĆ▓ ; ╬Ėk\z   t
                                                                  P
                                                                                                            t ))
                                                                         out                                j
measures the intra-node influence unique in decentralized learning, which aggregates the indirect
influences on all one-hop neighbors, i.e., direct neighbors, of node j.
In decentralized learning environments, data influence propagates not only to immediate neighbors
but also to multi-hop neighbors through the communication topology. To characterize this multi-hop
influence, we extend the ground-truth influence cascade measure to arbitrary r-hop neighbors.
Definition 3 (Multi-hop Ground-truth Influence). The multi-hop DICE-GT value quantifies the
cumulative influence of a data instance z on a loss-evaluating instance z ŌĆ▓ across all nodes within
r-hop neighborhoods of participant j. Formally, for a given participant j Ōłł V:
                                                            r
                              t+ 1
                                                           X
 (r)
                                                                                X
IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = qj L(╬Ėj 2 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ ) +                              qk L(╬Ėkt+s ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėk\z
                                                                                                                 t+s     ŌĆ▓
                                                                                                                     t; z )  ,
                                                                                                                               j
                                                                       s=1 kŌłłN (s) (j)
                                                                                  out


            (s)
where Nout (j) denotes the set of s-hop out-neighbors of j (please refer to Appendix A.3 for details
of high-order neighbors). Here ╬Ėkt+s and ╬Ėk\z
                                          t+s
                                              t represents the parameters of node k at iteration t + s
                                                             j
when the influence from zjt are included and excluded, respectively.

Analogous to Definition 2, the first term captures the direct influence of data zjt on the loss at node j.
The subsequent summation aggregates the indirect influences on all multi-hop neighbors up to r steps
away from node j 3 . The reason to measure test loss change at the t + s step is that the impact of zjt
                              (s)
propagating to k Ōłł Nout (j) requires s steps. This layered formulation accounts for the multi-hop
cascading effects through the network up to the specified order r.


4.2     DYNAMIC G RADIENT- BASED E STIMATIONS

To meet the second aforementioned requirement of decentralized learning, we design dynamic
gradient-based estimators for DICE-GT, called the influence cascade estimations (DICE-E).


     3
       We note that the future effect of zjt on its local model ╬Ėjt+s over s = 2, . . . , r iterations is included within the indirect
influence terms, as a node is inherently considered part of its own arbitrary-order neighbor.


                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Proposition 1 (Approximation of One-hop DICE-GT). The one-hop DICE-GT value (see Defini-
 tion 2) can be linearly approximated as follow:
   (1)
                                                               X
 IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = ŌłÆ qj ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ       t
                                                                 qk Wk,j ŌłćL(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ),
                                                                                (1)
                                                                       kŌłłNout (j)

 where Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) = Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt . The proof is included in Appendix C.1.

Additivity. The one-hop DICE-E influence measure is additive over training instances. Specifically,
for a mini-batch Bjt from participant j, the total influence is the sum of individual influences:

                                         (1)                                   (1)
                                                                 X
                                     IDICE-E (Bjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) =                IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ).                                           (4)
                                                                zjt ŌłłBjt

The additivity provides guarantees for efficient computation of DICE-E score for large mini-batches.
We can then extend the influence approximation to multi-hop neighbors in decentralized learning and
show how the influence of a data instance cascades over the decentralized learning network.

                                                                                                                         (r)
 Theorem 2 (Approximation of r-hop DICE-GT). The r-hop DICE-GT influence IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ )
 (see Definition 3) can be approximated as follows:

                                                                               Žü
                                 r
                                                                                                   !
       (r)
                                 X             X                               Y                                                      ŌŖż
      IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = ŌłÆ                              t
                                                          ╬Ę qkŽü                       Wkt+sŌłÆ1
                                                                                         s ,ksŌłÆ1
                                                                                                              ŌłćL ╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                                                                                    Žü
                                                                                                                       ; zŌĆ▓
                                 Žü=0 (k ,...,k )ŌłłP (Žü)                         s=1
                                          1    Žü    j
                                                                           |           {z           }        |           {z            }
                                                                     communication graph-related term                test gradient

                                          Žü
                                                                                                    !
                                          Y
                                                        t+sŌłÆ1
                                                                 H(╬Ėkt+sŌłÆ1 ; zkt+sŌłÆ1                             Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt )

                                 ├Ś             I ŌłÆ╬Ę                   s         s
                                                                                     )                                                 .
                                         s=2
                                     |                            {z                                   }      |       {z        }
                                                        curvature-related term                             optimization-related term

                                                                                      (Žü)
 where Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) = Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt , k0 = j. Here Pj                            denotes the set of all sequences
                                    (1)
 (k1 , . . . , kŽü ) such that ks Ōłł Nout (ksŌłÆ1 ) for s = 1, . . . , Žü (see Definition A.7) and H(╬Ėkt+s
                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                      ; zkt+s
                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                              )
                                                                          t+s             t+s
 is the Hessian matrix of L with respect to ╬Ė evaluated at ╬Ėks and data zks . For the cases
 when Žü = 0 and Žü = 1, the relevant product expressions are defined as identity matrices, thereby
 ensuring that the r-hop DICE-E remains well-defined. Full proof is deferred to Appendix C.3.

Multi-hop DICE-E characterizes the cascading effects of data influence through multiple ŌĆ£layersŌĆØ
of communication. In this context, the influence of a data instance from participant j can propagate
through a sequence of intermediate nodes, reaching participants that are Žü hops away.
Influence Dynamics: Exponential Decay and Topological Dependency. Theorem 2 demonstrates
         multi-hop influence of a data instance zj t is governedQby the product of communication
that the Q
                                                                     Žü
weights s = 1Žü W ks , ks ŌłÆ 1t+sŌłÆ1 and Hessian-related terms s=2 (I ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+sŌłÆ1 Hks t+sŌłÆ1 ). This
indicates that data influence in decentralized learning depends on the curvature of intermediate nodes
and decays exponentially    with each additional hop. Nodes with higher topological importance (e.g.,
node j with large j = 1n Wj,k ) propagate their data influence more widely and with greater impact
                   P
on global utility (see Figure 1). These characteristics underscore the interplay between the original
data, the loss landscape curvature, and communication topology in shaping data influence.

4.3   P RACTICAL A PPLICATIONS

In idealized scenarios, participants may seek to estimate the influence of their high-order neighbors
on their local utility improvement. In practice, one-hop DICE-E emerges as a more suitable choice


                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


due to its computational efficiency. Based on Proposition 1, we derive the peer-level contribution,
which we refer to as the proximal influence.
Definition 4 (Proximal Influence). The proximal influence of a data instance zjt from participant j
on participant k at iteration t is defined as follows:
                           k,j
                          IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = ŌłÆ╬Ę t Wk,j
                                                       t
                                                           qk ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; zjt )ŌŖż ŌłćL(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ ).                               (5)

This term quantifies the influence of the data instance zjt from participant j on the loss reduction
experienced by its immediate neighbor k. Importantly, under the information sharing protocol defined
                                                    t
in Algorithm 1, participant k has access to qk , Wk,j , ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; zjt ), and ŌłćL(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ ).4 Therefore,
each participant can compute the proximal contributions of its neighbors. The proximal influence can
be utilized in the following scenarios:
Collaborator Selection. In decentralized learning, local data remains private and only local parameter
communication is permitted. The absence of a central authority complicates the problem of selecting
the most suitable neighbors with high-quality data. Fortunately, DICE offers a mechanism for
participants to efficiently estimate the contributions of their neighbors with proximal influence. By
assessing the proximal influence of their neighbors, participants can identify the potential collaborators
that have the most significant positive impact on their learning process.
To ensure reciprocal collaboration (Gouldner, 1960; Fehr & Ga╠łchter, 2000; Sundararajan & Krichene,
2023), participants can compute reciprocity factors, which evaluate the mutual balance of influence.
Definition 5 (Reciprocity Factors). The reciprocity factor is defined in two forms:
1. Proximal Reciprocity Factor: The reciprocity factor between participants j and k at iteration t is

                                    t
                                                  t
                                              qk Wk,j ŌłćL(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; zkt )
                                   Rk,j =         t ŌłćL(╬Ė t+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż ŌłćL(╬Ė t ; z t )
                                                                                             .                                (6)
                                              qj Wj,k   j                 k     j


2. Neighborhood Reciprocity Factor: To evaluate reciprocity at the community level, the neighbor-
hood reciprocity factor for participant j at iteration t is defined as:
                                                  t
                                                    ŌłćL(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; zjt )
                             P
                                           q Wk,j
                                 kŌłłNout (j) k
                                     (1)
                         t
                      Rj = P                     t ŌłćL(╬Ė t+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż ŌłćL(╬Ė t ; z t )
                                                                                     .        (7)
                                  lŌłłN (j) l
                                     (1)    q Wj,l         j              l    j
                                              in



The proximal reciprocity factor measures the balance of influence between two participants, with val-
ues near unity indicating equitable mutual contributions. Significant deviations suggest an imbalance,
helping participants refine their collaboration strategies. The neighborhood reciprocity factor extends
this concept to a participantŌĆÖs local community, evaluating the balance between influence inflow and
outflow. These metrics support participants in adjusting their engagement and aids the community in
managing membership, such as admitting new members or excluding underperforming participants.

5     E XPERIMENTS

This section presents the experimental results, with implementation details outlined in Appendix D.1.

Influence Alignment We evaluate the alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (see Definition 2)
                                                                                           (1)
and its first-order approximation, one-hop DICE-E (see Proposition 1). One-hop DICE-E IDICE-E  (Bjt ,z ŌĆ▓ )
                                                                            t
is computed as the sum of one-sample DICE-E within the mini-batch Bj thanks to the additivity
(see Equation (4)). DICE-GT IDICE-GT(1) (Bjt ,zŌĆ▓ ) is calculated by measuring the loss reduction after
removing Bjt from node j at the t-th iteration. As shown in Figure 3, each plot contains 30 points,
     4
       In decentralized learning literature, it is common for each participant to share only local parameters with its neighboring
participants (Lian et al., 2017; Koloskova et al., 2020). We note that sharing local gradients with neighbors maintains the
decentralized learning paradigm and does not significantly compromise privacy, as a participant can reconstruct the gradients
of its neighbors using the shared parameters (Mrini et al., 2024).


                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on a
32-node ring graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of Tiny ImageNet. Models are trained for 5
epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 0.1.


with each point representing the result of a single comparison of the ground-truth and estimated
influence. We can observe from Figure 3 that DICE-E closely tracks DICE-GT under different settings.
The alignment becomes even stronger on simpler data set including CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, as
detailed in Appendix D.2. These results demonstrate that DICE-E provides a strong approximation
of DICE-GT, achieving consistent alignment across datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and Tiny
ImageNet) and model architectures (CNN and MLP). Further validation of this alignment is provided
in Appendix D.2 to corroborate the robustness of one-hop DICE-E under changing batch sizes,
learning rates, and training epochs.

Anomaly Detection DICE identifies malicious neighbors, referred to as anomalies, by evaluating
their proximal influence, which estimates the reduction in test loss caused by a single neighbor. A
high proximal influence score indicates that a neighbor increases the test loss, negatively impacting
the learning process. In our setup, anomalies are generated through random label flipping or by
adding random Gaussian noise to features, please kindly refer to (Zhang et al., 2024). Figure 3
illustrates that the most anomalies (in red) are readily detectable with proximal influence values.
Additional results in Appendix D.3 further validate the reliability of this approach.


Figure 4: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of
0.1. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by random label flipping, while the other four are normal participants.


Influence Cascade The topological dependency of DICE-E in our theory reveals the ŌĆ£power
asymmetriesŌĆØ (Blau, 1964; Magee & Galinsky, 2008) in decentralized learning. To support the
theoretical finding, we examine the one-hop DICE-E values of the same batch on participants with
vastly different topological importance. Figure 1 illustrates the one-hop DICE-E influence scores
of an identical data batch across participants during decentralized training of a ResNet-18 model
on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Node sizes represent the one-hop DICE-E influence scores, quantifying
how a single batch impacts other participants in the network. The dominant nodes (e.g., those with
larger outgoing communication weights in W ) exhibit significantly higher influence, as shown in
Appendix D.4. These visualizations underscore the critical role of topological properties in shaping
data influence in decentralized learning, demonstrating how the structure of the communication
matrix W determines the asymmetries in influence.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we introduce DICE, the first comprehensive framework for quantifying data influence in
fully decentralized learning environments. By modeling influence propagation across multiple hops,
DICE reveals how local data contributions extend beyond immediate neighbors to reach non-adjacent
neighbors. Mathematically, DICE formalizes how data influence cascades through the communication
network, uncovering for the first time the intricate interplay between original data, communication
topology, and the curvature of the optimization landscape in shaping data influence.
Future Work. Beyond its theoretical contributions, DICE holds significant potential for practical
applications. By identifying influential contributors, DICE provides a foundation for designing
fair incentive schemes that ensure equitable attribution of contributions, thereby promoting broader
participation in decentralized learning. Moreover, DICE could contribute to the development of
decentralized markets, including data markets (Huang et al., 2023), parameter markets (Fallah et al.,
2024), and compute markets (Kristensen et al., 2024), which serve as fundamental building blocks of
a broader decentralized learning ecosystem.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62476244), ZJU-
China Unicom Digital Security Joint Laboratory and the advanced computing resources provided by
the Supercomputing Center of Hangzhou City University.

R EFERENCES
Youssef Allouah, Anastasia Koloskova, Aymane El Firdoussi, Martin Jaggi, and Rachid Guerraoui.
  The privacy power of correlated noise in decentralized learning. In Proceedings of the 41st
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235, pp. 1115ŌĆō1143, 2024.
Anthropic. Introducing claude 3.5 sonnet. Anthropic News, 2024.              URL https://www.
  anthropic.com/news/claude-3-5-sonnet.
Samyadeep Basu, Xuchen You, and Soheil Feizi. On second-order group influence functions for
  black-box predictions. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2020.
Samyadeep Basu, Phil Pope, and Soheil Feizi. Influence functions in deep learning are fragile. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Peter M. Blau. Exchange and power in social life. 1964.
Eric Bonabeau, Marco Dorigo, and Guy Theraulaz. Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial
  Systems. Oxford University Press, 1999.
Marco Bornstein, Tahseen Rabbani, Evan Z Wang, Amrit Bedi, and Furong Huang. SWIFT: Rapid
 decentralized federated learning via wait-free model communication. In The Eleventh International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Alexander Borzunov, Dmitry Baranchuk, Tim Dettmers, Maksim Riabinin, Younes Belkada, Artem
  Chumachenko, Pavel Samygin, and Colin Raffel. Petals: Collaborative inference and fine-tuning
  of large models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), pp. 558ŌĆō568. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2023a.
Alexander Borzunov, Max Ryabinin, Artem Chumachenko, Dmitry Baranchuk, Tim Dettmers,
  Younes Belkada, Pavel Samygin, and Colin A Raffel. Distributed inference and fine-tuning of large
  language models over the internet. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.
Ying Cao, Zhaoxian Wu, Kun Yuan, and Ali H Sayed. On the trade-off between flatness and
  optimization in distributed learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.20006, 2024.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CCAF. Cambridge bitcoin electricity consumption index (CBECI). https://ccaf.io/cbnsi/
  cbeci, 2023.
Guillaume Charpiat, Nicolas Girard, Loris Felardos, and Yuliya Tarabalka. Input similarity from the
  neural network perspective. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Samprit Chatterjee, R. Dennis Cook, and Sanford Weisberg. Residuals and influence in regression.
  1982.
Daiwei Chen, Jane Zhang, and Ramya Korlakai Vinayak. Unraveling the impact of training
  samples. In ICLR Blogposts 2024, 2024a. URL https://iclr-blogposts.github.
  io/2024/blog/unraveling-the-impact-of-training-samples/. https://iclr-
  blogposts.github.io/2024/blog/unraveling-the-impact-of-training-samples/.
Lesi Chen, Haishan Ye, and Luo Luo. An efficient stochastic algorithm for decentralized nonconvex-
  strongly-concave minimax optimization. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, 2024b.
Xuxing Chen, Minhui Huang, Shiqian Ma, and Krishna Balasubramanian. Decentralized stochastic
  bilevel optimization with improved per-iteration complexity. In Proceedings of the 40th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202, pp. 4641ŌĆō4671. PMLR, 2023.
R. Dennis Cook. Detection of influential observation in linear regression. Technometrics, 19(1):
  15ŌĆō18, 1977.
Edwige Cyffers, Aure╠ülien Bellet, and Jalaj Upadhyay. Differentially private decentralized learning
  with random walks. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 235, pp. 9762ŌĆō9783, 2024.
Google DeepMind. Introducing gemini 2.0: our new ai model for the agentic era. The
 Keyword, 2024. URL https://blog.google/technology/google-deepmind/
  google-gemini-ai-update-december-2024/#gemini-2-0-flash.
Ambra Demontis, Marco Melis, Maura Pintor, Matthew Jagielski, Battista Biggio, Alina Oprea,
 Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Fabio Roli. Why do adversarial attacks transfer? explaining transferability
 of evasion and poisoning attacks. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19),
 2019.
Arthur Douillard, Qixuan Feng, Andrei A Rusu, Rachita Chhaparia, Yani Donchev, Adhiguna
  Kuncoro, MarcŌĆÖAurelio Ranzato, Arthur Szlam, and Jiajun Shen. Diloco: Distributed low-
  communication training of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08105, 2023.
Peter F. Drucker. Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Perennial Library, 1985.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Mathieu Even, Anastasia Koloskova, and Laurent Massoulie. Asynchronous SGD on graphs: a
 unified framework for asynchronous decentralized and federated optimization. In Proceedings of
 The 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2024.
Alireza Fallah, Michael I Jordan, Ali Makhdoumi, and Azarakhsh Malekian. On three-layer data
  markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09697, 2024.
Ernst Fehr and Simon Ga╠łchter. Fairness and retaliation: The economics of reciprocity. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 14(3):159ŌĆō181, 2000.
Shaopeng Fu, Fengxiang He, and Dacheng Tao. Knowledge removal in sampling-based bayesian
  inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Hongchang Gao and Heng Huang. Fast training method for stochastic compositional optimization
  problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25334ŌĆō25345, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hongchang Gao, Bin Gu, and My T. Thai. On the convergence of distributed stochastic bilevel
  optimization algorithms over a network. In Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 206, pp. 9238ŌĆō9281. PMLR, 2023.

Anissa Gardizy and Amir Efrati. Microsoft and OpenAI plot $100 billion stargate AI supercom-
  puter. The Information, 2024. URL https://www.theinformation.com/articles/
  microsoft-and-openai-plot-100-billion-stargate-ai-supercomputer.

Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

Avishek Ghosh, Jichan Chung, Dong Yin, and Kannan Ramchandran. An efficient framework for
  clustered federated learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Alvin W. Gouldner. The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American Sociological
  Review, 25(2):161ŌĆō178, 1960.

Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, et al. Studying large language model generalization
  with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03296, 2023.

Chuan Guo, Tom Goldstein, Awni Hannun, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Certified data removal
  from machine learning models. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2020.

Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
  Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
  via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.

Han Guo, Nazneen Rajani, Peter Hase, Mohit Bansal, and Caiming Xiong. FastIF: Scalable influence
  functions for efficient model interpretation and debugging. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2021.

Mert Gurbuzbalaban, Yuanhan Hu, Umut Simsekli, Kun Yuan, and Lingjiong Zhu. Heavy-tail
 phenomenon in decentralized sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06689, 2022.

Zayd Hammoudeh and Daniel Lowd. Identifying a training-set attackŌĆÖs target using renormalized
  influence estimation. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
  Communications Security, 2022.

Zayd Hammoudeh and Daniel Lowd. Training data influence analysis and estimation: a survey.
  Machine Learning, 113(5):2351ŌĆō2403, 2024.

Frank R. Hampel. The influence curve and its role in robust estimation. Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 69(346):383ŌĆō393, 1974.

Xiaochuang Han, Byron C. Wallace, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Explaining black box predictions and
  unveiling data artifacts through influence functions. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.

Filip Hanzely and Peter Richta╠ürik. Federated learning of a mixture of global and local models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2002.05516, 2020.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
  networks. In European conference on computer vision, 2016.

Lie He, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, and Martin Jaggi. Byzantine-robust decentralized learning via
  clippedgossip. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01545, 2022.

Anson Ho, Tamay Besiroglu, Ege Erdil, David Owen, Robi Rahman, Zifan Carl Guo, David Atkinson,
  Neil Thompson, and Jaime Sevilla. Algorithmic progress in language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.05812, 2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Thomas
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katherine Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia
  Guy, Simon Osindero, Kare╠ün Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Oriol Vinyals, Jack Rae, and Laurent Sifre.
  An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Tzu-Heng Huang, Harit Vishwakarma, and Frederic Sala. Train ŌĆÖn trade: Foundations of parameter
  markets. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Data-
  models: Understanding predictions with data and data with predictions. In Proceedings of the 39th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Andrew Ilyas, Kristian Georgiev, Logan Engstrom, and Sung Min (Sam) Park. Data attribution at
  scale, 2024. URL https://ml-data-tutorial.org/. ICML 2024 Tutorial.
Sami Jaghouar, Jack Min Ong, Manveer Basra, Fares Obeid, Jannik Straube, Michael Keiblinger,
  Elie Bakouch, Lucas Atkins, Maziyar Panahi, Charles Goddard, et al. Intellect-1 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01152, 2024.
Matthew Jagielski, Giorgio Severi, Niklas Pousette Harger, and Alina Oprea. Subpopulation data
 poisoning attacks. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
 Communications Security, 2021.
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nick Hynes, Nezihe Merve Gu╠łrel, Bo Li,
  Ce Zhang, Dawn Song, and Costas J. Spanos. Towards efficient data valuation based on the shapley
  value. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, 2019.
Heasung Kim, Hyeji Kim, and Gustavo De Veciana. Clustered federated learning via gradient-based
  partitioning. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1885ŌĆō1894. PMLR, 2017a.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017b.
Anastasia Koloskova, Nicolas Loizou, Sadra Boreiri, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. A unified
  theory of decentralized SGD with changing topology and local updates. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2020.
Lingjing Kong, Tao Lin, Anastasia Koloskova, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. Consensus control
  for decentralized deep learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021.
Jesper Kristensen, David Wender, and Carl Anthony. Commodification of compute. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.19261, 2024.
Alex Krizhevsky, G Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images (tech. rep.).
  University of Toronto, 2009.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 2015.
Batiste Le Bars, AurŌĆÖelien Bellet, Marc Tommasi, Erick Lavoie, and Anne-Marie Kermarrec. Refined
  convergence and topology learning for decentralized sgd with heterogeneous data. In Proceedings
  of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 206, pp.
  1672ŌĆō1702. PMLR, 25ŌĆō27 Apr 2023.
Batiste Le Bars, Aure╠ülien Bellet, Marc Tommasi, Kevin Scaman, and Giovanni Neglia. Improved
  stability and generalization guarantees of the decentralized SGD algorithm. In Proceedings of the
  41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yann LeCun, Le╠üon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278ŌĆō2324, 1998.
Peizhao Li and Hongfu Liu. Achieving fairness at no utility cost via data reweighing with influence.
  In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Yuanzhi Li, Se╠übastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023.
Xiangru Lian, Ce Zhang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Wei Zhang, and Ji Liu. Can decentralized
  algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for decentralized parallel stochastic
  gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Xiangru Lian, Wei Zhang, Ce Zhang, and Ji Liu. Asynchronous decentralized parallel stochastic
  gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Shayne Longpre, Robert Mahari, Ariel Lee, Campbell Lund, Hamidah Oderinwale, William Brannon,
  Nayan Saxena, Naana Obeng-Marnu, Tobin South, Cole Hunter, et al. Consent in crisis: The rapid
  decline of the ai data commons. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14933, 2024.
Noel Loo, Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, and Daniela Rus. Dataset distillation with convexified
  implicit gradients. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  22649ŌĆō22674, 2023.
Cassio G. Lopes and Ali H. Sayed. Diffusion least-mean squares over adaptive networks: Formulation
  and performance analysis. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 56(7), 2008.
Yucheng Lu and Christopher De Sa. Optimal complexity in decentralized training. In Proceedings of
  the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Joe C Magee and Adam D Galinsky. Social hierarchy: The self-reinforcing nature of power and
  status. Academy of Management Annals, 2(1):351ŌĆō398, 2008.
Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, Jae Ro, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Three approaches for
  personalization with applications to federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10619, 2020.
Enrique Toma╠üs Mart─▒╠ünez Beltra╠ün, Mario Quiles Pe╠ürez, Pedro Miguel Sa╠ünchez Sa╠ünchez, Sergio Lo╠üpez
  Bernal, Ge╠üro╠éme Bovet, Manuel Gil Pe╠ürez, Gregorio Mart─▒╠ünez Pe╠ürez, and Alberto Huertas Celdra╠ün.
  Decentralized federated learning: Fundamentals, state of the art, frameworks, trends, and chal-
  lenges. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 25(4):2983ŌĆō3013, 2023.
Nestor Maslej, Loredana Fattorini, Raymond Perrault, Vanessa Parli, Anka Reuel, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  John Etchemendy, Katrina Ligett, Terah Lyons, James Manyika, Juan Carlos Niebles, Yoav
  Shoham, Russell Wald, and Jack Clark. The AI index 2024 annual report. Technical report, AI
  Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University, 2024.
Michalis Mavrovouniotis, Changhe Li, and Shengxiang Yang. A survey of swarm intelligence for
 dynamic optimization: Algorithms and applications. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 33:
 1ŌĆō17, 2017.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. In Proceedings of
  the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2017.
Abdellah El Mrini, Edwige Cyffers, and Aure╠ülien Bellet. Privacy attacks in decentralized learning.
  In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Giorgi Nadiradze, Amirmojtaba Sabour, Peter Davies, Shigang Li, and Dan Alistarh. Asynchronous
  decentralized sgd with quantized and local updates. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021.
Angelia NediŌĆÖc and Alex Olshevsky. Distributed optimization over time-varying directed graphs.
 volume 60, pp. 601ŌĆō615. IEEE, 2014.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Angelia Nedic and Asuman Ozdaglar. Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimization.
  IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 54(1):48ŌĆō61, 2009.

Peter Nickl, Lu Xu, Dharmesh Tailor, Thomas Mo╠łllenhoff, and Mohammad Emtiyaz E Khan. The
  memory-perturbation equation: Understanding model's sensitivity to data. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.

OpenAI. Learning to reason with llms. OpenAI Blog, 2024. URL https://openai.com/
  index/learning-to-reason-with-llms/.

OpenAI.    Announcing the stargate project.                    https://openai.com/index/
  announcing-the-stargate-project/, 2025.

Seulki Park, Jongin Lim, Younghan Jeon, and Jin Young Choi. Influence-balanced loss for imbalanced
  visual classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), 2021.

Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Hamza Alobeidli,
 Alessandro Cappelli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb
  dataset for falcon LLM: Outperforming curated corpora with web data only. In Thirty-seventh
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023.

Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.

Dominic Richards et al. Graph-dependent implicit regularisation for distributed stochastic subgradient
  descent. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2020.

David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning internal representations by
  error propagation. MIT Press, 1986.

Max Ryabinin, Tim Dettmers, Michael Diskin, and Alexander Borzunov. SWARM parallelism:
 Training large models can be surprisingly communication-efficient. In Proceedings of the 40th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, pp. 29416ŌĆō29440. PMLR, 2023.

Felix Sattler, Klaus-Robert Mu╠łller, and Wojciech Samek. Clustered federated learning: Model-
  agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy constraints. IEEE Transactions on
  Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 32(8):3710ŌĆō3722, 2021.

Ali H. Sayed. Adaptation, Learning, and Optimization over Networks. Now Publishers, 2014.

Andrea Schioppa, Polina Zablotskaia, David Vilar, and Artem Sokolov. Scaling up influence functions.
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022.

Ayush Sekhari, Jayadev Acharya, Gautam Kamath, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Remember what
  you want to forget: Algorithms for machine unlearning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.

Jaime Sevilla and Edu Rolda╠ün.   Training compute of frontier ai models
   grows by 4-5x per year, 2024.      URL https://epochai.org/blog/
   training-compute-of-frontier-ai-models-grows-by-4-5x-per-year.

Lloyd S. Shapley. A value for n-person games. In Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume II,
  chapter 17. Princeton University Press, 1953.

Li Shen, Yan Sun, Zhiyuan Yu, Liang Ding, Xinmei Tian, and Dacheng Tao. On efficient training of
  large-scale deep learning models. ACM Comput. Surv., 57(3), 2024.

Abhishek Singha, Charles Lua, Gauri Guptaa, Ayush Chopraa, Jonas Blanca, Tzofi Klinghoffera,
  Kushagra Tiwarya, and Ramesh Raskara. A perspective on decentralizing ai. 2024.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari Morcos. Beyond neural
  scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Tao Sun, Dongsheng Li, and Bao Wang. Stability and generalization of decentralized stochastic
  gradient descent. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Mukund Sundararajan and Walid Krichene. Inflow, outflow, and reciprocity in machine learning. In
 Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Canh T. Dinh, Nguyen Tran, and Josh Nguyen. Personalized federated learning with moreau
  envelopes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Yuki Takezawa, Ryoma Sato, Han Bao, Kenta Niwa, and Makoto Yamada. Beyond exponential
  graph: Communication-efficient topologies for decentralized learning via finite-time convergence.
  In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Hanlin Tang, Xiangru Lian, Ming Yan, Ce Zhang, and Ji Liu. D2: Decentralized training over
  decentralized data. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2018.
Naoyuki Terashita and Satoshi Hara. Decentralized hyper-gradient computation over time-varying
  directed networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02129, 2022.
J. Tsitsiklis, D. Bertsekas, and M. Athans. Distributed asynchronous deterministic and stochastic
   gradient optimization algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 31(9):803ŌĆō812, 1986.
Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chervonenkis. Theory of Pattern Recognition. Nauka, Moscow, 1974.
Pablo Villalobos, Anson Ho, Jaime Sevilla, Tamay Besiroglu, Lennart Heim, and Marius Hobbhahn.
  Position: Will we run out of data? Limits of LLM scaling based on human-generated data. In
  Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Thijs Vogels, Lie He, Anastasiia Koloskova, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Tao Lin, Sebastian U Stich,
  and Martin Jaggi. Relaysum for decentralized deep learning on heterogeneous data. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:28004ŌĆō28015, 2021.
Thijs Vogels, Hadrien Hendrikx, and Martin Jaggi. Beyond spectral gap: The role of the topology in
  decentralized learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(355):1ŌĆō31, 2023.
Guan Wang, Charlie Xiaoqian Dang, and Ziye Zhou. Measure contribution of participants in federated
  learning. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 2597ŌĆō2604, 2019.
Jiachen T Wang, Prateek Mittal, Dawn Song, and Ruoxi Jia. Data shapley in one training run. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2406.11011, 2024.
Jue Wang, Yucheng Lu, Binhang Yuan, Beidi Chen, Percy Liang, Christopher De Sa, Christopher Re,
  and Ce Zhang. CocktailSGD: Fine-tuning foundation models over 500Mbps networks. In Proceed-
  ings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 36058ŌĆō36076. PMLR, 2023a.
Tianhao Wang, Johannes Rausch, Ce Zhang, Ruoxi Jia, and Dawn Song. A Principled Approach to
  Data Valuation for Federated Learning, pp. 153ŌĆō167. Springer International Publishing, 2020.
Xinran Wang, Qi Le, Ahmad Faraz Khan, Jie Ding, and Ali Anwar. A framework for incentivized
  collaborative learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17052, 2023b.
Mengzhou Xia, Sadhika Malladi, Suchin Gururangan, Sanjeev Arora, and Danqi Chen. LESS:
 Selecting influential data for targeted instruction tuning. In Proceedings of the 41st International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 54104ŌĆō54132, 2024.
Wenhan Xian, Feihu Huang, Yanfu Zhang, and Heng Huang. A faster decentralized algorithm
 for nonconvex minimax problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 25865ŌĆō25877, 2021.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ran Xin, Chenguang Xi, and Usman A. Khan. FrostŌĆöfast row-stochastic optimization with uncoor-
  dinated step-sizes. EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, 2019(1):1, 2019.
Jie Xu, Wei Zhang, and Fei Wang. A(dp)2 sgd: Asynchronous decentralized parallel stochastic
   gradient descent with differential privacy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
   Intelligence, 2021.
Shuo Yang, Zeke Xie, Hanyu Peng, Min Xu, Mingming Sun, and Ping Li. Dataset pruning: Reducing
  training data by examining generalization influence. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Shuoguang Yang, Xuezhou Zhang, and Mengdi Wang. Decentralized gossip-based stochastic bilevel
  optimization over communication networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:238ŌĆō252, 2022.
Haoxiang Ye and Qing Ling. Generalization error matters in decentralized learning under Byzantine
  attacks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2025.
Bicheng Ying, Kun Yuan, Yiming Chen, Hanbin Hu, Pan Pan, and Wotao Yin. Exponential graph is
  provably efficient for decentralized deep training. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021.
Han Yu, Zelei Liu, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, Mingshu Cong, Xi Weng, Dusit Niyato, and Qiang
 Yang. A fairness-aware incentive scheme for federated learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM
  Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 2020.
Haoxiang Yu, Hsiao-Yuan Chen, Sangsu Lee, Sriram Vishwanath, Xi Zheng, and Christine Julien.
  idml: Incentivized decentralized machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05354, 2023.
Binhang Yuan, Yongjun He, Jared Quincy Davis, Tianyi Zhang, Tri Dao, Beidi Chen, Percy Liang,
  Christopher Re, and Ce Zhang. Decentralized training of foundation models in heterogeneous
  environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Kun Yuan, Qing Ling, and Wotao Yin. On the convergence of decentralized gradient descent. SIAM
  Journal on Optimization, 26(3):1835ŌĆō1854, 2016a.
Kun Yuan, Qing Ling, and Wotao Yin. On the convergence of decentralized gradient descent. SIAM
  Journal on Optimization, 26(3):1835ŌĆō1854, 2016b.
Kun Yuan, Bicheng Ying, Xiaochuan Zhao, and Ali H. Sayed. Exact diffusion for distributed opti-
  mization and learningŌĆöpart i: Algorithm development. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
  67(3):708ŌĆō723, 2019.
Liangqi Yuan, Ziran Wang, Lichao Sun, Philip S. Yu, and Christopher G. Brinton. Decentralized
  federated learning: A survey and perspective. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1ŌĆō1, 2024.
Shahryar Zehtabi, Dong-Jun Han, Rohit Parasnis, Seyyedali Hosseinalipour, and Christopher G Brin-
  ton. Decentralized sporadic federated learning: A unified algorithmic framework with convergence
  guarantees. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Rongfei Zeng, Chao Zeng, Xingwei Wang, Bo Li, and Xiaowen Chu. A comprehensive survey of
  incentive mechanism for federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15406, 2021.
Chang Zhang, Shunkun Yang, Lingfeng Mao, and Huansheng Ning. Anomaly detection and defense
  techniques in federated learning: a comprehensive review. Artificial Intelligence Review, 57(6):
  150, 2024.
Miaoxi Zhu, Li Shen, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Stability and generalization of the decentralized
 stochastic gradient descent ascent algorithm. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2023a.
Tongtian Zhu, Fengxiang He, Lan Zhang, Zhengyang Niu, Mingli Song, and Dacheng Tao. Topology-
  aware generalization of decentralized SGD. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
  PMLR, 2022.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tongtian Zhu, Fengxiang He, Kaixuan Chen, Mingli Song, and Dacheng Tao. Decentralized SGD
  and average-direction SAM are asymptotically equivalent. In Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2023b.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     BACKGROUND

A.1     DATA I NFLUENCE

Data Influence Estimation. As high-quality data becomes increasingly critical in modern machine
learning (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Penedo et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Longpre et al., 2024; Villalobos
et al., 2024), understanding the influence of data has emerged as a crucial research direction (Sorscher
et al., 2022; Grosse et al., 2023; Xia et al., 2024). Data influence estimation quantifies the contribution
of training data to model predictions (Chen et al., 2024a; Ilyas et al., 2024). It enables fair attribution
of data source contributions, serving as the foundation for incentive mechanisms. Besides serving
as an incentive, data influence has been extensively applied in various machine learning domains,
including few-shot learning (Park et al., 2021), dataset pruning (Sorscher et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2023), distillation (Loo et al., 2023), fairness improving (Li & Liu, 2022), machine unlearning (Guo
et al., 2020; Sekhari et al., 2021), explainability (Koh & Liang, 2017b; Han et al., 2020; Grosse et al.,
2023), as well as training-set attacks (Demontis et al., 2019; Jagielski et al., 2021) and defenses
(Hammoudeh & Lowd, 2022).
Data influence estimators are broadly categorized into static and dynamic approaches5 . Specifically,
static approaches include both retraining-based and one-point methods. Retraining-based methods,
such as leave-one-out (Cook, 1977), Shapley value (Shapley, 1953), and Datamodels (Ilyas et al.,
2022), assess data influence by retraining the model on (subsets of) the training data. These methods
offer a conceptually straightforward computation of data influence and are grounded in theoretical
foundations, but they are often computationally expensive due to the requirement for retraining.
In contrast, one-point influence methods approximate the effect of retraining using a single trained
model. A well-established one-point method is the canonical influence function (Koh & Liang,
2017b), developed from statistics (Hampel, 1974; Chatterjee et al., 1982), which examines how
infinitesimal perturbations of a training example affect the empirical risk minimizers (ERM) (Vapnik
& Chervonenkis, 1974). The influence function has been extended to incorporate higher-order
information (Basu et al., 2020) and scaled for larger models (Guo et al., 2021; Schioppa et al.,
2022), including LLMs (Grosse et al., 2023). Fu et al. (2022) extend influence function to Bayesian
inference. While these static influence measures have elegant theoretical foundations, they are limited
in characterizing how training data influences the training process.
Alternatively, dynamic methods enhance influence estimation by considering the evolution of model
parameters across training iterations (Charpiat et al., 2019). Notable examples in this category include
TracIn (Pruthi et al., 2020) and In-Run Data Shapley (Wang et al., 2024), which track the influence
of training data points by averaging gradient similarities over time. The practicality of dynamic
influence estimators is demonstrated by their applications in improving training processes in modern
setups (Xia et al., 2024). Recently, Nickl et al. (2023) adopt a novel memory-perturbation equation
framework to derive dynamic influence estimation of model trained under different centralized
optimization algorithms, including SGD, RMSprop and Adam.
However, the existing static and dynamic influence estimation methods primarily target centralized
scenarios, and little progress has been made in analyzing data influence in fully decentralized
environments. To the best of our knowledge, the only closely related work is by Terashita & Hara
(2022), who proposed a decentralized hyper-gradient method and provided novel insights on applying
hyper-gradients to compute a centralized formulation of data influence. Nevertheless, their estimation
method is static and cannot capture the influence cascade arising from gossip communication
during decentralized training. In contrast, our framework, DICE, is specifically designed for fully
decentralized environments, allowing it to provide a fine-grained characterization of the unique
influence cascade inherent in these settings.

A.2     D ECENTRALIZED LEARNING

Currently, large-scale training and inference processes are primarily performed in expensive data
centers. Decentralized training, echoing swarm intelligence (Bonabeau et al., 1999; Mavrovouniotis
    5
      Typically, data influence estimators are classified as retraining-based and gradient-based methods (Hammoudeh &
Lowd, 2024). For enhanced logical coherence in this paper, we group retraining-based methods and one-point gradient-based
techniques under the static category. This classification does not contradict conventional categorizations.


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2017), offers a cost-efficient alternative avenue by crowd-sourcing computational workload
to geographically decentralized compute nodes, without the control of central servers (Yuan et al.,
2022; Borzunov et al., 2023b; Jaghouar et al., 2024). One notable example showcasing decentralized
computingŌĆÖs computational potential is the Bitcoin eco-system which virtually distributes jobs
requiring instantaneous 16 GW power consumption (CCAF, 2023)ŌĆō this has been triple of the
estimated 5 GW of the worldŌĆÖs largest planned cluster for AI (Gardizy & Efrati, 2024; OpenAI, 2025).
In the following, we provide an overview of the algorithmic and theoretical advancements in de-
centralized learning. While our discussion touches on several notable contributions, it is far from
exhaustive. For a more comprehensive survey, we refer readers to Mart─▒╠ünez Beltra╠ün et al. (2023);
Singha et al. (2024); Yuan et al. (2024).
Algorithmic Development of Decentralized Learning. The advancement of decentralized learning
algorithms has been driven by the need for communication-efficient optimization methods in practical
distributed learning scenarios. These algorithms have adapted to accommodate dynamic network
structures (NediŌĆÖc & Olshevsky, 2014; Koloskova et al., 2020; Ying et al., 2021; Takezawa et al.,
2023), asynchronous communication (Lian et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2021; Nadiradze et al., 2021;
Bornstein et al., 2023; Even et al., 2024), data heterogeneity (Tang et al., 2018; Vogels et al., 2021;
Le Bars et al., 2023), and Byzantine adversaries (He et al., 2022; Ye & Ling, 2025). Furthermore,
their applicability has extended beyond conventional optimization problem to more complex problem
formulations, including compositional (Gao & Huang, 2021), minimax (Xian et al., 2021; Zhu et al.,
2023a; Chen et al., 2024b), and bi-level (Yang et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023)
optimization problems. Additionally, privacy concerns in decentralized learning are also critical,
with efforts focusing on differentially privacy (Cyffers et al., 2024; Allouah et al., 2024) and data
reconstruction attacks (Mrini et al., 2024).
Theoretical Development of Decentralized Learning. In terms of optimization, earlier works on
decentralized optimization (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Sayed, 2014; Yuan et al., 2016b; Lian et al.,
2017) lay the groundwork for understanding convergence. Lu & De Sa (2021) present a systematic
framework for federated and decentralized learning by categorizing decentralization into three distinct
layers. Koloskova et al. (2020) unify synchronous decentralized gradient descent algorithms across
various communication topologies, while Even et al. (2024) extend this framework to accommodate
asynchronous scenarios. Building on these efforts, Zehtabi et al. (2025) further develops existing
frameworks to consider the sporadicity of both communications and local computations. Regarding
generalization, Richards et al. (2020) establishes generalization bounds of decentralized SGD in
convex settings via uniform stability. Sun et al. (2021) extend this to non-convex settings, revealing
an additional O( Žü1 ) dependence on graph topology, though later empirical studies suggest this gap
might be overstated (Kong et al., 2021). To refine this, Zhu et al. (2022) introduce a Gaussian weight
difference assumption, improving the Žü dependence to O((1 ŌłÆ Žü)2 ). Le Bars et al. (2024) further
show that in convex settings, the generalization error of local models in decentralized SGD matches
that of standard SGD, while in non-convex settings, decentralization primarily affects worst-case
generalization. To explain previously unexplained phenomena in decentralized learning (Kong et al.,
2021; Gurbuzbalaban et al., 2022; Vogels et al., 2023), Zhu et al. (2023b) later link decentralized
SGD to random sharpness-aware minimization, uncovering a flatness bias in decentralized training.
Complementing this, Cao et al. (2024) further analyze the flatness properties of DSGD and its role in
escaping local minima.
Decentralized Training of Foundation Models. DT-FM (Yuan et al., 2022) introduces tasklet
scheduling for training Transformers in decentralized settings with low-bandwidth networks, opti-
mizing resource utilization in distributed environments. SWARM Parallelism (Ryabinin et al., 2023)
enhances scalability through fault-tolerant pipelines and dynamic node rebalancing. CocktailSGD
(Wang et al., 2023a) combines decentralization with sparsification and quantization enhances com-
munication efficiency in fine-tuning LLMs. On the inference side, Petal (Borzunov et al., 2023a)
leverages swarm parallelism to amortize inference costs across heterogeneous resources. Recently,
Intellect (Jaghouar et al., 2024) built on Diloco (Douillard et al., 2023) has employed a combination
of data parallel and model parallel to collaboratively train large models with up to billions of param-
eters. For a comprehensive overview of large-scale deep learning training, including data, model
architecture, optimization strategies, budget constraints, and system design, see Shen et al. (2024).
The following figure presents a comparison between server-based learning and decentralized learning.



                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Server

                  Communication                                                         Local training


                   Local training
                                                                                             Participant


                                                                                       Communication

       Participants

  (a) Server-based Learning                           (b) Decentralized Learning

   Figure A.1: A comparative illustration of server-based learning versus decentralized learning.



We summarize some commonly used notions regarding decentralized training as follows:
Definition A.1 (Doubly Stochastic Matrix). Let G = (V, E) represent a decentralized communication
topology, where V is the set of n nodes and E is the set of edges. For any G = (V, E), the doubly
stochastic gossip matrix W = [Wj,k ] Ōłł Rn├Śn is defined on the edge set E and satisfies:
ŌĆó If j ╠Ė= k and (j, k) Ōłł
                       / E, then Wj,k = 0; otherwise, Wj,k > 0.
                                 P           P
ŌĆó Wj,k Ōłł [0, 1] for all j, k, and k Wk,j = j Wj,k = 1.

Intuitively, the doubly stochastic property ensures a balanced flow of information during gossip
communication, a common assumption in decentralized learning literature. However, in the scenarios
we consider, participants may occupy
                              Pn different roles within the network. Influential nodes might have
higher outgoing weights, i.e., j=1 Wj,k > 1.
To accommodate such cases while still ensuring the convergence of decentralized SGD (Yuan et al.,
2019; Xin et al., 2019), we introduce a relaxed condition:
Definition A.2 (Row Stochastic Matrix). Let G = (V, E) denote a decentralized communication
topology, where V is the set of n nodes and E is the set of edges. For any G = (V, E), the row
stochastic gossip matrix W = [Wj,k ] Ōłł Rn├Śn is defined on the edge set E and satisfies:
ŌĆó If j ╠Ė= k and (j, k) Ōłł
                       / E, then Wj,k = 0; otherwise, Wj,k > 0.
                                 P
ŌĆó Wj,k Ōłł [0, 1] for all j, k, and j Wk,j = 1.

The weighted adjacency matrix W in Algorithm 1 can vary across iterations, resulting in time-varying
collaborations among participants. Additionally, FedAVG (McMahan et al., 2017) is a special case of
Algorithm 1 where the averaging step is performed globally. This demonstrates that our framework
accommodates decentralized learning with dynamic communication topologies and is applicable
to both federated and decentralized learning paradigms, even though the primary focus is on fully
decentralized learning without central servers.


A.3   M ULTI - HOP N EIGHBORS

In graph theory, the concept of neighborhoods is fundamental for understanding the structure and
dynamics of graphs. To ensure a coherent and comprehensive flow in Section 4, we provide formal
definitions of multi-hop neighborhoods.
The adjacency matrix serves as a powerful tool for representing and analyzing the structure of a graph.
Multi-hop neighbors can be precisely defined using the adjacency matrix.
Definition A.3 (Adjacency Matrix). The adjacency matrix A of a graph G = (V, E) is an n ├Ś n
square matrix (where n = |V|) defined by:

                                                 1   if (j, k) Ōłł E,
                                     Ajk =                                                          (A.1)
                                                 0   otherwise.

                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The adjacency matrix enables the determination of r-hop neighbors through matrix exponentiation.
Specifically, the (j, k)-entry of Ar , denoted as (Ar )jk , corresponds to the number of distinct paths of
length r from node j to node k.
Definition A.4 (r-hop Neighbor via Adjacency Matrix). The set of r-hop neighbors is formally
defined using the adjacency matrix A as:

                      (r)                r                    s
                   N (j) = k Ōłł V (A )jk > 0 and ŌłĆs < r, (A )jk = 0 .                   (A.2)

This definition indicates that there exists at least one path of length r connecting nodes j and k, and
no shorter path exists between them.
Multi-hop neighbors can also be defined via the shortest path length between two nodes.
Definition A.5 (Shortest Path Length). In a connected graph G = (V, E), the shortest path length
d(j, k) between nodes j Ōłł V and k Ōłł V is the minimum number of edges that must be traversed to
travel from j to k.
Building upon this, the set of r-hop neighbors is defined as follows:
Definition A.6 (r-hop Neighbor via Shortest Path Length). For any node j Ōłł V and a positive integer
r Ōēź 1, the set of r-hop neighbors, denoted by N (r) (j), consists of all nodes that are at a distance of
exactly r from node j. Formally,

                                    N (r) (j) = {k Ōłł V | d(j, k) = r},                                  (A.3)
where d(j, k) represents the shortest path length between nodes j and k in the graph G.
Furthermore, an alternative perspective on r-hop neighborhoods involves characterizing them through
sequences of nodes, which provides a formal framework aligned with influence propagation in
decentralized learning.
Definition A.7 (r-hop Neighbor via Node Sequences). For any node j Ōłł V and a positive integer
             (r)
r Ōēź 1, let Pj denote the set of all sequences (k1 , . . . , kr ) such that for each s = 1, . . . , r, the node
ks is an out-neighbor of ksŌłÆ1 , with k0 = j. Formally,
                           n                                                        o
                     (r)                             (1)
                   Pj = (k1 , . . . , kr ) | ks Ōłł Nout (ksŌłÆ1 ) for s = 1, . . . , r .

This definition ensures that each node in the r-hop neighborhood is reachable from node j through a
sequence of consecutive immediate out-neighbors within Žü Ōēż r steps.
This sequence-based characterization of r-hop neighborhoods provides a granular understanding of
the pathways through which influence or information can propagate within the network, complement-
ing the previous definitions based on adjacency matrices and shortest path lengths.



B     D ISCUSSIONS

B.1    P RACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF DICE

Decentralized Machine Unlearning. As concerns about data privacy and the right to be forgotten
increase, the ability to remove specific data contributions from a trained model becomes important
(Guo et al., 2020; Sekhari et al., 2021). In decentralized settings, retraining the model from scratch
is often impractical for edge users with limited compute. The proximal influence measure enables
participants to estimate the impact of removing a particular data instance from its neighbor. For
example, by assessing the influence of zjt on neighbors, participants can adjust their local models to
mitigate the effects of zjt without requesting full retraining of the whole decentralized learning system.
This approach facilitates efficient and targeted unlearning procedures, avoiding costly system-wide
retraining while respecting individual data privacy requests.


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2    A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK

Clustered Federated Learning. Clustered Federated Learning (CFL) addresses the challenge of
data heterogeneity by grouping clients with similar data distributions and training separate models
for each cluster (Mansour et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2020; Sattler et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2024).
Gradient-based CFL methods (Sattler et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2024) use client gradient similarities to
form clusters, with Sattler et al. (2021) employing cosine similarity to recursively partition clients
after convergence and Kim et al. (2024) dynamically applying spectral clustering to organize clients
based on gradient features during training. These methods effectively capture direct, peer-to-peer
gradient relationships to cluster clients with similar data-generating distributions. Both gradient-based
CFL and the one-hop DICE estimator (see Proposition 1) utilize gradient similarity information.
However, CFL is inherently limited to local interactions, as its gradient similarity metrics are
confined to pairwise relationships. In contrast, DICE extends far beyond this scope by quantifying
the propagation of influence across multiple hops in a decentralized network. Mathematically,
Theorem 2 highlights how DICE generalizes peer-level gradient similarity into a non-trivial extension
for decentralized networks. This includes incorporating key factors including network topology and
curvature information, enabling a deeper understanding of how influence flows through the whole
decentralized learning systems. A promising future direction is to explore the potential of DICE-E
as a more advanced high-order gradient similarity metric for effectively clustering participants in
decentralized federated learning.

C     P ROOF

C.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proposition 1 (Approximation of One-hop DICE-GT). The one-hop DICE-GT value (see Defini-
tion 2) can be linearly approximated as follows:
   (1)
                                                                X
  IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = ŌłÆ qj ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ       t
                                                                  qk Wk,j ŌłćL(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ),
                                                                           (1)
                                                                     kŌłłNout (j)
                                                                                                          (C.1)

where Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) = Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt . The proof is given below.

Proof. Recall from Definition 2 that the one-hop DICE-GT is defined by
                               t+ 1

   (1)
                                                             X
 IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = qj L(╬Ėj 2 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ ) +   qk L(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėk\z
                                                                                       t+1     ŌĆ▓
                                                                                           t; z ) .
                                                                                                      j
                                                                             (1)
                                                                        kŌłłNout (j)


We proceed by applying a first-order Taylor expansion to each term.
First term: Using Taylor expansion, we write
                              t+ 21                                              t+ 1

                        L(╬Ėj          ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ ) Ōēł ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż ╬Ėj 2 ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt .

Under the new update rule, we have
                                                     t+ 21
                                                    ╬Ėj       = Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ),
so that
                                            t+ 12
                                          ╬Ėj        ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt = Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt .
Thus, the first term is approximated by
                          t+ 12

                     L(╬Ėj         ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ ) Ōēł ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt .


                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              (1)
Second term: For each k Ōłł Nout (j), we similarly have

                        L(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėk\z
                                             t+1      ŌĆ▓        t+1
                                                 t ; z ) Ōēł ŌłćL(╬Ėk   ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż ╬Ėkt+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ėk\z
                                                                                     t+1
                                                                                         t .
                                                                j                                                  j


By the gossip averaging step in the algorithm, we have
                                                                              t+ 21
                                                           X
                                         ╬Ėkt+1 =                      t
                                                                     Wk,l ╬Ėl          ,
                                                         lŌłłNin (k)

                                                                                                      t+ 12
                                                                              X
                                        t+1      t    t                                          t
                                       ╬Ėk\z t = Wk,j ╬Ėj +                                       Wk,l ╬Ėl       .
                                               j
                                                                         lŌłłNin (k)\{j}

It then follows that
                                               t+ 12

                        ╬Ėkt+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ėk\z
                                 t+1      t
                                     t = Wk,j ╬Ėj     ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt = Wk,j
                                                              t
                                                                    Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt .
                                          j


Thus, the second term becomes

                    L(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėk\z
                                         t+1      ŌĆ▓     t       t+1
                                             t ; z ) Ōēł Wk,j ŌłćL(╬Ėk   ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt .
                                                     j



Combining the Approximations: Substituting the above approximations into the definition of
 (1)
IDICE-GT yields

              (1)
            IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) Ōēł ŌłÆ qj ŌłćL(╬Ėjt ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt
                                        X
                                   ŌłÆ          qk Wk,j  t
                                                         ŌłćL(╬Ėkt+1 ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt .
                                                          (1)
                                                   kŌłłNout (j)

This completes the proof.

C.2     P ROOF OF T WO - HOP DICE-E A PPROXIMATION

Proposition 2 (Approximation of Two-hop DICE-GT). The two-hop DICE-GT influence
 (2)
IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) (see Definition 3) can be approximated as

      (2)                        (1)
   IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ )
         X              X
   ŌłÆ                                   t+1
                             ╬Ę t ql Wl,k       t
                                             Wk,j ŌłćL(╬Ėlt+2 ; z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż (I ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+1 H(╬Ėkt+1 ; zkt+1 ))Ōłåj (╬Ėjt ; zjt ),
              (1)          (1)
        kŌłłNout (j) lŌłłNout (k)
                                                                                                                                      (C.2)

where Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) Ōē£ Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt . andH(╬Ėkt+1 ; zkt+1 ) denotes the Hessian matrix of L with
respect to ╬Ėkt+1 evaluated at zkt+1 .

Proof. We begin from the definition in Definition 3 where the two-hop DICE-GT influence is given
by
                                                      h                                 i
              (2)
                                    X        X
            IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) =                 ql L(╬Ėlt+2 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L ╬Ėl\z
                                                                            t+2
                                                                                t; z
                                                                                     ŌĆ▓
                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                   j
                                                          (1)           (1)
                                                   kŌłłNout (j) lŌłłNout (k)

Subtracting the one-hop influence from both sides yields
                                                                                                   h                                 i
       (2)                         (1)
                                                                       X              X
      IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) =                                            ql L(╬Ėlt+2 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L ╬Ėl\z
                                                                                                                         t+2
                                                                                                                             t; z
                                                                                                                                  ŌĆ▓
                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                              j
                                                                        (1)               (1)
                                                                    kŌłłNout (j) lŌłłNout (k)



                                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A first-order Taylor expansion gives
                                                                        ŌŖż   t+2
                    L(╬Ėlt+2 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L ╬Ėl\z
                                         t+2      ŌĆ▓
                                                      Ōēł ŌłćL ╬Ėlt+2 ; z ŌĆ▓           t+2

                                             t; z                          ╬Ėl ŌłÆ ╬Ėl\z t .
                                                      j                                          j


Next, the update rule in Algorithm 1 implies that
                                                                                t+ 3
                                                              X
                                              ╬Ėlt+2 =                      t+1
                                                                         Wl,m  ╬Ėm 2 ,
                                                            mŌłłNin (l)

                   t+2                             t
and similarly for ╬Ėl\z t . Since the influence of zj reaches l only via intermediate nodes, we may write
                          j


                                                                                t+ 3   t+ 3
                                                             X
                               ╬Ėlt+2 ŌłÆ ╬Ėl\z
                                        t+2
                                            t =
                                                                         t+1
                                                                       Wl,k    ╬Ėk 2 ŌłÆ ╬Ėk\z2t .
                                                  j                                       j
                                                              (1)
                                                          kŌłłNout (j)


At an intermediate node k, the local update in iteration t + 1 gives
                                        t+ 3
                                       ╬Ėk 2 = ╬Ėkt+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+1 ŌłćL ╬Ėkt+1 ; zkt+1 .


Therefore, the difference between the actual and perturbed updates is
                    t+ 3    t+ 3
                                                                 t+1
                   ╬Ėk 2 ŌłÆ ╬Ėk\z2t Ōēł I ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+1 H ╬Ėkt+1 ; zkt+1           t+1
                                                                 ╬Ėk ŌłÆ ╬Ėk\z t .
                                        j                                                        j


At node k, the difference between the parameters updated with and without the influence from zjt is
given by


                                            t+ 12

                     ╬Ėkt+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ėk\z
                              t+1      t
                                  t = Wk,j ╬Ėj     ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt Ōēł ŌłÆ╬Ę t Wk,j
                                                                t
                                                                    Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ).
                                        j


Hence, we obtain
                   t+ 3   t+ 3
                                                                   t
                  ╬Ėk 2 ŌłÆ ╬Ėk\z2t Ōēł ŌłÆ╬Ę t I ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+1 H ╬Ėkt+1 ; zkt+1 Wk,j Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ).
                                   j


Substituting back into the expression for node l, we have
                                X
       ╬Ėlt+2 ŌłÆ ╬Ėl\z
                t+2
                    t Ōēł ŌłÆ╬Ę
                            t             t+1
                                       Wl,k   Wk,jt
                                                      I ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+1 H ╬Ėkt+1 ; zkt+1 Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ).
                      j
                                            (1)
                                   kŌłłNout (j)

Plugging this into the Taylor expansion for the loss difference and multiplying by ql yields

     L(╬Ėlt+2 ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L ╬Ėl\z
                          t+2      ŌĆ▓

                              t; z
                              j
                             ŌŖż X
      Ōēł ŌłÆ╬Ę t ŌłćL ╬Ėlt+2 ; z ŌĆ▓             Wl,kt+1    t
                                                Wk,j    I ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+1 H ╬Ėkt+1 ; zkt+1 Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ).
                                              (1)
                                       kŌłłNout (j)

Finally, summing over all intermediate nodes and multiplying by ql , we obtain
 (2)                  (1)
IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ IDICE-E (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ )
         X             X                                            ŌŖż
 ŌēłŌłÆ                           ╬Ę t ql Wl,k  t+1  t
                                               Wk,j ŌłćL ╬Ėlt+2 ; z ŌĆ▓      I ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+1 H ╬Ėkt+1 ; zkt+1 Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ).
           (1)        (1)
       kŌłłNout (j) lŌłłNout (k)

This completes the proof.


                                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2 (Approximation of Multi-hop DICE-GT). The r-hop DICE-GT value (see Definition 3)
can be approximated as
                                                 Žü
                             r
                                                             !
         (r)
                             X   X               Y                           ŌŖż
                 t    ŌĆ▓
       IDICE-E (zj , z ) = ŌłÆ              t
                                         ╬Ę qkŽü      Wks ,ksŌłÆ1 ŌłćL ╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                       t+sŌłÆ1
                                                                    Žü
                                                                       ; zŌĆ▓
                                      Žü=0 (k ,...,k )ŌłłP (Žü)                     s=1
                                             1        Žü       j

                                             Žü
                                                                                                           !
                                             Y
                                       ├Ś              I ŌłÆ╬Ę        t+sŌłÆ1
                                                                          H    ╬Ėkt+sŌłÆ1
                                                                                  s
                                                                                       ; zkt+sŌłÆ1
                                                                                            s
                                                                                                               Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ),    (C.3)
                                             s=2

where
                                             Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) Ōē£ Oj (╬Ėjt , zjt ) ŌłÆ ╬Ėjt ,
                      (Žü)                                                                                                    (1)
where k0 = j, Pj denotes the set of all sequences (k1 , . . . , kŽü ) such that ks Ōłł Nout (ksŌłÆ1 ) for
s = 1, . . . , Žü (see Definition A.7) and H(╬Ėkt+s   s
                                                      ; zkt+s
                                                           s
                                                              ) is the Hessian matrix of L with respect to ╬Ė
evaluated at ╬Ėkt+ss
                     and data z t+s
                               ks   . For the cases when   Žü =   0 and Žü = 1, the relevant product expressions
are defined as identity matrices, thereby ensuring that the r-hop DICE-E remains well-defined.

Proof. From the definition in Definition 3, the r-hop influence is
                                           r
                (r)
                                           X                  X
              IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) =                                      qkŽü L(╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                                                    Žü
                                                                                       ; z ŌĆ▓
                                                                                             ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ė t+Žü
                                                                                                     kŽü \z t ; z ŌĆ▓
                                                                                                                   )  .
                                                                                                                      j
                                            Žü=0 (k ,...,k )ŌłłP (Žü)
                                                      1       Žü      j


Here the Žü = 0 term (with k0 = j) corresponds to the direct influence on node j. For any Žü Ōēź 1,
define the incremental influence as
                                (Žü)                           (Žü)                         (ŽüŌłÆ1)
                            ŌłåIDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) = IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ IDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ).
Thus,                                                                        h                                  i
                      (Žü)
                                                          X
               ŌłåIDICE-GT (zjt , z ŌĆ▓ ) =                                   qkŽü L(╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                                                   Žü
                                                                                      ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                                                                     Žü \z
                                                                                                              ŌĆ▓
                                                                                                          t; z ) .
                                                                                                                  j
                                                                    (Žü)
                                                 (k1 ,...,kŽü )ŌłłPj

A first-order Taylor expansion gives
                                                                                         ŌŖż h t+Žü            i
                  L(╬Ėkt+Žü
                       Žü
                          ; z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ L(╬Ėkt+Žü
                                         Žü \z
                                                   ŌĆ▓        t+Žü
                                              t ; z ) Ōēł ŌłćL ╬Ėk
                                                              Žü
                                                                ; zŌĆ▓                        ╬ĖkŽü ŌłÆ ╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                                                                     Žü \z
                                                                                                          t  .
                                                          j                                                           j


Our goal is to express the parameter change Ōłå╬ĖkŽü Ōē£ ╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                      Žü
                                                         ŌłÆ ╬Ėkt+Žü  t in terms of the propagated
                                                              Žü \zj

perturbation from node j.
According to the gossip update in Algorithm 1, for any node kŽü we have

                                                                                        t+ŽüŌłÆ 12
                                                              X
                                           ╬Ėkt+Žü
                                              Žü
                                                 =                        Wkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                             Žü ,m
                                                                                  ╬Ėm              ,
                                                          mŌłłNin (kŽü )
                                                                                        t+ŽüŌłÆ 1
                                                              X
                                         ╬Ėkt+Žü
                                            Žü \z
                                                 t =                      Wkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                             Žü ,m
                                                                                  ╬Ėm\zt 2 .
                                                  j                                          j
                                                          mŌłłNin (kŽü )

Since only the predecessor kŽüŌłÆ1 is affected by the perturbation from zjt , we obtain

                                                          t+ŽüŌłÆ 12     t+ŽüŌłÆ 21

                                      Ōłå╬ĖkŽü = Wkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                 ,k
                                                Žü ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                        ╬Ė kŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                  ŌłÆ ╬Ė kŽüŌłÆ1 \z t   .
                                                                                                  j


At node kŽüŌłÆ1 , using the local update rule,

                                            t+ŽüŌłÆ 1
                                           ╬ĖkŽüŌłÆ1 2 = OkŽüŌłÆ1 (╬Ėkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                               ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                    , zkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                         ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                              ),


                                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the difference can be written as
          t+ŽüŌłÆ 1    t+ŽüŌłÆ 1

        ╬ĖkŽüŌłÆ1 2 ŌłÆ ╬ĖkŽüŌłÆ1 \z2 t = ╬Ėkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                    ŽüŌłÆ1
                                        ŌłÆ ╬Ėkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                             ŽüŌłÆ1 \z t
                            j                       j

                               ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+ŽüŌłÆ1 ŌłćL(╬ĖkŽüŌłÆ1 ; zkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                        ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                            ) ŌłÆ ŌłćL(╬Ė t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                     kŽüŌłÆ1 \z
                                                                                  t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                             t ; zk
                                                                                    ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                                        )  .
                                                                                                             j


A further first-order Taylor expansion approximates

         ŌłćL(╬Ėkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
               ŽüŌłÆ1
                    ; zk
                        t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                         ŽüŌłÆ1
                              ) ŌłÆ ŌłćL(╬Ė t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                       kŽüŌłÆ1 \z t ; zk
                                                     t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                      ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                           ) Ōēł Hk
                                                                 t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                  ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                         ╬Ė t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                           kŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                                 ŌłÆ ╬Ė t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                                     kŽüŌłÆ1 \z t   .
                                                         j                                                                  j


Thus,
                  Ōłå╬ĖkŽü Ōēł Wkt+ŽüŌłÆ1
                            Žü ,kŽüŌłÆ1
                                      I ŌłÆ ╬Ę t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                  H t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                    kŽüŌłÆ1    ╬Ė t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                              kŽüŌłÆ1  ŌłÆ ╬Ė t+ŽüŌłÆ1
                                                                        kŽüŌłÆ1 \z t  .
                                                                                                             j

By recursively unrolling this relation from s = Žü down to s = 1, we deduce
                               Žü             Žü
                                                                     !
                              Y             Y
          t+Žü     t+Žü                t+sŌłÆ1                    t+sŌłÆ1
        ╬ĖkŽü ŌłÆ ╬ĖkŽü \zt Ōēł           Wks ,ksŌłÆ1      I ŌłÆ╬Ę t+sŌłÆ1
                                                            HksŌłÆ1       ╬Ėkt+1
                                                                           1
                                                                              ŌłÆ ╬Ė t+1
                                                                                  k1 \z t   .
                        j                                                                                               j
                               s=1                   s=2

At the base level, the local update at node j gives

                               ╬Ėkt+1
                                  1
                                     ŌłÆ ╬Ėkt+1
                                          1 \z
                                                     t t          t    t
                                               t = ŌłÆ╬Ę Wk1 ,j Ōłåj (╬Ėj , zj ).
                                                     j


Hence,
                                      Žü                             Žü
                                                             !                                              !
                                      Y                             Y
         ╬Ėkt+Žü
            Žü
               ŌłÆ ╬Ėkt+Žü  t Ōēł ŌłÆ╬Ę
                    Žü \zj
                               t
                                           Wkt+sŌłÆ1
                                              s ,ksŌłÆ1
                                                                          I ŌłÆ╬Ę   t+sŌłÆ1
                                                                                            Hkt+sŌłÆ1
                                                                                               sŌłÆ1
                                                                                                              Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ).
                                     s=1                         s=2


Substituting this back into the Taylor expansion for the loss difference, we have
                                                            Žü
                                                                         !
              (Žü)
                                        X                  Y                              ŌŖż
                        t   ŌĆ▓
          ŌłåIDICE-GT (zj , z ) Ōēł ŌłÆ                  t
                                                 ╬Ę qkŽü         Wks ,ksŌłÆ1 ŌłćL ╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                                   t+sŌłÆ1
                                                                                  Žü
                                                                                    ; zŌĆ▓
                                        (k1 ,...,kŽü )ŌłłPj
                                                         (Žü)              s=1

                                          Žü
                                                                                     !
                                          Y
                                    ├Ś            I ŌłÆ╬Ę        t+sŌłÆ1
                                                                     Hkt+sŌłÆ1
                                                                        sŌłÆ1
                                                                                         Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ).
                                          s=2

Summing over Žü = 0 to r (with the Žü = 0 term accounting for the direct influence at node j) yields
                                                       Žü
                             r
                                                                     !
         (r)
                             X       X                Y                                 ŌŖż
                 t    ŌĆ▓
       IDICE-E (zj , z ) = ŌłÆ                   t
                                              ╬Ę qkŽü       Wks ,ksŌłÆ1 ŌłćL ╬Ėkt+Žü
                                                              t+sŌłÆ1
                                                                               Žü
                                                                                  ; zŌĆ▓
                                   Žü=0 (k ,...,k )ŌłłP (Žü)                   s=1
                                          1      Žü       j

                                           Žü
                                                                                                     !
                                           Y
                                    ├Ś            I ŌłÆ╬Ę        t+sŌłÆ1
                                                                     H    ╬Ėkt+sŌłÆ1
                                                                             s
                                                                                  ; zkt+sŌłÆ1
                                                                                       s
                                                                                                            Ōłåj (╬Ėjt , zjt ).
                                          s=2

This concludes the proof.

D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
D.1     D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Computational Resources. The experiments are conducted on a computing facility equipped with
80 GB NVIDIA┬« A100Ōäó GPUs.
We employ the vanilla mini-batch Adapt-Then-Communicate version of Decentralized SGD ((Lopes
& Sayed, 2008), see Algorithm 1) with commonly used network topologies (Ying et al., 2021) to train


                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


three-layer MLPs (Rumelhart et al., 1986), three-layer CNNs (LeCun et al., 1998), and ResNet-18
(He et al., 2016) on subsets of MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009), and Tiny ImageNet (Le & Yang, 2015). The number of participants (one GPU as a
participant) is set to 16 and 32, with each participant holding 512 samples. For sensitivity analysis,
we evaluate the stability of results under hyperparameter adjustments. The local batch size is varied
as 16, 64, and 128 per participant, while the learning rate is set as 0.1 and 0.01 without decay. The
code will be made publicly available.

D.2     I NFLUENCE A LIGNMENT

In this experiments, we evaluate the alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (see Definition 2) and
                                                                                           (1)
its first-order approximation, one-hop DICE-E (see Proposition 1). One-hop DICE-E IDICE-E      (Bjt ,z ŌĆ▓ )
is computed as the sum of one-sample DICE-E within the mini-batch Bjt thanks to the additivity
(see Equation (4)). DICE-GT IDICE-GT(1) (Bjt ,zŌĆ▓ ) is calculated by measuring the loss reduction after
removing Bjt from node j at the t-th iteration. In the following Figures, each plot contains 30
points, with each point representing the result of a single comparison of one-hop DICE-GT and
the estimated influence DICE-E. Strong alignments of DICE-GT and DICE-E are observed across
datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and Tiny ImageNet) and model architectures (CNN and MLP).


Figure D.1: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on
a 16-node exponential graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100.
Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 0.1.


Figure D.2: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on
a 32-node exponential graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100.
Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 0.1.

We conduct additional sensitivity analysis experiments to evaluate the robustness of DICE-E under
varying hyperparameters, including learning rate, batch size, and training epoch. These results demon-
strate that DICE-E provides a strong approximation of DICE-GT, achieving consistent alignment
across datasets (CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100) and model architectures (CNN and MLP) under different
batch sizes, learning rates, and training epochs.

D.2.1    S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS ON BATCH S IZE

We conduct experiments to evaluate the robustness of DICE-E under varying batch sizes.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.3: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on a
32-node ring graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100. Models are
trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 16 and a learning rate of 0.1.


Figure D.4: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on a
32-node ring graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100. Models are
trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 0.1.


Figure D.5: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on a
32-node ring graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100. Models are
trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 0.1.


D.2.2   S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS ON L EARNING R ATE AND THE N UMBER OF N ODES
We also condcut experiments to evaluate the robustness of DICE-E under varying learning rates and
the number of nodes.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.6: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on a
16-node ring graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100. Models are
trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 0.1.


Figure D.7: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on a
16-node ring graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100. Models are
trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 0.01.


Figure D.8: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on a
32-node ring graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100. Models are
trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 0.1.


Figure D.9: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on a
32-node ring graph. Each node uses a 512-sample subset of CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100. Models are
trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 0.01.


D.2.3   S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS ON T RAINING E POCHS
We conduct experiments to evaluate the robustness of DICE-E under varying training epochs.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.10: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on
16 and 32-node exponential graphs. Each node uses a 8192-sample subset of Tiny ImageNet. Models
are trained for 10 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 0.1.


Figure D.11: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis) on
16 and 32-node exponential graphs. Each node uses a 8192-sample subset of Tiny ImageNet. Models
are trained for 20 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 0.1.


Figure D.12: Alignment between one-hop DICE-GT (vertical axis) and DICE-E (horizontal axis)
on a 16 and 32-node exponential graph. Each node uses a 8192-sample subset of Tiny ImageNet.
Models are trained for 30 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 0.1.



D.3     A NOMALY D ETECTION

We can also use the proximal influence metric to effectively detect anomalies. Specifically, anomalies
are identified by observing significantly higher or lower proximal influence values compared to
normal data instances. In our setup, anomalies are generated through random label flipping or by
adding random Gaussian noise to features. The following Figures illustrates that the most anomalies
(in red) is detectable with proximal influence values.


D.3.1    R ANDOM LABEL FLIPPING

We can conclude from these experiments that anomalies introduced through random label flipping
are readily detectable by analyzing their proximal influence.


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.13: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 16 and a learning rate of
0.1. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by random label flipping, while the other four are normal participants.


Figure D.14: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of
0.1. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by random label flipping, while the other four are normal participants.


Figure D.15: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of
0.1. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by random label flipping, while the other four are normal participants.


D.3.2   F EATURE P ERTURBATIONS
We can conclude from Figure D.19, Figure D.20 and Figure D.21 that most anomalies introduced
through adding zero-mean Gaussian noise with high variance are readily detectable by analyzing
their proximal influence, which significantly deviates from that of normal data participants.


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.16: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 16 and a learning rate of
0.01. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by random label flipping, while the other four are normal participants.


Figure D.17: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of
0.01. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by random label flipping, while the other four are normal participants.


Figure D.18: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of
0.01. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by random label flipping, while the other four are normal participants.


D.4     I NFLUENCE CASCADE

D.4.1    O NE - HOP I NFLUENCE CASCADE

The topological dependency of DICE-E in our theory reveals the ŌĆ£power asymmetriesŌĆØ (Blau, 1964;
Magee & Galinsky, 2008) in decentralized learning. To support the theoretical finding, we examine
the one-hop DICE-E values of the same batch on participants with vastly different topological
importance. Figure 1 illustrates the one-hop DICE-E influence scores of an identical data batch across
participants during decentralized training of a ResNet-18 model on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Node
sizes represent the one-hop DICE-E influence scores, quantifying how a single batch impacts other
participants in the network. The dominant nodes (e.g., those with larger outgoing communication
weights in W ) exhibit significantly higher influence, as shown in Figure 1 and further detailed


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.19: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of
0.1. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by adding zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance equals 100 on each
feature, while the other four are normal participants.


Figure D.20: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of
0.01. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by adding zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance equals 100 on each
feature, while the other four are normal participants.


Figure D.21: Anomaly detection on exponential graph with 32 nodes. Each node uses a 512-sample
subset of CIFAR-10. Models are trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 16 and a learning rate of
0.1. In a 32-node exponential graph, each participant connects with 5 neighbors, where the neighbor
in red is set as an anomaly by adding zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance equals 100 on each
feature, while the other four are normal participants.


in Figure D.23 and Figure D.24. These visualizations underscore the critical role of topological
properties in shaping data influence in decentralized learning, demonstrating how the structure of the
communication matrix W determines the asymmetries in influence.
To better observe and showcase the ŌĆ£influence cascadeŌĆØ phenomenon, we design a communication
matrix with one ŌĆ£dominantŌĆØ participant (node 0), two ŌĆ£subdominantŌĆØ participants (nodes 7 and 10),
and several other common participants. Figure D.22 (Left) visualizes the communication topology,
where node sizes indicate out-degree, reflecting their influence, and edge thickness represents the
strength of communication links. Node 0 stands out as the dominant participant with the largest size,
while nodes 7 and 10 serve as subdominant intermediaries. Figure D.22 (Right) complements this by


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


showing the adjacency matrix W as a heatmap, where the color intensity highlights the magnitude
of connection strengths, with the dominant participant exhibiting strong outgoing links across the
network. Together, these visualizations highlight the hierarchical structure and asymmetries in the
communication matrix, crucial for understanding topological influences in decentralized learning.


Figure D.22: Left: Visualization of the communication topology used in Section 5, where each node
represents a participant, and edges indicate communication links. Node sizes are proportional to
their out-degree (sum of outgoing edge weights), reflecting their communication influence within the
community. Edge thickness corresponds to the strength of connection (i.e., weight), with directional
arrows capturing the flow of information between participants. Self-loops are omitted for simplicity.
Right: Heatmap representation of the weighted adjacency matrix W used in Section 5, where
each entry Wk,j quantifies the communication strength from participant j to k. The color intensity
represents the magnitude of the weights.


Figure D.23: Visualization of one-hop influence cascade during decentralized trainingg with MLP
on MNIST (left) and CIFAR-10 (right) under a designed communication matrix (see Figure D.22).
The thickness of edges represents the strength of communication links (i.e., weights in W ), while
node sizes correspond to the relative one-hop DICE-E influence scores (see Proposition 1) computed
for the same data batch across different participants. The numerical labels on the nodes indicate the
corresponding participants, aligning with the participant indices in Figure D.22.


D.4.2   M ULTI - HOP I NFLUENCE CASCADE
To better illustrate the communication structure underlying the influence cascade phenomenon in
multi-hop decentralized learning (see Figure 1), following the setup in Appendix D.4.1, with the only


                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.24: Visualization of one-hop influence cascade during decentralized trainingg with ResNet-
18 on CIFAR-10 (left) and CIFAR-100 (right) under a designed communication matrix (see Fig-
ure D.22). The thickness of edges represents the strength of communication links (i.e., weights in
W ), while node sizes correspond to the relative one-hop DICE-E influence scores (see Proposition 1)
computed for the same data batch across different participants. The numerical labels on the nodes
indicate the corresponding participants, aligning with the participant indices in Figure D.22.


modification being the use of a different mixing matrix. This modification is specifically designed
to refine the visualization for better geographic representation, making the spatial relationships of
decentralized participants more apparent. The heatmap in Figure D.25 visualizes the corresponding
mixing matrix (i.e., weighted adjacency matrix) W for the 16-node topology, where each entry
Wj,k represents the communication strength from participant j to k. The color intensity encodes the
magnitude of these weights, with warmer colors indicating stronger connections.
                                                                                              0.8
                            0.8 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0
                            0.3 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                                                                                              0.7
                            0.0 0.0 0.6 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0
                            0.0 0.0 0.1 0.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                                                                                              0.6
                            0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                            0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                                                                                              0.5
                            0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                            0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                                                                                              0.4
                            0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                            0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                                                                                              0.3
                            0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0
                            0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
                                                                                              0.2
                            0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0
                            0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 0.2
                                                                                              0.1
                            0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 0.1
                            0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.6
                                                                                              0.0


Figure D.25: Heatmap representation of the weighted adjacency matrix W used in Figure 1, where
each entry Wk,j quantifies the communication strength from participant j to k. The color intensity
represents the magnitude of the weights.


                                                              36
