Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


NL-E YE : A BDUCTIVE NLI FOR I MAGES
  Mor Ventura1∗ Michael Toker1 Nitay Calderon1                    Zorik Gekhman1,2
  Yonatan Bitton2 Roi Reichart1
 1
   Technion 2 Google Research



                                             A BSTRACT
            Will a Visual Language Model (VLM)-based bot warn us about slipping if it de-
            tects a wet floor? Recent VLMs have demonstrated impressive capabilities, yet
            their ability to infer outcomes and causes remains underexplored. To address this,
            we introduce NL-E YE, a benchmark designed to assess VLMs’ visual abduc-
            tive reasoning skills. NL-E YE adapts the abductive Natural Language Inference
            (NLI) task to the visual domain, requiring models to evaluate the plausibility of
            hypothesis images based on a premise image and explain their decisions. NL-
            E YE consists of 350 carefully curated triplet examples (1,050 images) spanning
            diverse reasoning categories: physical, functional, logical, emotional, cultural,
            and social. The data curation process involved two steps—writing textual descrip-
            tions and generating images using text-to-image models, both requiring substan-
            tial human involvement to ensure high-quality and challenging scenes. Our ex-
            periments show that VLMs struggle significantly on NL-E YE, often performing
            at random baseline levels, while humans excel in both plausibility prediction and
            explanation quality. This demonstrates a deficiency in the abductive reasoning
            capabilities of modern VLMs. NL-E YE represents a crucial step toward devel-
            oping VLMs capable of robust multimodal reasoning for real-world applications,
            including accident-prevention bots and generated video verification.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
                                                        Premise       Plausible Hypothesis   Implausible Hypothesis
Abductive reasoning refers to the ability
to infer and predict plausible outcomes or
causes given a context scene Peirce et al.
(1934); Fann (2012); Douven (2021). This
reasoning skill is crucial for Visual Lan-
guage Models (VLMs), as they are likely
to become increasingly integrated into our     Slipping is more likely without a wet floor warning sign
daily lives (Yildirim et al., 2024; Anwar
et al., 2024; Chiang et al., 2024; Shah Figure 1: NL-E YE evaluates the abductive reason-
et al., 2023). These models will be re- ing capabilities of VLMs. The main setup involves
quired to accurately monitor and interpret a premise image and two hypothesis images, where
daily life scenes and correctly infer plau- the model is tasked with inferring which hypothesis is
sibility to prevent accidents and provide more plausible, and to provide an explanation for its
timely advice. For instance, would a bot choice.
warn us from slipping on a wet floor when
there is no warning sign? or would it infer a missing pacifier as a cause of a crying baby?
Although this capability is critical, previous work has mainly evaluated VLMs in a single scene
setting — such as visual entailment or detecting improbable events like a fire in a closed jar —
or in sequential scenes, such as next-frame prediction Xie et al. (2019); Fu et al. (2022); Hessel
et al. (2022); Fu et al. (2024); Ganz et al. (2024); Yarom et al. (2024); Kadiyala et al. (2024).
Consequently, it remains unclear to what extent existing VLMs are capable of abductive reasoning.
To address this, we introduce NL-E YE, a benchmark designed to evaluate visual abductive reason-
ing capabilities of VLMs across multiple images. NL-E YE is inspired by the textual abductive NLI
    ∗
        Correspondence to: mor.ventura@campus.technion.ac.il
    1
        Our data and code are available at https://venturamor.github.io/NLEye/.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


task Bhagavatula et al. (2019) and applies it to the visual domain. In NL-E YE, a VLM is presented
with a premise image and one or two hypothesis images. It then needs to infer how likely (plausible)
a hypothesis image is to result from or lead to the premise image. The plausibility evaluation can be
either done individually or in comparison to an alternative hypothesis. For instance, in Figure 1, the
VLM needs to infer that, given the broken leg in the context image, it is more likely that the man
slipped on the wet floor which lacked a warning sign (i.e., selecting hypothesis image 1).
Beyond plausiblity prediction, NL-E YE facilitates the evaluation of the models’ capability to pro-
vide faithful explanations. This allows us to explore whether they are correct for the right reasons
rather than relying on shallow heuristics McCoy et al. (2019). For example, a valid explanation for
the broken leg scene would suggest that the presence of a warning sign would have made the man
more alert, thereby potentially preventing the accident. In contrast, a shallow explanation might
suggest that the man was simply resting on a cozy rainy day.
Each NL-E YE example features a premise image alongside two hypothesis images, annotated with
a gold label indicating the index of the more plausible hypothesis. The examples also include a gold
explanation detailing why the chosen hypothesis is more plausible than the alternative. Each ex-
ample is categorized into one of six reasoning categories – physical, logical, emotional, functional,
cultural, and social – and includes temporal annotations that specify whether the hypotheses occur
before, after, or simultaneously with the premise, and whether the time duration between the premise
and hypothesis scenes is short or long. This rich annotation aids in diagnosing current VLMs and
highlights their strengths and weaknesses. Figure 2 presents a detailed example.
To create NL-E YE, we collected a large pool of high-quality textual scenes created by experienced
human annotators. The resulting scenes were then provided to professional designers who utilized
Midjourney and DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) to synthesize the corresponding images. The design-
ers are also tasked with categorizing each example and creating the explanation that is used as the
gold label. The image generation process was iterative, requiring multiple attempts to ensure consis-
tency between the textual descriptions and the visual scenes, as well as visual coherence among the
images within the same triplet. This process resulted in a total of 1,050 generated images, yielding
350 image triplets. Overall, NL-E YE is characterized by carefully curated examples, offering high
quality both in terms of the scenarios and the consistency and quality of the images.
The first analysis is human evaluation where annotators select the more plausible hypothesis and
explain their choice. Our results indicate that humans successfully identify the more plausible hy-
pothesis in 85% of the cases. Furthermore, in our assessment of the quality of the human-generated
explanations, we find that in 94% of the cases where the correct hypothesis was selected, the humans
also provided a valid explanation. This demonstrates that humans perform reasonably well on the
NL-E YE tasks.
Next, we design a comprehensive study to evaluate the abductive reasoning abilities of modern
VLMs. We take multiple measures to ensure the robustness of our evaluation, including addressing
sensitivity to the order in which hypotheses are presented and exploring various input strategies,
such as feeding the model three separate images or presenting it with a single combined-image
that composites all three. Since real-world scenarios may not always provide two alternatives, we
also evaluate the model’s ability to assign a plausibility score to a single hypothesis, in addition to
comparing two candidates. We have also developed a framework that utilizes a text-based base-
line that processes textual descriptions of visual scenes. Specifically, we compare the results with
gold descriptions and with the captions of the images as generated by the VLMs. Lastly, evaluat-
ing model-generated explanations is challenging, as comparing generated text to a single reference
(gold) explanation can be limiting and may not capture the variety and validity of possible correct
answers. To address this, we adopt the evaluation proposed by Bitton-Guetta et al. (2023): human
annotators are presented with an image triplet where the correct hypothesis is already labeled and
select valid explanations from a provided set.
Our results show that while humans perform well on NL-E YE, VLMs struggle, with most models
failing to surpass a random baseline in the plausibility prediction task. Even when identifying the
plausible hypothesis, VLMs fail to provide accurate explanations in over 50% of cases, revealing
a major weakness in their abductive reasoning. Furthermore, our text-based experiments indicate
that these models often succeed in textual reasoning even when they fail to reason over images.
Interestingly, when we prompt the VLMs to generate image captions, the resulting captions prove



                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Premise            Plausible Hypothesis     Implausible Hypothesis           Premise                 Plausible Hypothesis       ImplausibleHypothesis
          car r ot s next t o a   a bowl wit h a l ot of    a bowl wit h car r ot      A gir l wat ches a movie       a br oom in t he ar ea   a mop wit h a bucket in t he
                                                                                    scene of a wit ch on a br oom     of t he wat er in t he    ar ea of t he wat er in t he
                 gr at er            gr at ed car r ot s           cubes
                                                                                       f l ies above t he r iver           l iving r oom               l iving r oom


                                           I                                                                                  I



                                                         Why Is t his scene mor e pl ausibl e?
                                                                                            Because it is more likely that the girl is mimickingthe witch
         Because a grater produces shreddedvegetables                                                   flying above the river in the movie.
           Reasoning Category         Temporal Duration       Temporal Direction       Reasoning Category            Temporal Duration            Temporal Direction

                  Functional               Short term                 Forward                    Logical                      Short term                    Forward


Figure 2: Fully annotated examples from NL-E YE. Each example includes the three images, the
textual descriptions (prompts) used to generate them, the gold label, an explanation for why the gold
is more plausible, and indications of the reasoning category and temporal direction and duration.



ineffective for solving the task. Consequently, we hypothesize that the VLMs reasoning is hindered
by inaccurate visual interpretations. We also find that these models are sensitive to the order in which
the hypotheses are presented and to the input format (three separate images vs a single combined-
image). This sensitivity is concerning, as it raises the possibility that the models may not genuinely
understand the underlying concepts, potentially relying on superficial cues to make decisions.
To summarize, we introduce NL-E YE a carefully curated benchmark designed to test the abductive
reasoning abilities of VLMs across various categories and temporal relations. We then conduct a
comprehensive study evaluating modern VLMs on NL-E YE and find notable deficiencies in their
abductive reasoning capabilities. We believe NL-E YE represents a crucial step toward enhancing
the reasoning abilities of VLMs, moving them closer to truly understanding complex, real-world
scenarios and providing more reliable and interpretable outputs.



2     T HE NL-E YE B ENCHMARK

2.1   TASKS

Our objective is to explore and benchmark the abductive reasoning capabilities of modern VLMs.
Unlike much of the previous work in NLP, our focus is on reasoning solely based on visual inputs:
premise and hypothesis images. The premise image illustrates the context – factual observations
about the world and a starting point from which conclusions are drawn. The hypothesis image
illustrates a candidate conclusion – a possible event that could occur before, after, or simultaneously
with the scenario presented by the premise image. In the context of our study, we refer to the
definition of abductive reasoning Nie et al. (2020); Douven (2021) as a form of logical reasoning
that seeks the most plausible hypothesis (conclusion) given a premise (a set of observations).
To perform visual abducting reasoning, the VLM should identify objects and their relationships
within each image, understand the relationships between the images, and integrate this informa-
tion to reason about the plausibility of the hypotheses (see §B.1 for detailed definitions of the sub-
capabilities involved in performing visual abductive reasoning). We introduce two novel tasks to
evaluate those capabilities: Plausibility Prediction and Plausibility Explanation. In the prediction
task, the VLM is provided with the premise and hypothesis images. Its goal is to predict the plausi-
bility of the hypothesis images or to determine which one is more plausible. We argue that VLMs
should be capable of not only predicting plausibility but also providing a sensible explanation of
their reasoning process. Therefore, in the explanation task, the model is also required to generate
a free-form textual explanation justifying why the chosen hypothesis is plausible or at least more
plausible than the other.


                                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Premise                Plausible Hypothesis      Implausible Hypothesis             Premise               Plausible Hypothesis     Implausible Hypothesis


      Because banana rot after a month                                                     Because the rolling pinflattens the dough


      Homes with childrentypically have a fridge stockedwith kid-friendly food             Wearing house shoes is a commonRussiantrait, similar tohaving Matryoshka dolls


      Treats are positive feedback that makes dogs happy                                   Because a family photois more likely toindicate a marriedperson

Figure 3: Real examples from each reasoning category in NL-E YE. The more plausible hypotheses
are framed in green. The gold explanations are included below each sample.


2.2      B ENCHMARK S TRUCTURE AND C ATEGORIZATION

In this subsection, we describe the structure of each example in our benchmark and discuss the tax-
onomy we proposed for categorizing the examples. In Figure 2, we present the structure of two
examples, which contains: (1) the premise image; (2) two hypothesis images; (3) the label, which
indicates the more plausible hypothesis and is given by the benchmark designers; (4) the textual
descriptions of the three images that were used for generating the images; (5) the gold explana-
tion, which clarifies why the correct hypothesis is more plausible, and is written by the benchmark
designers; (6) reference explanations, which were written and validated by crowd-workers; (7) cat-
egorization of the example, which indicates the involved reasoning category, temporal direction and
duration.
In §A, we describe the data creation process and specifically elaborate on components (1)-(5). The
crowd-worker annotations (component 6) are detailed in §3.2. We next outline our proposed catego-
rization, which serves two purposes: first, to ensure our benchmark is diverse, balanced, and covers
a wide range of domains and reasoning types; and second, to aid in diagnosing areas where VLMs
fall short.

Reasoning Categories We identify six different categories: Physical, Logical, Emotional, Func-
tional, Social, and Cultural, ranging from physical reasoning (e.g., predicting the color of a rotten
banana) to cultural reasoning (e.g., determining if a habit like wearing house shoes implies another
cultural trait, such as owning Matryoshka dolls). Figure 3 presents an example from each category,
with formal definitions in Appendix B.2.

Temporal Categories The temporal categories are based on direction and duration. Temporal di-
rection refers to the logical relationship between the premise and hypothesis, indicating whether the
event depicted in the premise image causes the hypothesis event (forward), is caused by it (back-
ward), or if the events occur simultaneously (parallel). Examples that do not occur at the same time
and are not categorized as parallel can also be classified by temporal duration, which is determined
by the time gap between the events depicted in the premise and hypothesis images. These include
short-term – when the events occur close in time, possibly in the same physical environment, or with
no significant sequence of events separating them, and long-term – when the events take place in
noticeably different periods of time. For instance, in the example on the left in Figure 2, the grated
carrots suggest a short-term forward progression within the same environment as the whole carrot
in the premise.


                                                                                       4
                                     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      Triplet Setup                                                 Pairs Setup
                                                      Context                 1                 2
                                                                                                                   A)
                                                                                                                               Context              1
                                                                                                                                                               Table 1: Models and baselines by their in-
                                       A)
                                                                                                                              Context
                                                                                                                                                               put strategy and reasoning approach.

                                                                                                                                                                  Approach →         Vision-Based       Text-Based
                                       B)             Context                 1                2
                                                                                                                   B)          Context              2             Strategy →        Multiple All In   Image to Text
                                                                                                                                                                   Model ↓          Images    One       Text    Only
                                                                                                                                                                 Gemini-1.5-Pro       ✓        ✓        ✓        ✓
                                                                                                                                                                  GPT-4 Vision        ✓        ✓        ✓        ✓
                                                                                                                                                                     GPT-4o           ✓        ✓                 ✓
                                                                                                                                                                Claude-3.5-Sonnet     ✓        ✓        ✓        ✓
                                       A) More Plausible: Image 1                 B) More Plausible: Image 2       A) Rank: 7                     B) Rank: 3     Claude-3-Opus                 ✓        ✓        ✓
                                                                            &                                                                                       Llava-1.6                  ✓        ✓        ✓
                                        Explanation: Museumcoins                  Explanation: Findings f romthe
                                        typically have signif icant               Pyramids archaeological site                    Rank A>Rank B                 BLIP2-FlanT5-XL                         ✓
                                          archaeological origins                    are displayed in museums                                                      InstructBLIP                          ✓
                                                                                                                              MorePlausible: Image 1             BART-L-MNLI                                     ✓
                                                                    Consistency- Accuracy                                     Order- Faithf ul Accuracy          DeBERTa-v3-nli                                  ✓


                                     Figure 4: In the triplet setup (left), the input of the VLM is a triplet of premise and two hypotheses
                                     images, and its task is to predict and explain which hypothesis is more plausible. We provide the
                                     triplet two times with different orders of the hypotheses (e.g., see A and B), and only if it is consistent
                                     and predicts the correct hypothesis for both we consider it an accurate prediction. In the pairs setup
                                     (right), the input is a premise and hypothesis, and the VLM should output a plausibility score. For
                                     the same premise and two hypotheses, the predictions of the VLM are considered order-faithful and
                                     accurate if the correct hypothesis is scored higher than the wrong one.

                                                       Triplet Setup                                                     Pairs Setup
                                     3A) E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
                                            Context             1             2                                     Context              1
                                                                                      1                   A)
                                                                                                                   Context
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Image gener
                                     3.1          TASKS AND S ETUPS                                                                                                                                                                             zoom- in
                                      B)    Context             1             2                           B)        Context              2

                                        Recall that the NL-E YE benchmark includes two tasks: Plausibility Prediction and Plausibility
                                        Explanation. Both tasks require reasoning about the relationship between the context image, the
                                 A) premise, which               B) is denoted as IA)              P , and a candidate   B)        image, a hypothesis, denoted by IH . In addition                                                                               Pr
                                 MorePlausible: Image 1             More Plausible: Image 2        Rank: 7
                                        to the images,         &   the     model f receives                a textual query  Rank: 3 (a prompt) that contains instructions describing                                       Pr emise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Scene
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The boy is crying while g
                                  Explanation: Museumcoins         Explanation: Findings f romthe
                                        the
                                  typically havetask       it should
                                                 signif icant             perform
                                                                   Pyramids   archaeological (see
                                                                                              site   Appendix        Tables 16 and 11). We introduce two setups for solving
                                                                                                           Rank A>Rank B
                                        the tasks:
                                    archaeological  origins the Triplet
                                                                     are displayedsetup
                                                                                     in museumand
                                                                                               s    the Pairs setup.                                                                                                      Pr ompt           Thecurly redheadboy with
                                                        Consistency                                                MorePlausible: Image 1                                                                              augment at ion
                                                         Accuracy                                                        Accuracy                                                                                                           Thecurly redheadboy with
                                     The Triplet Setup which is illustrated in the left box of Figure 4 the model receives the query                                                                                   Pr ompt Fixing

                                     along with three images: the premise (IP ) and two candidate hypotheses (IH1 and IH2 ). In the
                                     prediction task, the model’s goal is to determine which of the two hypotheses is more plausible                                                                                     Pr ompt +          Thecurly redheadboy with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       phot or eal ist ic   nurse room, capturedwith
                                     given IP , i.e., which is more likely to occur, assuming IP is a true observation about the world. For                                                                                 st yl e
                                     the explanation task, the model is also required to generate a textual explanation justifying why the
                                     chosen hypothesis is more plausible than the other.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Text - To- Image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gener at ion
                                     The Pairs Setup which is illustrated in the right box of Figure 4, the model f receives the query
                                     and two images: the premise IP and the hypothesis IH . The prediction task now is to provide a
                                     plausibility score that indicates how plausible IH is, given that IP is a factual observation. In our
                                     experiments, this score is provided on a 1-10 Likert scale. However, this is not mandatory – the
                                     plausibility score can be adapted to the needs of the model developer. For instance, the score could
                                     be expressed as a probability or another appropriate metric. In the explanation task, the model is                                                                                Pr emise Image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Edit ing
                                     asked to explain why IH can be plausible given IP .

                                     Reasoning Approaches & Input Strategies To thoroughly assess the abductive reasoning capa-
                                     bilities of current models, we use two reasoning approaches: Vision-based – where the model is
                                     tasked with performing the entire task end-to-end based solely on the visual input, and Text-based
                                     – where the final plausibility reasoning is based on textual input. In the vision-based approach, we
                                     experiment with two input strategies for feeding input to the model: (v.1) combined-image – where
                                     we concatenate the images (with the premise on the left) to form a single combined image, and (v.2)
                                     separate-images – where we feed in one prompt the images to the model separately, starting with
                                     the premise. As not all models support both strategies, Table 1 specifies which strategy was used
                                     for each model in our study. In the text-based approach, we utilize two input strategies as well: (t.1)
                                     image-to-text – where we ask the model to describe the two images in natural language, and then,
mage 1                 Correct
Order- faithf ulness
                                                                                                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


using those descriptions, the same model or another performs the plausibility prediction, and (t.2)
text-only – we discard the visual inputs altogether and use only the textual descriptions generated
when the images were created (see §A). The vision-based and text-based approaches allow us to
understand the model’s weaker capabilities better.


3.2   E VALUATION

Predictions in the Triplet Setup At first, we evaluated models based on accuracy. However, we
found that all models are sensitive to the positioning (in the all-in-one strategy) or the order (in the
sequential strategy) of the hypothesis images, that is, whether IH1 is placed or fed before or after
IH2 . For example, models may perform differently when given Triplet A versus Triplet B from
Figure 4. To address this sensitivity, we provide predictions for both orders of the hypotheses and
then aggregate the two predictions. A prediction is considered correct if and only if the model selects
the correct hypothesis in both orders. This approach reduces the likelihood of a correct prediction by
chance and ensures the model demonstrates consistency. The performance score in the triplet setup
is the described consistency accuracy (proportion of correct and consistent predictions; see §B.3).


Predictions in the Pairs Setup In the pairs setup, we aim to evaluate the plausibility score pre-
dicted by the model. However, as previously mentioned, we do not want to constrain the model (or
developers) to produce a specific score or adhere to a specific scoring function. Therefore, we do not
support direct evaluation of the score, i.e., we do not provide a gold standard score against which
the predicted score is compared. This raises the question: how do we plan to evaluate models in the
pairs setup? The only assumption we require from the scoring function is order-faithfulness (Gat
et al., 2024): if for a given premise IP , the evaluated model m scores one hypothesis IH1 higher
than another hypothesis IH2 , then IH1 should genuinely be more plausible than IH2 . Accordingly,
for every premise image, we take the two hypotheses and consider the scores of f as correct if the
hypothesis scored higher is the gold plausible hypothesis. The performance score in the pairs setup
is the described order-faithfulness accuracy (proportion of correctly ordered scores; see §B.3).


Human Evaluation of Explanations Evaluating free-text explanations is a challenging task due
to the various ways explanations can be paraphrased and the reasoning involved in determining their
validity. To address this, we followed the efficient human evaluation protocol proposed by Bitton-
Guetta et al. (2023) and recruited crowd workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). For each
triplet of images, the workers were presented with the correct hypothesis and several explanations
either written by humans (from the human baseline described in the next subsection) or generated
by VLMs. We included only explanations of the correct hypothesis. Then, the workers were tasked
to select all the explanations that are logic and justify why the correct hypothesis is more plausible
(see Appendix E for additional details). We consider an explanation as correct if at least one worker
selected it. The human evaluation score we present is the proportion of correct explanations.


Automatic Evaluation of Explanations Through automatic evaluation, we aim to demonstrate
a more scalable and cheaper approach to assessing the validity of model explanations. Like other
recent works, we follow the common practice of employing an LLM as a judge (Zheng et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024). Notice, that current models perform poorly on our visual abductive reasoning
tasks, thus, expecting them to succeed in evaluating the validity of explanations generated by other
models is pretentious. Instead, we simplify the task by conducting a reference-based evaluation,
asking the LLM to determine whether the generated explanation aligns with a gold reference expla-
nation – a task that relies solely on textual reasoning. The reference explanations include the gold
explanations (see §A), augmented with human-written explanations approved during the human
evaluation stage. To perform the automatic evaluation, we instruct an LLM (GPT-4o) to determine
if the generated explanation aligns with one of the reference explanations (more details are provided
in §I). The automatic evaluation score is the proportion of generated explanations that the judge
LLM predicted as aligning with the references.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Main results: Scores for vision-based experiments. Automatic evaluation scores are not
presented for Humans since their explanations serve as references. Regardless of the input strategy,
VLMs are greatly outperformed by humans and mostly perform on par or even below the baselines.

                    Input                                Prediction     Explanation
                               Model
                   Strategy                            Triplet Pairs   Human Auto
                               Humans                  85%     83%      95%     —
                               Gemini-1.5-Pro          51%     42%      38%    34%
                               GPT-4-Vision            46%     40%      39%    37%
                   Separate    GPT-4o                  16%     50%      23%    23%
                    Images     Claude-Sonnet-3.5       49%     38%      50%    26%
                               Gemini-1.5-Pro          43%     39%      40%    33%
                               GPT-4-Vision            41%     34%      37%    27%
                               GPT-4o                  60%     45%      44%    40%
                               Claude-Sonnet-3.5       28%     33%      42%    21%
                   Combined
                               Claude-Opus-3           15%     19%      26%     6%
                    Image
                               LLaVA 1.6               14%     42%      15%     4%
                               Fuyu                    4%      44%      10%     2%
                               Random                  25%     45%      —       —
                               Dumb Pixel              50%     50%      —       —



3.3   M ODELS AND BASELINES

Table 1 outlines the models used in our study, detailing their configuration, reasoning approach,
and input strategy (specific versions in Appendix Table 15). Below, we provide more details on the
models and baselines.


VLMs We employ state-of-the-art closed source VLMs, including, Gemini-1.5-pro (Google,
2024), GPT-4-vision and GPT-4o (Achiam et al., 2023), and Claude-Sonnet-3.5 and Claude-Opus-3
(Anthropic, 2024). In addition, we employ open-source VLMs, including LLaVa 1.6 (Liu et al.,
2024) and Fuyu (Bavishi et al., 2023).


NLI models Recall that in the text-only reasoning approach, we provide the model with the gold
text descriptions (used to generate the images) and ask it to predict which hypothesis description is
more plausible. The predictor models we use in this approach include all the closed-source VLMs
mentioned above, as well as fine-tuned NLI models such as DeBERTa-v3 (He et al., 2023) and
BART-L (Lewis et al., 2019). When the predictor is an LLM, we ask it to determine which hy-
pothesis description is more plausible given the textual premise description. For fine-tuned NLI
models, we compute two ‘entailment’ scores between the premise and each hypothesis, and the final
prediction is made based on the hypothesis with the higher score.


Random baselines We present two simple baselines. The first is the random baseline, which ran-
domly selects a hypothesis in the triplet setup or assigns a random score in the pairs setup. However,
it is inconsistent due to its sensitivity to hypothesis order. To improve consistency, we introduce
the dumb pixel baseline, which selects a hypothesis or assigns a score based on a predefined rule
using the upper-leftmost pixel. For example, the hypothesis with the brighter pixel is deemed more
plausible, or the score is calculated from the pixel’s value.


Humans Currently, there are indications that models can perform inference tasks at a level com-
parable to, or even exceeding, that of humans. Accordingly, we want to investigate whether these
VLMs can match human performance on our tasks that appear straightforward for humans and
expect them to succeed. To this end, we recruited 15 crowd-workers on the AMT platform. Pre-
qualifications for workers were high approval rates and English-speaking countries. Additional
details and guidelines are provided in §E.

                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     R ESULTS

4.1   VLM S FAIL TO P ERFORM A BDUCTIVE R EASONING W ITH I MAGES

Table 2 presents the performance of humans, VLMs, and baselines on both tasks, prediction and
explanation, for different setups and input strategies. For detailed results, refer to Appendix §C.1
and §C.2, where we provide extended experiments, as well as §D, where we compare human per-
formance to VLM performance and analyze their alignment.

VLMs Fail Where Humans Excel The results reveal a large performance gap between humans
and VLMs on both tasks. Except GPT-4o, which achieves 60% accuracy in the triplet setup for
combined-image inputs, all VLMs perform worse than the dumb pixel baseline. The situation is
even more concerning for current open-source VLMs, such as LLaVA 1.6 and Fuyu, which score
below random baselines (see additional open-source VLMs in Appendix Table 9). In contrast, hu-
man participants achieve 83-85% accuracy in the prediction task and 95% in the explanation task.
Notably, the participants are crowd-workers who are not experts or highly skilled. This suggests
that the task is neither unsolvable nor particularly difficult. Rather, current VLMs lack the visual
abductive reasoning capabilities necessary to solve it effectively. Importantly, the finding that tasks
easily handled by humans pose significant challenges for VLMs underscores the relevance of our
benchmark and highlights areas where the research community can focus its efforts. Moreover, we
found that VLMs are better in comparative or relative judgment setups (triplet, selecting which hy-
pothesis is more plausible than the other) than in absolute judgment (pairs, predicting a plausibility
score for a single hypothesis). This is unsurprising, as it is a known and well-studied phenomenon
of humans (Pollitt, 2012; Verhavert et al., 2019) which was also observed in LLM-as-a-judge tasks
(Kim et al., 2024). To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to show it for visual reasoning
tasks.

Even When Correct, VLM Explanations Are Unhelpful To assess the quality of the explana-
tions, we conduct human and automatic evaluations. Since nearly half of the predictions are incor-
rect, we focused only on explanations for correct predictions, ensuring we can determine whether an
explanation is genuinely poor rather than simply a result of the model failing to predict the correct
answer. Note that in §D we provide a qualitative analysis of explanations of wrong predictions to
better understand why they fail. Table 8 in the Appendix reports the number of evaluated explana-
tions of each model (a total of more than 3,800), and the results are reported on the two rightmost
columns of Table 2 (see human votes distribution in Appendix Table 7). As can be seen, humans
almost always produce correct explanations, as 95% of the explanations were selected by the an-
notators. On the other hand, at best, only half of the explanations are selected. This demonstrates
that even when the VLMs predict correctly, the explanation is unhelpful. In addition, we used valid
human explanations as references for the automatic evaluation, which produces scores similar to
those of the human evaluation in most cases. The automatic evaluation suggests that VLMs produce
explanations that describe different reasoning than humans.

4.2   R EASONS F OR FAILING TO R EASON

This subsection presents experiments analyzing why VLMs fail at visual abductive reasoning.

VLMs Can Perform Textual Reasoning – The Failure is in Visual Interpretation Table 3
presents the results of text-based experiments aimed at decoupling the textual reasoning capabili-
ties from the visual ones. In the text-only approach, the models are provided with gold-standard
descriptions of the images. As shown in the table, the performance of all models, including smaller
fine-tuned NLI models, is significantly higher than their performance in vision-based experiments.
Strong VLMs, such as GPTs and Claudes, achieve around 80% accuracy, nearing human perfor-
mance. This indicates that VLMs are capable of textual reasoning. This finding suggests that the
reasoning challenge does not mainly lie in the VLM’s textual components but in the visual ones.
In open-source VLM architectures (Liu et al., 2024), inference is not performed directly over im-
ages. Instead, the models encode images to latent visual representations, which are then passed to
the language model component. We hypothesize that poor visual inference results from these visual
representations being inaccurate for the reasoning task.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                Reasoning Categories              Temporal Categories
Table 3: Text-Based: Performance for predic-                           0.9                                                                    0.9
tion in the triplet setup. Predictor models per-
                                                                       0.8                                                                    0.8
form well and similarly to (vision-based reason-
ing of) humans when using the gold description.                        0.7                                                                    0.7

However, VLM describers generate useless cap-                          0.6                                                                    0.6
tions which do not help solve the task.                                0.5                                                                    0.5

                                                                       0.4                                                                    0.4
  Reasoning                                           Prediction
                 Describer        Predictor
  Approach                                              Triplet        0.3                                                                    0.3

                                                                               nal nal ical ical cial ral                   llel Short Long
                                  Gemini-1.5-Pro        66%
                                                                                                             ard    ard
                                                                           otio ctio hys Log So Cultu ackw Forw Para
                                  GPT-4o                80%              Em Fun P                       B
                                  GPT-4                 78%                            Gemini-1.5-Pro     Claude-3.5-sonnet          GPT-4
                 Gold
  Text-Only                       Claude-Sonnet-3.5     79%                            Dumb Pixel         Humans
                                  Claude-Opus-3         81%
                                  BART L mnli           68%
                                  DeBERTa nli v3        65%
                                                                       Figure 5: Vision-based performance with sep-
                 Gemini-1.5-Pro                         29%
                 GPT-4 vision                           32%            arate images for different reasoning categories
                 Claude 3.5                             39%            (left) and temporal categories (right). VLMs
 Image-to-Text   Claude 3         GPT-4o                33%
                 LLaVA 1.6                              29%            struggle with the Emotional and Functional cate-
                 BLIP 2                                 40%            gories but perform better on Social and Cultural
                 Instruct BLIP                          35%
                                                                       ones and on parallel reasoning.


In contrast, when VLMs generated descriptions for each image, and these descriptions were used
as input to GPT-4o, instead of the gold ones, the performance dropped significantly, aligning with
the results from the vision-based experiments (see Appendix Table 10 for Claude 3.5 as the predic-
tor). We hypothesize that this indicates a recognition gap, where the generated descriptions either
lack sufficient detail to capture the necessary information or are overly detailed (see examples in
Appendix Figure 7), making it challenging to reason effectively.
Finally, consider the performance gap in Table 2 between separate and combined image input strate-
gies. Except for GPT-4o, which consistently predicts the first hypothesis as more plausible (see
Table 5 in the Appendix), the other three models perform better when using separate image inputs,
showing an average improvement of over 10% (48.6% vs. 37.3%). This suggests that when an
image is complex and contains many details, as in the case of a combined image, VLMs struggle to
encode the necessary details and represent each image successfully.

VLMs Predictions Depend on Hypothesis Location Another factor contributing to the low per-
formance of VLMs in the triplet setup is their lack of consistency. As shown in Table 5 in the
Appendix, all VLMs are highly sensitive to hypothesis order, with performance variations ranging
from 5-80%. For example, Gemini-1.5-pro’s performance in the combined-image strategy drops
from 82% when the second hypothesis is correct to 46% when the first hypothesis is correct. Sim-
ilarly, GPT-4o, which performs best in the combined-image strategy (60%), fails in the separate-
images approach, scoring 97% when the first hypothesis is correct but only 16% for the second.
This suggests GPT-4o almost always predicts the first hypothesis as correct. In contrast, VLMs
show much greater consistency in text-only inputs, with performance variation limited to 7%. This
indicates that VLMs rely on weak visual encoding, capturing superficial patterns like hypothesis
order rather than meaningful image content.

VLMs are Better in Correlational and Knowledge-based Reasoning Compared to Causal Rea-
soning Relying on the categorization within our benchmark, we present in Figure 5 the vision-
based results in the triplet setup for six reasoning categories (left plot) and five temporal categories
(right plot). VLMs exhibit a clear dichotomy in their reasoning abilities, excelling in some areas
while falling short in others. Interestingly, the patterns are consistent across models, yet they diverge
from the performance patterns observed in humans. For example, VLMs perform best in Social and
Cultural reasoning, where specific knowledge is key to correctly solving those examples, see Ven-
tura et al. (2023) for extended discussion about VLMs and cultural knowledge. In contrast, humans
perform worst in the Cultural category. Another interesting observation is that VLM performance
on parallel reasoning examples is higher than on forward and backward reasoning tasks. Notably,
parallel reasoning may require only understanding correlations between the premise and the hy-
pothesis, whereas forward and backward reasoning require causal reasoning – identifying causes (in


                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


backward) or effects (in forward). This suggests that VLMs may be more adept at identifying cor-
relations rather than causal understanding. Finally, the weakest category for VLMs is Emotional,
which aligns with the literature (Lissak et al., 2024).


5   R ELATED W ORK

Recent advances in multimodal learning have enabled models to integrate textual and visual data
across diverse tasks (Voulodimos et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2024). Powerful visual
encoders like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021; Cherti et al., 2023) and SigLip (Zhai et al., 2023), coupled
with the progress in LLMs (Chowdhery et al., 2023), have given rise to sophisticated VLMs such as
BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023b), GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), and Gemini (Google, 2024). These VLMs
are pushing the boundaries of multimodal capabilities, tackling tasks like visual question answering
(VQA) (Antol et al., 2015) and visual entailment (VE) (Xie et al., 2019). Our work builds on and
extends research in these areas, with an emphasis on commonsense reasoning.

From Textual to Visual Entailment A cornerstone of our work is the expansion of Natural
Language Inference (NLI), traditionally a text-based task (MacCartney, 2009; Dagan et al., 2010;
Gekhman et al., 2023), into the visual domain. While previous research has explored NLI in the
context of image-text alignment (e.g., SNLI-VE (Xie et al., 2019), TIFA (Hu et al., 2023), WYSI-
WYR (Yarom et al., 2024), Mismatch-Quest (Gordon et al., 2023)), and even video-text entail-
ment (Xu et al., 2021; Bansal et al., 2024), we introduce a novel framework for image-to-image en-
tailment. This framework goes beyond simply selecting plausible alternatives by requiring models
to explain their choices, thus offering a deeper evaluation of their abductive reasoning. Furthermore,
we introduce a “pairs” setup that requires scoring the plausibility of image pairs, aligning our task
more closely with the original formulation of textual entailment.

Synthetic Data for Multi-Image Reasoning Our work uniquely employs synthetic images gen-
erated by models like DALL·E (Ramesh et al., 2022), allowing greater control over visual com-
plexity and diversity compared to natural image datasets such as Winoground (Thrush et al., 2022),
Sherlock (Hessel et al., 2022), and VCOPA (Yeo et al., 2018). By emphasizing multi-image rea-
soning, we address limitations in existing datasets that focus primarily on single-image tasks, like
WHOOPS!(Bitton-Guetta et al., 2023) and Visual Riddles(Bitton-Guetta et al., 2024). Our approach
complements research on synthetic image understanding (Gokhale et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023;
Stöckl, 2023) and is better suited for commonsense reasoning in real-world contexts, enhancing
datasets like SEED-Bench (Li et al., 2023a) and MMToM-QA (Jin et al., 2024), which tackle differ-
ent aspects of multi-image reasoning. Unlike ScienceQA (Lu et al., 2022) and NTSEBench (Pandya
et al., 2024), which focus on diagrams and scientific domains, our dataset employs photorealistic
scenes from everyday life, making it more appropriate for evaluating commonsense reasoning. This
integration of synthetic data, multi-image reasoning, and image-to-image entailment establishes a
new benchmark for assessing VLMs’ reasoning capabilities.


6   C ONCLUSION

We introduced NL-E YE, a benchmark designed to assess the visual abductive reasoning capabilities
of VLMs across multiple images. This skill is essential for real-world applications, such as accident-
prevention bots. We paid special attention to detail in order to ensure that NL-E YE consists of high-
quality and challenging examples, which required extensive human involvement at every stage of
its curation. Our carefully designed study highlights critical challenges faced by modern VLMs in
delivering satisfying plausibility predictions. We demonstrate that although humans perform well
on these tasks, VLMs struggle significantly. This indicates a significant limitation of current mod-
els’ ability to integrate visual interpretation with logical reasoning. Furthermore, models not only
struggle to make correct predictions but also often fail to consistently provide helpful explanations.
In future work, we would like to address these gaps, building on our insights to develop new VLM
architectures with higher reasoning skills, mirroring human cognitive processes in complex environ-
ments, as elaborated in §F.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT

The NL-E YE benchmark includes AI-generated images, with the potential presence of unpleasant or
insensitive content. While we strive to minimize harmful biases, the inclusion of reasoning based on
common sense knowledge and cultural perspectives may introduce further bias, particularly related
to social norms. Additionally, the labels in this benchmark are based on consensus from human
annotators, whose judgments may be influenced by their own cultural backgrounds, which could
amplify bias. We also recognize the challenges related to text-to-image (TTI) copyrights, where
the ownership of AI-generated content remains unclear. Researchers are encouraged to carefully
consider these ethical and legal concerns when utilizing the benchmark.


R EPRODUCIBILITY

To ensure the reproducibility of our results and promote further research, we will publicly release
the NL-E YE benchmark, along with the code. Detailed technical instructions, as well as documen-
tation on how to use and adapt the benchmark, will be provided in a publicly accessible repository.
Additional technical details, including model versions and specific configurations used in the exper-
iments, are available in the Appendix (§I). By sharing these resources, we aim to foster transparency
and support the research community in advancing the evaluation of VLMs.


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Anthropic. Claude ai models, 2024. URL https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/
  welcome. Accessed: [Date].

Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zit-
  nick, and Devi Parikh. Vqa: Visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 2425–2433, 2015.

Abrar Anwar, John Welsh, Joydeep Biswas, Soha Pouya, and Yan Chang. Remembr: Building
  and reasoning over long-horizon spatio-temporal memory for robot navigation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2409.13682, 2024.

Hritik Bansal, Yonatan Bitton, Idan Szpektor, Kai-Wei Chang, and Aditya Grover. Videocon: Robust
  video-language alignment via contrast captions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13927–13937, 2024.

Rohan Bavishi, Erich Elsen, Curtis Hawthorne, Maxwell Nye, Augustus Odena, Arushi Somani,
  and Sağnak Taşırlar. Introducing our multimodal models, 2023. URL https://www.adept.
  ai/blog/fuyu-8b.

Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Chaitanya Malaviya, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ari Holtzman, Han-
  nah Rashkin, Doug Downey, Scott Wen-tau Yih, and Yejin Choi. Abductive commonsense rea-
  soning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.05739, 2019.

Yonatan Bitton, Hritik Bansal, Jack Hessel, Rulin Shao, Wanrong Zhu, Anas Awadalla, Josh Gard-
  ner, Rohan Taori, and Ludwig Schmidt. Visit-bench: A dynamic benchmark for evaluating
  instruction-following vision-and-language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36:26898–26922, 2023.

Nitzan Bitton-Guetta, Yonatan Bitton, Jack Hessel, Ludwig Schmidt, Yuval Elovici, Gabriel
  Stanovsky, and Roy Schwartz. Breaking common sense: Whoops! a vision-and-language bench-
  mark of synthetic and compositional images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2616–2627, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nitzan Bitton-Guetta, Aviv Slobodkin, Aviya Maimon, Eliya Habba, Royi Rassin, Yonatan Bitton,
  Idan Szpektor, Amir Globerson, and Yuval Elovici. Visual riddles: a commonsense and world
  knowledge challenge for large vision and language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19474,
  2024.
Dongping Chen, Ruoxi Chen, Shilin Zhang, Yaochen Wang, Yinuo Liu, Huichi Zhou, Qihui
  Zhang, Yao Wan, Pan Zhou, and Lichao Sun. Mllm-as-a-judge: Assessing multimodal llm-
  as-a-judge with vision-language benchmark. In Forty-first International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=dbFEFHAD79.
Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gor-
 don, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for
 contrastive language-image learning. In 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2818–2829. IEEE, 2023.
Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Zhuo Xu, Zipeng Fu, Mithun George Jacob, Tingnan Zhang, Tsang-
  Wei Edward Lee, Wenhao Yu, Connor Schenck, David Rendleman, Dhruv Shah, et al. Mobility
  vla: Multimodal instruction navigation with long-context vlms and topological graphs. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.07775, 2024.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):
  1–113, 2023.
Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Bernardo Magnini, and Dan Roth. Recognizing textual entailment: Rational,
  evaluation and approaches–erratum. Natural Language Engineering, 16(1):105–105, 2010.
Elena Deza, Michel Marie Deza, Michel Marie Deza, and Elena Deza. Encyclopedia of distances.
  Springer, 2009.
Igor Douven. Abduction. In Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
  Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Summer 2021 edition, 2021.
Kuang Tih Fann. Peirce’s theory of abduction. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Xingyu Fu, Ben Zhou, Ishaan Preetam Chandratreya, Carl Vondrick, and Dan Roth. There’s a
  time and place for reasoning beyond the image. ArXiv, abs/2203.00758, 2022. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247218503.
Xingyu Fu, Yushi Hu, Bangzheng Li, Yu Feng, Haoyu Wang, Xudong Lin, Dan Roth, Noah A
  Smith, Wei-Chiu Ma, and Ranjay Krishna. Blink: Multimodal large language models can see but
  not perceive. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12390, 2024.
Roy Ganz, Yair Kittenplon, Aviad Aberdam, Elad Ben Avraham, Oren Nuriel, Shai Mazor, and
  Ron Litman. Question aware vision transformer for multimodal reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.05472, 2024.
Yair Ori Gat, Nitay Calderon, Amir Feder, Alexander Chapanin, Amit Sharma, and Roi Reichart.
  Faithful explanations of black-box NLP models using llm-generated counterfactuals. In The
  Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria,
  May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  UMfcdRIotC.
Zorik Gekhman, Jonathan Herzig, Roee Aharoni, Chen Elkind, and Idan Szpektor. Trueteacher:
  Learning factual consistency evaluation with large language models.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.11171, 2023.
Tejas Gokhale, Hamid Palangi, Besmira Nushi, Vibhav Vineet, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Chitta
  Baral, and Yezhou Yang. Benchmarking spatial relationships in text-to-image generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.10015, 2022.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Google. Gemini pro vision, 2024. URL https://ai.google.dev. Multimodal model.

Brian Gordon, Yonatan Bitton, Yonatan Shafir, Roopal Garg, Xi Chen, Dani Lischinski, Daniel
  Cohen-Or, and Idan Szpektor. Mismatch quest: Visual and textual feedback for image-text mis-
  alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03766, 2023.

Meng-Hao Guo, Tian-Xing Xu, Jiang-Jiang Liu, Zheng-Ning Liu, Peng-Tao Jiang, Tai-Jiang Mu,
 Song-Hai Zhang, Ralph R Martin, Ming-Ming Cheng, and Shi-Min Hu. Attention mechanisms
 in computer vision: A survey. Computational visual media, 8(3):331–368, 2022.

Pengcheng He, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Debertav3: Improving deberta using electra-style
  pre-training with gradient-disentangled embedding sharing. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=sE7-XhLxHA.

Jack Hessel, Jena D Hwang, Jae Sung Park, Rowan Zellers, Chandra Bhagavatula, Anna Rohrbach,
  Kate Saenko, and Yejin Choi. The abduction of sherlock holmes: A dataset for visual abductive
  reasoning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 558–575. Springer, 2022.

Yushi Hu, Benlin Liu, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Mari Ostendorf, Ranjay Krishna, and Noah A
  Smith. Tifa: Accurate and interpretable text-to-image faithfulness evaluation with question an-
  swering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  20406–20417, 2023.

Chuanyang Jin, Yutong Wu, Jing Cao, Jiannan Xiang, Yen-Ling Kuo, Zhiting Hu, Tomer Ullman,
  Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Tianmin Shu. Mmtom-qa: Multimodal theory of
  mind question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08743, 2024.

Likith Anoop Kadiyala, Omer Mermer, Dinesh Jackson Samuel, Yusuf Sermet, and Ibrahim Demir.
  The implementation of multimodal large language models for hydrological applications: A com-
  parative study of gpt-4 vision, gemini, llava, and multimodal-gpt. Hydrology, 11(9):148, 2024.

Seungone Kim, Juyoung Suk, Shayne Longpre, Bill Yuchen Lin, Jamin Shin, Sean Welleck, Graham
  Neubig, Moontae Lee, Kyungjae Lee, and Minjoon Seo. Prometheus 2: An open source language
  model specialized in evaluating other language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01535, 2024.

Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
 training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. CoRR, abs/1910.13461,
 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13461.

Bohao Li, Rui Wang, Guangzhi Wang, Yuying Ge, Yixiao Ge, and Ying Shan. Seed-bench: Bench-
  marking multimodal llms with generative comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16125,
  2023a.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.12597, 2023b.

Shir Lissak, Nitay Calderon, Geva Shenkman, Yaakov Ophir, Eyal Fruchter, Anat Brunstein
  Klomek, and Roi Reichart. The colorful future of llms: Evaluating and improving llms as
  emotional supporters for queer youth. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gómez-Adorno, and Steven
  Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), NAACL 2024, Mexico City, Mexico, June 16-21, 2024, pp. 2040–2079. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/V1/2024.NAACL-LONG.113. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.113.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tanglin Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains for
  science question answering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:2507–2521,
  2022.
Bill MacCartney. Natural language inference. Stanford University, 2009.
Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
  heuristics in natural language inference. In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  pp. 3428–3448, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
  18653/v1/P19-1334. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1334.
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. Adver-
  sarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural language understanding. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai,
  Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4885–4901, Online, July 2020. Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.441. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2020.acl-main.441.
Piotr Padlewski, Max Bain, Matthew Henderson, Zhongkai Zhu, Nishant Relan, Hai Pham, Donovan
  Ong, Kaloyan Aleksiev, Aitor Ormazabal, Samuel Phua, et al. Vibe-eval: A hard evaluation suite
  for measuring progress of multimodal language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02287, 2024.
Pranshu Pandya, Agney S Talwarr, Vatsal Gupta, Tushar Kataria, Vivek Gupta, and Dan Roth.
  Ntsebench: Cognitive reasoning benchmark for vision language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.10380, 2024.
Charles Sanders Peirce, Charles Hartshorne, and Paul Weiss. Pragmatism and pragmaticism. (No
  Title), 1934.
Alastair Pollitt. Comparative judgement for assessment. International Journal of Technology and
  Design Education, 22(2):157–170, 2012.
Libo Qin, Qiguang Chen, Xiachong Feng, Yang Wu, Yongheng Zhang, Yinghui Li, Min Li,
  Wanxiang Che, and Philip S Yu. Large language models meet nlp: A survey. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.12819, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 8821–8831. Pmlr, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Dhruv Shah, Błażej Osiński, Sergey Levine, et al. Lm-nav: Robotic navigation with large pre-
  trained models of language, vision, and action. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 492–504.
  PMLR, 2023.
Andreas Stöckl. Evaluating a synthetic image dataset generated with stable diffusion. In Interna-
  tional Congress on Information and Communication Technology, pp. 805–818. Springer, 2023.
Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela, and
  Candace Ross. Winoground: Probing vision and language models for visio-linguistic composi-
  tionality. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 5238–5248, 2022.
Michael Toker, Hadas Orgad, Mor Ventura, Dana Arad, and Yonatan Belinkov. Diffusion lens:
 Interpreting text encoders in text-to-image pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05846, 2024.

                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mor Ventura, Eyal Ben-David, Anna Korhonen, and Roi Reichart. Navigating cultural chasms: Ex-
 ploring and unlocking the cultural pov of text-to-image models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01929,
 2023.
San Verhavert, Renske Bouwer, Vincent Donche, and Sven De Maeyer. A meta-analysis on the
  reliability of comparative judgement. Assessment in Education: Principles, policy & practice, 26
  (5):541–562, 2019.
Athanasios Voulodimos, Nikolaos Doulamis, Anastasios Doulamis, and Eftychios Protopapadakis.
  Deep learning for computer vision: A brief review. Computational intelligence and neuroscience,
  2018(1):7068349, 2018.
Xiaoshi Wu, Keqiang Sun, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. Human preference score:
  Better aligning text-to-image models with human preference. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2096–2105, 2023.
Ning Xie, Farley Lai, Derek Doran, and Asim Kadav. Visual entailment: A novel task for fine-
  grained image understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06706, 2019.
Hu Xu, Gargi Ghosh, Po-Yao Huang, Dmytro Okhonko, Armen Aghajanyan, Florian Metze, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Videoclip: Contrastive pre-training for zero-shot
  video-text understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.14084, 2021.
Michal Yarom, Yonatan Bitton, Soravit Changpinyo, Roee Aharoni, Jonathan Herzig, Oran Lang,
 Eran Ofek, and Idan Szpektor. What you see is what you read? improving text-image alignment
 evaluation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jinyoung Yeo, Gyeongbok Lee, Gengyu Wang, Seungtaek Choi, Hyunsouk Cho, Reinald Kim Am-
   playo, and Seung-won Hwang. Visual choice of plausible alternatives: An evaluation of image-
   based commonsense causal reasoning. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference
   on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), 2018.
Nur Yildirim, Hannah Richardson, Maria Teodora Wetscherek, Junaid Bajwa, Joseph Jacob,
  Mark Ames Pinnock, Stephen Harris, Daniel Coelho De Castro, Shruthi Bannur, Stephanie Hy-
  land, et al. Multimodal healthcare ai: identifying and designing clinically relevant vision-language
  applications for radiology. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
  ing Systems, pp. 1–22, 2024.
Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language
  image pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 11975–11986, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao
  Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
  and Ion Stoica. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In Alice Oh,
  Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10
  - 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  hash/91f18a1287b398d378ef22505bf41832-Abstract-Datasets_and_
  Benchmarks.html.


                                                 15
                                     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     A      DATA C URATION

                                     Joining recent efforts in evaluating VLMs with                                                                    Scenes Wr it ing
                                                                                                                                                                                             Hand-curated
                                     an emphasis on the quality of test sets over their                             SceneWriting                             Filtering
                                                                                                                                                                                             Model-generated
                                     sheer size (Thrush et al., 2022; Bitton-Guetta
                                     et al., 2024; Bitton et al., 2023; Bitton-Guetta                                                                 I mage Gener at ion
                                                                                                                                                                                 Premise            Hypothesis
                                     et al., 2023; Padlewski et al., 2024), we care-                                                                                              Image
                                                                                                                                                                                Generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                     images
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Generation
                                     fully curated 350 test set examples. The cre-                                 Prompt Augmentationby                 Fixing Alignment
                                                                                                                           LLM
                                     ation process of NL-E YE required human in-                                                                                                        Image Editing
                                     volvement at every key step (see Figure 6), en-                                                                                            for Consistency andAlignment
                                     abling the creation of diverse, high-quality ex-                                                             Expl anat ion and Cat egor iz at ion

                                     amples tailored to the evaluation’s specific goal.                           Plausibility Validation                Gold Explanation            Feature Classification
                                                                                                                                                             Writing
                                     NL-E YE is a multi-image benchmark consist-
                                     ing of daily life scenes. A “scene” refers to a
                                                                                                                 Figure 6: NL-E YE data curation workflow
                                     specific setting where objects, people, and ac-
                                                                                                                 scheme. The process includes three steps: (1)
                                     tions are arranged in a particular context, which
                                                                                                                 writing textual descriptions, (2) generating im-
                                     can be represented either textually or visually.
                                                                                                                 ages, and (3) generating explanation and catego-
                                     The benchmark includes both representations,
                                                                                                                 rization. Yellow denotes steps that require human
                                     and the following key steps in its creation pro-
                                                                                                                 involvement while turquoise denotes model-based
                                     cess: (1) textual description writing, (2) image
                                                                                                                 generations.
                                     generation, and (3) explanation and categoriza-
                                     tion.

                                           Textual Descriptions Scenes were manually crafted by a group of 20 annotators who were tasked
                                           with creating triplets consisting of a premise scene, and two hypothesis scenes, while one is more
                                           plausible than the other (see the first step, “scenes writing”, in Figure 6). Each annotator had the
                                           flexibility to develop hypotheses across diverse reasoning categories, time directions, time durations,
                                           and domains. Annotators’ creativity and experiences generated unique, everyday scenes that are of-
                                           ten undocumented or scattered, making it hard to gather automatically similar data. We manually
                                           filtered scenes from the suggested pool based on several key criteria: (1) premise necessity, ensuring
                                           the scene is essential for determining the more plausible hypothesis; (2) visual relevance, guarantee-
                                           ing the scenes can be effectively communicated visually; and (3) uniqueness, verifying that we do
             Because morelikely toloose a sock
                                           notonreplicate
                                                 a hanging linethan in a dryer
                                                               similar      existing examples or logical patterns (see examples in Appendix Table 14). We
                                           also applied preferences for receiving a range of challenges, from easy to difficult, as well as diverse
                                           time shifts, including varying directions and durations. After applying these filters, we retained 75%
                                           of 450 suggested ideas.
                                                                                                     Triplet Setup                                                                           Pairs Setup
                                                                            Context                         1                                 2                                  Context                         1

                                     Image Generation The images in NL-E YE were manually curated by two of the authors (noted
                                     as “the designers”), who have experience with text-to-image models. This careful generation pro-                                                                                     Rank #1: 7
                                     cess ensures high-quality images and verifies consistency, alignment between text and images, and
                                     overall clarity. The images were generated based on the textual descriptions using mainly Midjour-
                                     ney and DALL-E 3 (Ramesh et al., 2021). During the prompt augmentation phase, The designers
                                     had the option to utilize assistance from Gemini and GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023)Context            to transform the2                                                            Arg-Max     MorePlausib

eft    top right                     human-generated concise descriptions from step 1, into more detailed prompts with specific visual
                                     elements, enhancing visual consistency (see Appendix §H). For example, the step 1 textual descrip-
left   bottom right                  tion, the boy is crying, turns to the augmented        prompt,     the curly redhead boy with the striped green                                                                     Rank #2: 3
                                                                                  More Plausible: Image 1
                                     t-shirt is crying. Once the revised prompts were verified to ensure they don’t interfere with the es-
                                                                           Explanation: Museumcoins typically have
                                     sential content (e.g., a change such as the
                                                                              signifteenager      is crying
                                                                                     icant archaeological       or an omission such as the curly redhead
                                                                                                          origins
                                     boy is wearing striped t-shirt) and manual edits were made if necessary, the prompts were ready for
                                     image generation.

ding   Communication   Interaction
                                     Typically, the process begins with generating the premise image. Image generation is an iterative
                                     process, involving repeated cycles of manual editing and image-to-image alignment until high qual-
                                     ity and consistency are achieved. The image generation phase produces photorealistic images that
                                     are visually consistent, meaning that objects, people, and environments appearing in one image of
                                     the triplet are the same as in the others.
                                                                          St ep 1
                                                                                        The last guideline
                                                                                                       St ep 2
                                                                                                                       arises from Stthe  ep 3
                                                                                                                                                  crucial need to exclude
                                     style from reasoning considerations
                                                                       Scene W ritingthe future Prom
                                                                              in                    pt Augmentation by
                                                                                                evaluation           of  VLMs   on    the
                                                                                                                                 Plausibility   task.
                                                                                                                                              Validation Technically, visual
                                                                                                         LLM
                                     consistency is achieved not only through prompt augmentations but also via inpainting (i.e., edit-

                                                                                       Filtering                                                           GoldExplanation
                                                                                                            16FixingAlignment                                  Writing


                                                                                                       Context                    Candidate
                                                                                      Hand-curated      Image                      images                Features Classifying
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ing a specific region of an image using a textual prompt), image-conditioned prompting (generating
an image while conditioning on another image), and using the same seed (initial noise distribution
number) for all triplet images. See an example of image generation, step 2, in Figure 17 in Appendix
§H.

Explanation For each example, the designers wrote gold-standard explanations 2 The gold ex-
planation represents the original reasoning behind the scenes at the time of their curation. The gold
explanation clarifies why the correct hypothesis is a more plausible outcome or cause of the premise.
It often follows a pattern like “Usually, X tends to Y” or “Because X made Y to...”. Naturally, the
explanation written at this stage is not the only possible explanation of the reasoning. Humans can
suggest multiple plausible explanations and stories to justify connections between observations, also
even for less likely scenarios. For example, examining the example of the Social reasoning category
in Figure 3 (bottom-right row), the premise image depicts a wallet with a family photo, the hypothe-
sis images depict a man’s hand with a wedding ring (plausible) and a man’s hand without a wedding
ring (less plausible), and the human explanation is a man with a family photo in his wallet is socially
and statistically more likely to be married rather than single. However, the man might be married
but not wearing a ring, have a family without being married, or the scenes might tell a story of loss
and remembrance.

Validation and Categorization The validation process consists of two key checks: (1) image-text
alignment and (2) plausibility validation. First, we ensured that the images were correctly aligned
with their corresponding texts. Second, we qualitatively assessed each example’s plausibility, eval-
uating how difficult it is to understand the intended meaning and make any necessary adjustments.
This process includes manual verification by the designers, supported by a human baseline (§3.3)
with a high human success rate on the plausibility prediction task (85%; see §4) and strong inter-
annotator-agreement (67.6%; unanimous votes) confirms the clarity.In addition, the designer classi-
fied the examples into relevant categories, as outlined in the previous section.

Dataset Statistics NL-E YE is categorized by reasoning categories, domains and temporal infor-
mation. The Logical, Social, Physical, Cultural, Functional, and Emotional reasoning categories
comprise 28%, 24.6%, 17.8%, 14.3%, 7% and 8%, respectively, of the benchmark examples. 78%
of the examples are in the time duration of short-term, divided mainly (68%) with the forward di-
rection. The long-term examples are 22% while 27% of them are also associated with the backward
direction. Refer to the histogram of reasoning categories and real NL-E YE examples in Appendix
Figures 18 and 16, respectively.

B     E XTENDED D EFINITIONS
B.1    S UB - CAPABILITIES OF V ISUAL A BDUCTIVE R EASONING IN NL-E YE

We propose that visual abductive reasoning can be organized into three levels of sub-capabilities,
ranging from basic to advanced skills. Below, we outline and define these levels:

Basic Capabilities

       • Visual Recognition: Comprehending visual elements and their spatial relationships within
         a scene.
       • Object Detection: Identifying and recognizing objects in the visual input.

Intermediate Capabilities

       • Handling Multiple Images or Details: Analyzing information across multiple images or
         managing intricate details within a single image.
       • Object Tracking: Identifying an object in one image as the same object in another, even
         across changes in perspective or context.
    2
      The benchmark contains the gold explanations and additional explanations written and validated by anno-
tators, see §3.3.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Advanced Capabilities

       • Temporal Understanding: The ability to interpret the sequence, direction, and duration
         of events in visual inputs. This includes identifying the flow of actions or changes, under-
         standing their temporal order, and estimating how long they persist.
       • Order Sensitivity and Correlation Handling: Recognizing the importance of sequence
         and distinguishing causal relationships from spurious correlations.
       • Common Sense Reasoning: Applying general world knowledge to infer logical conclu-
         sions about the visual input.
       • Plausibility Assessment and Decision-Making: Evaluating the likelihood of a scenario
         based on visual and contextual clues, and selecting the most plausible explanation or out-
         come from multiple options.

This hierarchical organization clarifies the definition of abductive reasoning in the context of NL-
E YE.

B.2   R EASONING C ATEGORIES D EFINITIONS

Table 4: NL-E YE textual descriptions examples. One example for each reasoning category. Every
example consists of a premise phrase, a plausible hypothesis phrase, and an implausible hypothesis
phrase.

  Category      Premise                           Plausible Hypothesis            Implausible Hypothesis
  Physical      A child sits on the floor,        A child sits on the floor,      A child sits on the floor,
                holding a wrapped present         holding an unwrapped rect-      holding an unwrapped ball-
                in the shape of a rectangu-       angular present.                shaped present.
                lar box.
  Logical       Clothesline with large            A refrigerator full of home-    An empty refrigerator with
                shirts and small children’s       made food, yogurts, and         only a few bottles of beer
                shirts.                           children’s food.                and ketchup.
  Emotional     A baby stroller with a paci-      A crying baby sits in a         A happy baby sits in a
                fier lying on the floor next to   stroller.                       stroller.
                it.
  Functional    A large thin circle of dough      A lump of dough and a           A lump of dough and a
                on a kitchen surface.             rolling pin on a kitchen sur-   pasta maker on a kitchen
                                                  face.                           surface.
  Cultural      A digital clock shows 16:00       British old ladies sit and      British old ladies play con-
                pm and an image of Queen          drink hot tea cups.             tract bridge game.
                Elizabeth is on the wall.
  Social        A person with a kiss mark         Grandmother arrived as a        Grandfather arrived as a
                on the cheek sitting at a hol-    guest.                          guest.
                iday table with family.



Physical Reasoning. Involves understanding the physical world and how objects interact within
it. The scenes include changes in temperature, phase, shadow’s location, color, shape, etc. This
reasoning is inspired by the spatial-temporal reasoning definition (Deza et al., 2009).

Functional Reasoning. Requires an understanding of objects’ functionalities and tools’ common
usage. This type of reasoning involves not just recognizing objects and tools, but also comprehend-
ing their intended purposes and how they interact within various contexts. For instance, a hammer
is not merely identified by its shape but also by its function of driving nails into surfaces. Functional
reasoning allows a model to infer the appropriate use of an object within a given scenario, such as
using a knife for cutting or a broom for sweeping.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Social Reasoning. Understanding social norms, relationships, and interactions. Social reasoning
allows for the comprehension of social norms and etiquette, such as knowing how to greet someone
depends on the context. This includes recognizing familial roles, friendships, professional relation-
ships, and the varying degrees of formality and familiarity in interactions.

Emotional Reasoning. Understanding and interpreting emotions and emotional responses. It
refers to the ability to identify a wide range of emotions, including happiness, sadness, anger, fear,
surprise, and disgust, and to understand the context in which these emotions arise.

Cultural Reasoning. Involves acknowledging cultural traits and traditions while correctly associ-
ating them with their respective cultures. It includes the ability to recognize and interpret cultural
symbols, rituals, languages, and behaviors accurately. For instance, it includes understanding that
certain gestures may have different meanings in different cultures or that specific holidays and cele-
brations are unique to particular cultural or religious groups.

Logical Reasoning. Requires an understanding of general processes and broad commonsense. It
enables the analysis of situations, draw inferences, and make decisions based on logical principles
and widely accepted knowledge. Logical reasoning involves the ability to follow a sequence of
steps to solve problems, recognize patterns, and identify relationships between different pieces of
information.

B.3   ACCURACY M ETRICS : M ATHEMATICAL F ORMULATION

Here we present the mathematical formulation of the accuracy metrics, based on the notations in
Section §3).
Formally, the consistency-accuracy (triplet accuracy) is:


 consistency Acc.(IP , IH1 , IH2 , Hgold ) =

                                             1, if f (IP , IH1 , IH2 ) = f (IP , IH2 , IH1 ) = Hgold
                                             0, otherwise

Formally, the order-faithful accuracy (pairs accuracy) is:


order-faithful Acc.(IP , IH1 , IH2 , Hgold ) =
                                             
                                             1, if f (IP , IH1 ) > f (IP , IH2 ) & H1 = Hgold
                                               1, or f (IP , IH1 ) < f (IP , IH2 ) & H2 = Hgold
                                             
                                               0, otherwise


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C       C OMPLEMENTARY R ESULTS
C.1       R ESULTS OF P LAUSIBILITY P REDICTION AND E XPLANATION

Table 5: Plausibility prediction results of the triplet setup. Order refers to the position of the correct
hypothesis image in the input, whether it was presented first (order 1) or second (order 2).

          Baseline                       Model                          Consistency Acc.                Order 1 Acc.                Order 2 Acc.
          Separate-Images                Gemini-1.5-pro                          50.57%                       56.0%                    75.14%
                                         GPT-4-vision                            45.71%                       59.14%                    66.0%
                                         GPT-4o                                  16.29%                       97.43%                   16.29%
                                         Claude-3.5-sonnet                       49.28%                       65.9%                    59.31%
          Combined-Image                 Claude-3-opus                           15.14%                       30.57%                   72.86%
                                         Claude-3.5-sonnet                       28.29%                       76.86%                   30.29%
                                         Llava-mistral-7b                        14.86%                       53.14%                    26.0%
                                         Gemini-1.5-pro                          42.57%                       46.29%                   81.43%
                                         GPT-4-vision                            41.14%                       54.57%                   67.14%
                                         GPT-4o                                  60.0%                        76.0%                    69.14%
                                         Fuyu-8b                                  4.58%                       42.98%                   13.75%
          Text-Only                      GPT-4                                    78.0%                       86.86%                   82.86%
                                         GPT-4o                                   80.0%                       83.14%                   88.57%
                                         Gemini-1.5-pro                           65.8%                       72.99%                   79.02%
                                         Claude-opus-3                           80.57%                       85.43%                   87.43%
                                         Claude-sonnet-3.5                       79.43%                       82.29%                   89.43%
                                         Bart L mnli                              68.0%                       68.0%                     68.0%
                                         DeBeRTa-v3                                65%                         65%                       65%


Table 6: Pairs-setup performance with additional rank information regarding rank differences and
absolute values.
    Strategy            Model          Accuracy (%)   ∥Rank Diff∥   Equal Rank Rate (%)   Correct Rank Diff   Incorrect Rank Diff   Correct Rank   Incorrect Rank
                        GPT-4o             50            1.48               37                  2.54                 0.42               7.39            6.61
                     GPT-4-vision          40            1.60               44                  3.12                 0.58               6.97            6.04
 Separate-Images
                    Gemini-1.5-pro         42            1.71               43                  3.16                 0.65               7.13            6.47
                   Claude-Sonnet-3.5       38            1.33               41                  2.49                 0.60               7.97            7.58
                       GPT-4o              45            1.30               37                  2.27                 0.50               7.77            7.23
                     GPT-4-vision          34            1.28               48                  2.52                 0.62               6.76            6.37
Combined-Image
                    Gemini-1.5-pro         39            1.73               45                  3.29                 0.71               6.99            6.47
                      LLaVA 1.6            42            2.38               27                  3.31                 1.69               6.10            5.02
                       Fuyu-8b             44            2.58               17                  3.25                 2.04               8.06            7.60


Table 7: Human votes of candidate explanations. The percentage of votes reflects annotators’ agree-
ment with the candidate explanations provided by the models. 0-votes notes no-selection, 3-votes
notes selected unanimously.

      Input Strategy                     Model Name                 0 Votes (%)            1 Vote (%)             2 Votes (%)            3 Votes (%)
            Humans                               -                         5%                    9%                    25%                     60%
                                           GPT-4o                         77%                    8%                      5%                     9%
                                         GPT-4-vision                     61%                    8%                      6%                    25%
     Separate-Images
                                        Gemini-1.5-pro                    62%                    9%                      7%                    23%
                                       Claude-sonnet-3.5                  50%                   12%                     12%                    25%
                                           GPT-4o                         56%                    6%                      8%                    31%
                                         GPT-4-vision                     63%                    8%                     11%                    18%
                                        Gemini-1.5-pro                    60%                    7%                     12%                    21%
    Combined-Image                     Claude-sonnet-3.5                  58%                    8%                     10%                    24%
                                        Claude-opus-3                     74%                   12%                      5%                     9%
                                          LLaVA 1.6                       85%                    9%                      5%                     1%
                                             Fuyu                         90%                    8%                      2%                     1%


                                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Number of evaluated explanations. The explanations are associated with correct plausi-
bility prediction. Human explanations include the correct explanations of 3 crowd-workers. The
explanations are evaluated by human and automatically.

                                    Input Strategy                           Model                          Num Candidate Explanations
                                    Humans                                                                                      840
                                                                             Gemini-1.5-pro                                     282
                                                                             GPT-4-vision                                       278
                                    Separate-Images
                                                                             GPT-4o                                             340
                                                                             Claude-sonnet-3.5                                  265
                                                                             Claude-Opus-3                                      309
                                                                             Claude-sonnet-3.5                                  276
                                                                             LLaVA 1.6                                          224
                                    Combined-Image                           Gemini-1.5-pro                                     298
                                                                             GPT-4-vision                                       281
                                                                             GPT-4o                                             298
                                                                             Fuyu-8b                                            181
                                    Total Model explanations                                                                   3,868


              Gol d                                                  I mage- t o- Text
                                                                                                                                             I mage
    (Text ual Descr ipt ions)                                          (Cl aude 3.5)

    a groomandbride holdhands in         'The image shows a couple inwhat appears tobe a church or chapel setting. They are walking
    the aisle, looking happy.            together andlooking at each other with bright smiles, suggestinga joyful occasion, possibly a
                                         wedding.
                                         The womanis wearing anelegant off-the-shoulder white dress with long sleeves, which couldbe
                                         a wedding gown. Her long blonde hair is styledinloose waves.
                                         The manis dressedina dark suit jacket, white shirt, andhas a small floral boutonnire pinnedto
                                         his lapel, which is typical for a groom. He has dark, wavy hair anda beard.
                                         The backgroundshows archedceilings, hanging lights, andwhat looks like a stainedglass
                                         window, all indicative of a church interior. There are hints of other people anddecorations inthe
                                         background, suggestinganevent is taking place.
                                         The overall atmosphere of the image is one of happiness and celebration, capturedinan
                                         intimate moment between the couple as they walk through the venue.'

    twophones (one belonging toa man, 'The image shows twosmartphones heldside by side, displaying dating appinterfaces.
    one toa woman) display the tinder Both screens show "It\'s a Match!" messages, indicating that two users have
    appwith a match.                  matched with each other on the dating platforms. The left phone displays anapp
                                      called"Tindor" with a profile picture of a smiling manwith dark hair anda beard. The
                                      right phone shows anappcalled"Tinde" with a profile picture of a laughing womanwith
                                      longblonde hair. Both appinterfaces feature similar layouts with heart icons, action
                                      buttons (likely for likingor rejecting profiles), andsome text beneath the "It\'s a Match!"
                                      message. The phones are being heldby hands, suggesting a personis holding each device.
                                      The overall tone of the image is warm, with a soft backgroundlighting that emphasizes
                                      the bright screens of the smartphones. This setupappears tobe illustrating the moment
                                      whentwo people match on dating apps, capturing the excitement andpotential of a
                                      newconnectioninthe digital dating world.'


    twophones (one belonging to         'The image shows twosmartphones side by side, displaying what appears tobe a dating app
    a man, one toa woman)               interface. Both screens showprofile pictures andthe text "No Match" prominently displayed.
    display the tinder appwith a        Onthe left phone, we see a manwith dark hair anda beard, looking downat his phone. Onthe
    no-match.                           right phone, there\'s a womanwith long, light-coloredhair, alsolookingat her phone while
                                        touchingher face.Belowthe profile pictures onboth phones, there are twobuttons: a red
                                        heart onthe left anda gray or black heart onthe right. These are likely the app\'s interface
                                        for liking or passing ona potential match. The phones appear tobe modernsmartphones with
                                        notchedscreens, resembling recent iPhone models. The backgroundhas a warm, slightly
                                        glowingeffect, creating a moody atmosphere.The overall compositionsuggests a commentary
                                        onmodern dating apps andthe potential disconnection or missed connections that can
                                        occur indigital matchmaking.'


Figure 7: Image-to-text descriptions example. Detailed descriptions by Claude 3.5 and the gold
textual descriptions. In bold style are the key necessary details for succeeding in the plausibility
prediction task.


                                                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   F URTHER E XPERIMENTS

To complement our primary experiments, we conducted additional analyses to further examine the
reasoning capabilities of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) under various conditions. These ex-
periments focus on three key aspects: (1) evaluating the performance of additional open-source
VLMs that support multi-image inputs and flexible resolutions (Table 9), (2) assessing image-to-text
pipelines using Claude 3.5 as a predictor, in contrast to GPT-4o in the main experiments (Table 10),
and (3) analyzing the sensitivity of VLMs to different prompt formulations (Table 11). Our findings
highlight persistent limitations in current VLMs, with most models struggling to perform well on
NL-E YE tasks.
Table 9: Additional Open-source VLMs: Scores for vision-based experiments, including two ad-
ditional VLMs that are multi-image and support flexible resolutions and aspect ratios: MiniCPM,
which employs a SigLIP-400M visual encoder paired with the MiniCPM-2.4B language backbone
(MiniCPM v2.6), and LLaVA-OneVision, which integrates a SigLIP vision encoder with a Qwen2
language backbone (LLaVA-OneVision-Qwen2-7b). While performance on separate images re-
mains below random, using a combined image strategy with these models demonstrates improve-
ment, showcasing their enhanced ability to encode and leverage visual information effectively.

                        Input Strategy    Model                         Triplet Acc.
                        Humans            —                                  85%
                           Separate       MiniCPM-V-2.6                      12%
                           Images         LLaVA-OneVision-Qwen2-7b-ov        18%
                                          MiniCPM-V-2.6                      36%
                          Combined
                                          LLaVA-OneVision-Qwen2-7b-ov        23%
                           Image
                                          LLaVA-1.6                          14%
                        Random            —                                  25%
                        Dumb Pixel        —                                  50%



Table 10: Image-to-Text: Performance drops were observed also with Claude 3.5 as a predictor,
evaluated using Triplet Accuracy based on a separate image input strategy. GPT-4o demonstrates
lower performance in the plausibility performance task, as it relies on image descriptions. Both
models exhibit a significant drop in performance overall.

                                      Describer      Predictor: Claude 3.5
                                 Gemini-1.5-Pro              50%
                                  GPT-4 vision               44%
                                   LLaVA 1.6                 36%
                                     BLIP 2                  42%
                                  Instruct BLIP              36%


Table 11: Prompts Comparison with GPT-4 Vision: Analyzing different prompts provides valu-
able insights; however, a well-performing VLM (or any model) should be able to understand and
follow instructions. Excessive sensitivity to input prompts may indicate difficulty with the task. This
table includes results from experiments with 3 additional prompts. The CoT approach shows a 3%
improvement, while overall, the prompts demonstrate comparable performance.

           Prompt Variant                Prompt Template            Triplet Acc. (Separated)
           Regular (Table 16)                      –                               46%
           Reverse Task               First explain, then predict                  43%
           CoT                         Let’s think step by step                    49%
           Role                       You are a causality expert                   44%


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     FAILURE A NALYSIS

This section examines key failure points and differences in VLM reasoning patterns, with a focus
on quantitative comparisons to human performance and qualitative failure analysis.

Are Human and Model Difficulties Aligned? In the plausibility prediction task using the triplet
setup of the separate-images input strategy, humans and VLMs agree on 55% of the predictions (full
comparison in Table 12). When humans are incorrect, the model’s success rate falls to 30%, below
random chance. While the model outperforms humans in only 5% of cases, its explanations in these
instances are rarely accurate. Furthermore, only 21% of the models’ errors overlap with human
errors, indicating that humans and models tend to make different types of mistakes. Additional
examples are shown in Figures 11 and 12.

Table 12: Plausibility prediction analysis: Model vs. Human Comparison. ✓notes correct prediction
while × notes incorrect one.

              Model          Model ✓Human ✓    Model ✓Human ×     Model ×Human ×       Model ×Human ✓
         Claude-sonnet-3.5        44%                5%                   10%                   40%
          Gemini-1.5-pro          46%                5%                   11%                   38%
           GPT-4-vision           41%                4%                   11%                   42%
           Models Avg.            44%                5%                   11%                   40%



VLM Failure Analysis This section presents a qualitative analysis of VLMs’ explanations for
wrong predictions. We qualitatively analyze 120 explanations – 40 from each VLM: Gemini 1.5,
GPT-4 and Claude 3.5.
We identify five main factors contributing to the models’ failures: (1) style & consistency: When
irrelevant visual details influence the decision; (2) time: When the explanation relies on incorrect
time direction or duration; (3) ignoring key details: Overlooking important information; (4) missing
knowledge: Misinterpreting key details despite recognizing them; (5) failed comparison: Justifying
a less plausible hypothesis with logical reasoning. Table 13 presents illustrative examples of these
factors.
As Figure 8 shows, all models struggle with
understanding temporal progression. Notably,
Claude often relies on style considerations,
with 30% of its errors resulting from this factor,
indicating an overemphasis on irrelevant visual
details. Both Gemini (32%) and GPT-4 (25%)
frequently miss key details, suggesting recogni-
tion gaps. GPT-4 has the highest rate of failed
comparisons, often making the incorrect deci-
sion at the final plausibility stage. To further
understand these failures, researchers can try
to interpret models’ internal thought processes
(Toker et al., 2024).
                                                                 Claude 3.5        Gemini 1.5         GPT- 4


Does Image Naturalness Influence Model Figure 8: Failure factors of model explanation for
Performance? Synthesizing the benchmark incorrect plausibility prediction.
provides flexibility to simulate diverse everyday scenes while maintaining consistency and qual-
ity. Extracting triplet scenes from real-world sources, such as videos, poses challenges in terms of
efficiency and feasibility, particularly when ensuring consistency between the premise and a false
hypothesis, which may not exist in the same video.
To evaluate the influence of image style, generated versus realistic, on model performance, we con-
ducted an ablation study using a subset of 20 triplets (60 images) 3 that are parallel to the generated
   3
     The sample IDs of the real images subset: [8, 15, 24, 30, 35, 47, 51, 63, 84, 86, 106, 118, 187, 192, 200,
256, 268, 312, 342]


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Failure factors with examples, as illustrated by the following scene - a premise of a man
in a hospital bed with a broken leg and two hypotheses: a wet floor with (less plausible) and without
(plausible) a warning sign (Figure 1).

    Failure Factor                     Example
    Style & Consistency                Selecting the image because the window in the background matches the
                                       one in the premise image.
    Time                               Assuming the hypothesis occurs after the premise and concluding the
                                       warning sign was placed after an accident.
    Ignored Key Details                Ignoring the cast on the man’s leg and assuming he’s resting rather than
                                       injured.
    Missing Knowledge                  Identifying the sign but not realizing it’s a warning sign.
    Failed Comparison                  Selecting the hypothesis with the warning sign, reasoning the person
                                       was distracted and didn’t see it, even though slipping could occur in
                                       both cases.


ones, consisting solely of natural images sourced online or photographed by students, as demon-
strated in Figure 9. We selected examples that were straightforward to produce, focusing on those
that did not require consistency across individuals or highly nuanced setups, due to the complexity
of finding or producing such cases. This resulted in simpler examples that generally yielded higher
performance outcomes.
Our analysis reveals that GPT-4 Vision achieves 58% consistency-accuracy (triplet, separate images)
on real images compared to 68% on generated original ones. This suggests that the performance
gap is not significantly influenced by the type of images used, but it opens the door for further
investigation into how visual styles may may impact the robustness of visual abductive reasoning
performance in VLMs.

                        Gener at ed (phot or eal ist ic st yl e)            Gener at ed (phot or eal ist ic st yl e)


 NL- Eye
exampl es



                                Onl ine Ext r act ion                                    Phot ogr aphed


 Abl at ion:
 Real ist ic
  Images


                                Figure 9: Examples of the real images subset.


                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  A)                                    Style & Consistency                                             D)                                      Missing Knowledge


   Claude 3.5:                                                                                          Claude 3.5:
    'The secondhypothesis image is more plausible because it shows the same older man as in the         'Hypothesis 1is more plausible because it shows a strong connectiontothe context image. Both
   context image, but ina normal, smiling pose. ..... Both images share the same setting, clothing,     images feature the same ancient, gnarled tree andthe same ginger cat, suggesting a
   and person, indicating they are part of the same photo session or moment. The second                 continuity of setting and characters. The maindifference is that the context image shows a
   hypothesis image, showing a young girl, does not seemto be directly related to the context           child, while hypothesis 1shows anolder man, implying a passage of time. This couldrepresent the
   image interms of subject or timing.'                                                                 same person returning to a meaningf ul place fromtheir childhood...'
   B)                                            Time                                                   E)                                       Failed Comparison


   Gemini 1.5:                                                                                          GPT- 4:
   'Image 1shows fresh flowers, which are more likely to be purchased or received upon                  'The secondhypothesis image shows a personina gymsetting, which is a common place for
   returning f roma trip. Image 1depicts wilting flowers, suggesting a passage of time.'                someone to carry a sports bag and wear sports goggles, as seeninthe context image. The bag
  C)                                     Ignored Key Details                                            andgoggles suggest that the personis either preparing for or has f inished a swimming session,
                                                                                                        which is anactivity typically associated with a gym. The secondhypothesis image, while it also
                                                                                                        shows a personwith a similar bag, is set ina residential pool area, which is less likely tobe directly
                                                                                                        relatedtothe use of sports goggles for swimming. Therefore, the first image is more plausible
                                                                                                        because it aligns with the commonuse of sports equipment ina gymenvironment.'


   Gemini 1.5:
   'Because the dog inthe context image is peacef ully sleeping next to its food bowl, andthe dog in
   Image 2 is happy andhealthy with its owner, it is more likely that the dog inthe context image is
   enjoying a fulfilling life like the dog inImage 2.'



Figure 10: VLM failure analysis: Explanations examples. Based on five main factors: (A) Style &
consistency, (B) Time, (C) Ignored key details, (D) Missing knowledge and (E) Failed comparison.


                                                                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          A)                                                    Explanation


                           Gemini 1.5:
                           'Image 1is more plausible because it visually matches the f ish inthe context image andcould
                           be a toy version of it. Moreover, it's unlikely that a cat would be playing with a dead
                           f ish (Image 2).'
                          B)                                                    Explanation


                          Claude 3.5:
                          'Hypothesis 1is more plausible because it shows a crumpled pink paper, ... The crumpledpaper
                          suggests a failed attempt at folding the origami, which wouldnaturally occur before
                          successf ully creating the intricate f lower shape seeninthe context image...'

Figure 11: VLM failure analysis: When the model’s plausibility prediction is correct - the explana-
tion can be either valid (B) or not (A).



        A)                                                  Model Explanation                  HumanPrediction


        Gemini 1.5:                                                                     Human
        'People typically don't wear suits in their own homes, making image 2 more      'The toilet has possibly overflowedor the bathroomis j ust a complete
        likely tooccur ina settinglike the dilapidated bathroom. While it's unlikely    mess. The manin1is wearing a suit, andI don't believe he's related
        someone wouldchoose towash their hands inthe bathroomfromthe context            to the toilet. The maninnumber 2 is wearing a bathrobe and used
        image, image 2 presents a slightly more plausible scenarioof someone being      the toilet, andthen it exploded.'
        forced to use a run- down facility.'
        B)                                                  Model Explanation                  Human Prediction


        GPT- 4:                                                                             Human
        'The first hypothesis image is more plausible because it shows a cow standing in 'It is more plausible for a cow to be on a road in a country area
        the middle of the road with a motorcyclist stopped at a distance, which          rather than a city street.'
        couldlogically precede the context image where the motorcyclist is closer and
        the cowis in focus, suggesting that the motorcyclist has approached the cow
        since the f irst image. The second hypothesis image, while similar, shows a
        different cow...'


Figure 12: VLM failure analysis: When humans plausibility prediction is incorrect, and model’s
explanation is correct - the explanation can be either valid (B) or not (A).



                                                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    H UMAN P ERFORMANCE & E VALUATION

                  Plausibility Prediction & Explanation                                                Explanation Evaluation
              Context                                                                      Context


                                  Answer                                                                        Answer

      Answer:                                                                       - The pacifier fell to the floor next to the baby stroller, from the
      More Plausible Choice: Hypothesis 1                                             baby?s mouth so he is not calm anymore.
      Explanation: The pacifier fell to the floor next to the baby stroller,        - The floral wallpaper matches the stroller pattern in image 1.
      from the baby?s mouth so he is not calm anymore.                              -? .
                                 Guideline                                                                    Guideline

      To correctly answer many such questions, you would have to                    1. To correctly select the valid explanations, they have to tell
       detect small details and tell yourself the reasonable ?story?                  the ?missing story? that connects between the context and
                            behind the scenes.                                                              the correct image.
                                                                                     2. The explanation of the wallpaper / stroller style does not
                                                                                                        explain the baby reaction.



Figure 13: Guidelines for the crowd-workers. Guidelines for the human baseline on the plausibility
prediction and plausibility explanation tasks (left), and for human evaluation of explanations (right).


Human Performance - Plausibility Prediction and Explanation. AMT Crowd-workers were in-
structed to complete the plausibility prediction and explanation tasks based on the following guide-
lines, in Figure 13 and the questions in Figure 14.

Human Evaluation of Explanations. The explanations are presented in a multiple-choice ques-
tion format (see Figure 15), where the crowd workers are instructed to select explanations that
demonstrate logical reasoning and clearly justify why the correct hypothesis is more plausible than
the other candidate (see Figure 13). We conduct the human evaluation of explanations across all the
input formats in the vision-based reasoning approach (Triplet setup), focusing on the explanations
associated with the correct plausibility predictions, resulting in a total of 3.8k explanations.


                                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: AMT questionnaire (human baseline) screen of the plausibility prediction and plausibility
explanation tasks.


                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       (a) MTurk Human Explanation Evaluation Instructions.


Figure 15: Human evaluation of explanation screen, including (a) instructions provided to partici-
pants, and (b) a screenshot of the AMT questionnaire.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS FOR E NHANCING V ISUAL
    A BDUCTIVE R EASONING
To improve VLMs’ abductive reasoning, future efforts could focus on refining both model architec-
tures and training tasks. Given our findings that models can reason from textual descriptions but
struggle with images, one approach might be to modify the image encoding to align with the textual
query, thereby enhancing representations of specific areas within the image. Another potential solu-
tion is to train a model to generate image descriptions that are optimized for downstream reasoning
tasks.
Building on this, techniques like Chain-of-Thought (CoT) can be extended to the visual domain, gen-
erating images as part of the reasoning-thinking process. Additionally, VLMs tend to assign undue
importance to style or image order rather than focusing on semantics. To address this, constructing
a large-scale training set that emphasizes semantic content over order and style could help models
prioritize meaning over superficial patterns, resulting in more robust reasoning. These strategies
collectively offer a path toward enhancing models’ visual abductive reasoning capabilities.

G    NL-E YE E XAMPLES


Figure 16: NL-E YE examples from each reasoning category (3 triplets per category). Each example
consists of 3 images: a premise (left column), a plausible hypothesis (green frame), and a less
plausible hypothesis (red frame). While the gold explanations are included in the benchmark, we
invite the reader to attempt to create valid explanations on their own.


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H      NL-E YE DATASET: C URATION D ETAILS

      Table 14: Examples of suggested textual descriptions (scenes) filtered by specific criteria.

    Filter Cri-    Premise           Hypothesis 1       Hypothesis 2     Reason
    terion
    Premise ne-    A teacher en-     An apple on the    An orange on     We don’t need to see the teacher
    cessity        ters school       teacher’s desk     the teacher’s    to understand it’s a school setup
                                                        desk
    Visual rele-   Man says hello    Man      enters    Man exits home   It’s unclear if the man is
    vance                            home                                saying hi or bye
    Uniqueness     Man with a bro-   Hole in a road     Hole in a road   Repetition of existing ideas
                   ken leg           under construc-    with a warning   (Figure 1)
                                     tion               sign of com-
                                                        pleted work


Text-to-Image Prompt.         The Text-To-Image prompt (in Midjourney) is consisted of 3 parts, while
the last one is optional:

         • Text description. The textual scene caption, basic or improved.
         • Photorealistic style. Adding textual styling of photorealistic images by mentioning it is
           captured with Nikon D850.
         • Visual consistency. Making an image consistent with another image by setting the same
           seed number, and referring to the reference image with the flag cref and its conditioning
           strength with the flag cw ranging from 0-100.

All these parts are aggregated into the following template:
< prompt caption >, captured with a Nikon D850 and a 24-70mm lens at f/2.8 –seed <> –cref <>
–cw 80

Prompt Augmentation. Augmenting a text description by prompting Gemini or GPT-4 with the
following prompt:
Describe visually a specific looks of < interacting component1 >, < interacting component2 > and
< environment >. keep it short and concise, and avoid NSFW words. and integrate these details
into every reference of them in the following captions smoothly and consistently. do not change the
content of the captions besides the visual description integrations. return in a JSON format: 1) <first
image caption> 2) <plausible second image caption> 3) <implausible second image caption>
 Note: integrate the environment only if it fits the context of the caption.
For example:
interacting component1: little child, interacting component2: vaccine, environment: nurse room,
first image caption: a child gets a vaccine., plausible second image caption: a child cries after
getting a vaccine., implausible second image caption: a child smiles after getting a vaccine.
Response:
improved first image caption: a short curly-haired child wearing a green t-shirt receives a vaccine
with a silver syringe in a nurse’s room filled with toys. improved plausible second image caption:
the short curly-haired child in a green t-shirt cries after receiving a vaccine in the toy-filled nurse
room. improved implausible second image caption: the short curly-haired child in a green t-shirt
smiles after receiving a vaccine in the nurse’s room.


                                                       31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                                                           l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               na
                                                                                                                                                                         na


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  al


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                                                     al


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ica


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          al
                                                                                                                        l


                                                                                                                                                                                                       al


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ra
                                                                                                                      ra


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            cia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cia
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                  ion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t io
                                                                                                                                                                     t io


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gic
                                                                                                                                                                                                    gic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lt u
                                                                                                                  lt u


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ys


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          So
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      So


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ot



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nc



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lo
                                                                                                                                                                   nc
                                                                                                                                               ot


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ph
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ph


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cu
                                                                                                                Cu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Em
                                                                                                                                             Em


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fu
                                                                                                                                                                 Fu
                                                                                                                                   Premise                  Plausible Hypothesis                    ImplausibleHypothesis


                            Images gener at ing
                              st ep: zoom- in


                                                  Pr emise                                                                                                                 Hypot hesis 1                                                                                Hypot hesis 2
          Pr emise                                                                                                                                  Hypot hesis 1                                                                                 Hypot hesis 2
                              The boy is crying while getting the injection                                                                                                  The boy is holdinga present,                                                         Theboy is holdingcarrots andbroccoli,
           Scene                                                                                                                                       Scene                                                                                         Scene
                                                                                                                                                                           havinga bandage on his shoulder                                                          havinga bandage on his shoulder

                                                                                                                                                      Pr ompt            The curly redheadboy withthe stripedgreent-shirt is waiting happily in
         Pr ompt            The curly redheadboy with the stripedgreent-shirt is crying while gettingthe injectionby his female doctor             Hypot hesis 1         the nursing room, holding a present, with a bandage onhis shoulder,
      augment at ion                                                                                                                                  + Image            captured witha NikonD850 anda 24-70mmlens at f/2. --cerf
                           The curly redheadboy with the stripedgreent-shirt is crying while getting the injection in thenursing room               condit ion +         <premise_image_link>--seed<premise_seed>
      Pr ompt Fixing                                                                                                                                   seed


        Pr ompt +           The curly redheadboy with the stripedgreent-shirt is crying while gettingthe injectionin the                           Text - To- Image                                                                                               region-imageediting:
      phot or eal ist ic    nursing room, capturedwith a NikonD850 anda 24-70mmlens at f/2.                                                          Gener at ion                                                                                                 holdinga beg with lot of carrots
           st yl e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                andbroccoli


                                                                                                                                                                                                             region-imageediting:                 hypot hesis
                                                                                                                                                                                                             makea plaster strip                   2 Image
      Text - To- Image                                             Thereare bandages might imply the image already after the
                                                                   vaccination                                                                      hypot hesis 1                                                                                   Edit ing
        Gener at ion                                                                                                                                Image Edit ing
                                                                     Theinjectionis missing!



                                                                                                                                                                                                             region-imageediting:
                                                                                                                                                                                                             makea plaster striponthe exposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                             shoulder
                                                                   region-imageediting:
      Pr emise Image                                               boy is getting the injectioninthe shoulder
          Edit ing                                                                                                                                  hypot hesis 1
                                                                                                                                                    Image Edit ing


                                                                                                                                                                                                             region-imageediting: holdinga
                                                                                                                                                                                                             present
                                                                 get premise image seed?

                                                                                                                                                    hypot hesis 1
                                                                                                                                                    Image Edit ing


Figure 17: Zoom into the image generation step in NL-E YE curation, as seen in Figure 6. Yellow
color notes a hand-curated stage, while turquoise notes a model-generated stage. All stages require
human involvement for fixing, editing and validating.


                Domain                                                                                                                                                         Direction - Duration
           Administration                                                                                                                                                              Backward - Long
           Business & Work                                                                                                                                                             Backward - Short
           Daily- life & Hospitality                                                                                                                                                   Forward - Long
           Education                                                                                                                                                                   Forward - Short
           Healthcare                                                                                                                                                                  Parallel - Short
           Religion
           Sciene & Technology
           Sports & Arts
           Transportation


Figure 18: Dataset Analysis. A histogram of the NL-E YE examples. The benchmark is also an-
notated with diverse domains (left): administration, business & work, daily life & hospitality, ed-
ucation, healthcare, religion, science & technology, sports & arts and transportation, and repre-
sentation of time duration and direction (right) in every reasoning category. Parallel in noted by
”parallel-short”.


                                                                                                                                                            32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I     R EPRODUCIBILITY AND R ESOURCES

       Table 15: API and version of closed-source models used for inference on NL-E YE tasks.

                          API       Model Version                    Used as
                          Gemini    gemini-1.5-pro                   VLM, LLM
                          GPT       gpt-4o-2024-08-06                VLM, LLM
                          GPT       gpt-4-1106-vision-preview        VLM, LLM
                          Claude    claude-3-opus-20240229           VLM, LLM
                          Claude    claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620       VLM, LLM


        Table 16: Textual prompts for task descriptions in different input strategies and setups.

    Input Strategy      Setup           Prompt Template
                        Triplet         Given a context image and 2 hypothesis images (3 total images), which
    Separate-Images
                                        image of the following two (1 and 2) is more plausible? The context
                                        image can happen before or after the hypothesis images. Mention which
                                        one is more plausible – 1 or 2, and explain.
                        Pairs           Given a pair of images – a context image and a hypothesis image – rank
                                        how plausible the hypothesis image is in relation to the context. The
                                        context image can occur before or after the hypothesis image. Rank the
                                        plausibility with a score between 1 and 10, where: 1: Not plausible at
                                        all, 3: Slightly plausible, 5: Moderately plausible, 7: Very plausible, 10:
                                        Almost necessarily plausible. Explain why.
                        Triplet         Given a context image (left image) and two hypothesis images (middle
    Combined-Image
                                        and right), which hypothesis image (1 or 2) is more plausible? Mention
                                        which one is more plausible – 1 or 2, and explain. The context image
                                        can happen before or after the hypothesis images.
                        Pairs           The first (left) image is the context image. Given a pair of images...(as
                                        Separate-Images - Pairs)
    Text-Only           Triplet         Given a context, hypothesis1, and hypothesis2, which hypothesis is more
                                        plausible? The context can occur before or after the hypotheses.
    Image-to-Text       Triplet         Describe the content of the image in detail.



Prompt of Auto Evaluation of Explanation. We combine classes 0 and 1 as a false (invalid)
explanation, and 3 as a positive (valid) explanation:
Context: <premise textual description>,
Plausible Hypothesis: <hypthesis 1 textual description>,
Less Plausible Hypothesis: <hypothesis 2 textual description>.
Return 0 (Not logical at all), 1 (Logical but different), or 2 (Logical and same as one of the gold)
if the candidate’s explanation presents the same logical common sense as appears in one of the gold
explanations for justifying the plausible hypothesis.
Candidate explanation: <candidate explanation>.
Gold explanations:
Explanation 1: <gold explanation>...


                                                    33
