Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING S PATIOTEMPORAL DYNAMICAL S YSTEMS
FROM P OINT P ROCESS O BSERVATIONS

 Valerii Iakovlev Harri Lähdesmäki
 Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
 {valerii.iakovlev, harri.lahdesmaki}@aalto.fi



                                              A BSTRACT

         Spatiotemporal dynamics models are fundamental for various domains, from heat
         propagation in materials to oceanic and atmospheric flows. However, currently
         available neural network-based spatiotemporal modeling approaches fall short
         when faced with data that is collected randomly over time and space, as is often the
         case with sensor networks in real-world applications like crowdsourced earthquake
         detection or pollution monitoring. In response, we developed a new method that
         can effectively learn spatiotemporal dynamics from such point process observations.
         Our model integrates techniques from neural differential equations, neural point
         processes, implicit neural representations and amortized variational inference to
         model both the dynamics of the system and the probabilistic locations and timings
         of observations. It outperforms existing methods on challenging spatiotemporal
         datasets by offering substantial improvements in predictive accuracy and computa-
         tional efficiency, making it a useful tool for modeling and understanding complex
         dynamical systems observed under realistic, unconstrained conditions.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In this work, consider the modeling of spatiotemporal dynam-
ical systems whose dynamics are driven by partial differential
equations. Such systems are ubiquitous and range from heat
propagation in microstructures to the dynamics of oceanic cur-
rents. We use the data-driven modeling approach, where we
observe a system at various time points and spatial locations
and use the collected data to learn a model. In practice, the data
is often collected by sensor networks that make measurements
at random time points and random spatial locations. Such a
measurement approach is used, for example, in crowdsourced
earthquake monitoring where smartphones are used as mea-
surement devices (Minson et al., 2015; Kong et al., 2016), in Figure 1: Top: Previous models as-
oceanographic monitoring where measurements are made by sume dense observations at every
floating buoys (Albaladejo et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2014; Marin- time point and fixed spatiotemporal
Perianu et al., 2008), and for air pollution monitoring with grids. Bottom: Our model works
vehicle-mounted sensors (Ma et al., 2008; Ghanem et al., 2004). with extremely sparse observations
This approach offers several advantages as it needs no sensor and predicts where the next obser-
synchronization and allows the sensors to move freely. How- vations will happen.
ever, its random nature makes modeling more challenging as it
requires capturing both the system dynamics and the random observation process.
We focus on the marked spatiotemporal point process setting, where the randomness in observation
times and locations is defined in terms of the state of the underlying spatiotemporal dynamical
system and marks are generated from the system state via an observation function. To the best
of our knowledge, existing neural network-based methods cannot model such randomly observed
spatiotemporal dynamical systems, mainly for two reasons. First, they do not model observation
times and locations, hence they cannot predict where and when the next observation will be made.
    Source code and datasets can be found in our github repository.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Second, they assume the sensors form a fixed spatial grid and record data simultaneously, which is
not the case in our setup where the data could come from as little as a single sensor at each time point
(Fig. 1). For example, some earlier methods assume the observations are made on a fixed and regular
spatiotemporal grid (Long et al., 2018; Geneva & Zabaras, 2020), other methods work with irregular,
but still fixed, observation locations (Iakovlev et al., 2021; Lienen & Günnemann, 2022), and other
works go further and allow the observation locations to change over time (Pfaff et al., 2021; Yin et al.,
2023) but fix the observation times and assume dense observations. Whereas, another line of research
has proposed methods that model only the spatiotemporal observation process without modeling the
system dynamics (Chen et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022; Zhou & Yu, 2023; Du et al.,
2016).
Our work fills this gap and proposes a model for randomly observed spatiotemporal dynamical
systems. Our model incorporates techniques from amortized variational inference (Kingma &
Welling, 2013), neural differential equations (Chen et al., 2018; Rackauckas et al., 2020), neural
point processes (Mei & Eisner, 2017; Chen et al., 2021), and implicit neural representations (Chen
et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023) to efficiently learn both the underlying system dynamics and the random
observation process. Our model uses initial observations to obtain the variational estimate of the
latent initial state via a transformer encoder (Vaswani et al., 2017), simulates the latent trajectory with
neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018), and uses implicit neural representations to parameterize the point
process and observation distribution. Furthermore, we identify a computational bottleneck in the
latent state evaluation and propose a technique to alleviate it, resulting in up to 4x faster training. Our
model shows strong empirical results outperforming other models from the literature on challenging
spatiotemporal datasets.

2     BACKGROUND

2.1   S PATIOTEMPORAL P OINT P ROCESSES

Spatiotemporal point processes (STPP) model sequences of events occurring in space and time. Each
event has an associated event time ti ∈ R≥0 and event location xi ∈ Rdx . Given an event history
Ht ≜ {(ti , xi ) | ti < t} with all events up to time t, we can characterize an STPP by its conditional
intensity function
                                               P(ti ∈ [t, t + δt], xi ∈ Bδr (x)|Ht )
                      λ∗ (t, x) ≜     lim                                            ,                 (1)
                                    δt↓0, δr↓0              δt|Bδr (x)|
where δt denotes an infinitesimal time interval, and Bδr (x) denotes a δr-ball centered at x. Given a
history Ht with i − 1 events, λ∗ (t, x) describes the instantaneous probability of the next, ith, event
occurring at time t and location x. Given a sequence of N events {(ti , xi )}N
                                                                             i=1 on a bounded domain
A ⊂ [0, T ] × Rdx , the log-likelihood for the STPP is evaluated as (Daley et al., 2003)
                                                N
                                                X                           Z
                    log p({(ti , xi )}N
                                      i=1 ) =         log λ∗ (ti , xi ) −       λ∗ (t, x)dxdt.         (2)
                                                i=1                         A

Marked STPP extends the above simple STPP by a mark yi ∈ Rdy that is associated to each event
(ti , xi ).

2.2   O RDINARY AND PARTIAL D IFFERENTIAL E QUATIONS

Given a deterministic continuous-time dynamic system with state z(t) ∈ Rdz , we can describe the
evolution of its state in terms of an ordinary differential equation (ODE)
                                            dz(t)
                                                  = f (t, z(t)).                                       (3)
                                             dt
For an initial state z1 at time t1 we can solve the ODE to obtain the system state z(t) at later times
t > t1 . The solution exists and is unique if f is continuous in time and Lipschitz continuous in
state (Coddington et al., 1956), and can be obtained either analytically or using numerical ODE
solvers (Heirer et al., 1987). In this work we solve ODEs numerically using ODE solvers from


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


torchdiffeq (Chen, 2018) package. Similarly, the dynamics of spatiotemporal systems with state
z(t, x) defined over both space and time is described in terms of a partial differential equation (PDE)

                                 ∂z(t, x)
                                          = F (t, x, z(t, x), ∇z(t, x))                                          (4)
                                   ∂t
                                                                       ∂
which incorporates both temporal and spatial derivatives, indicated by ∂t and ∇, respectively.


3     P ROBLEM S ETUP

In this work, we model spatiotemporal dynamical systems from data. The data consists of multiple
trajectories collected by observing a system over a period of time. A trajectory consists of N triplets
{(ti , xi , yi )}N
                 i=1 , where yi ∈ R
                                    dy
                                       is a system observation, with ti ∈ R≥0 and xi ∈ Rdx being the
corresponding observation time and location. The number of observations N can change across
different trajectories in the dataset. Due to randomness of the observation process we assume the
observation times and locations do not overlap (neither within a trajectory nor across trajectories),
resulting in a single observation yi per time point and location. For brevity, we describe our method
for a single observed trajectory, but extension to multiple trajectories is straightforward.
We assume the data generating process (DGP) consists of a latent spatiotemporal state u(t, x) ∈ Rdu
with t ∈ R≥0 and x ∈ Rdx , whose dynamics are governed by a PDE. The latent state directly affects
the times and locations of the observations, and is only partially observed:
                               ∂u(t, x)
          u(t1 , ·) ∼ p(u),                = F (u(t, x), ∇u(t, x))),                                             (5)
                                   ∂t
            ti , xi ∼ nhpp(λ(u(t, x))),                                                     i = 1, . . . , N,    (6)
                 yi ∼ p(yi |g(u(ti , xi ))),                                                i = 1, . . . , N.    (7)

According to this process, each trajectory is generated as follows. We first sample the latent field
u(t1 , ·) at initial time point t1 and specify its dynamics by a PDE (Eq. 5). Next, we sample the
observation times ti and locations xi from a non-homogeneous Poisson process (nhpp) with intensity
λ that is a function of the latent state (Eq. 6). Finally, we sample yi from the observation distribution
parameterized by a function g (Eq. 7). All datasets in this work were generated according to this
process (see Appendix A for details). We assume the data generating process is fully unknown, and
our goal is to construct and learn its model from the data.


4     M ETHODS

In this section we describe our proposed model, its components, and the parameter inference method.

4.1   M ODEL

Our goal is to model the true DGP (Eqs. 5-7). To this end, we define our generative model as:
                                         dz(τ )
                 z(t1 ) ∼ p(z(t1 )),            = f (z(τ )),                                                     (8)
                                          dt
               u(t, x) = ϕ(z(t), x),                                                                             (9)
                ti , xi ∼ nhpp(λ(u(t, x))),                                           i = 1, . . . , N,         (10)
                     yi ∼ p(yi |g(u(ti , xi ))),                                      i = 1, . . . , N,         (11)

and the corresponding joint distribution is (details in App. B):
                                                                            N
                                                                            Y
                p(z1 , {ti , xi , yi }N                         N
                                      i=1 ) = p(z1 )p({ti , xi }i=1 |z1 )         p(yi |z1 , ti , xi ).         (12)
                                                                            i=1

Below, we describe each component in detail, and a diagram of our model is shown in Figure 2.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Latent dynamics (Eq. 8). Our goal is to model the latent PDE dynamics of the DGP (Eq. 5). To do
that, we introduce a low-dimensional temporal latent state z(τ ) ∈ Rdz with τ ∈ R≥0 that encodes
the spatiotemporal field u(τ, ·), and introduce a neural network-parameterized ODE governing its
dynamics (Eq. 8). We use a low-dimensional latent state because it allows to simulate the dynamics
considerably faster than a full-grid spatiotemporal discretization (Wu et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2023).
During our experiments, we observed that it takes ODE solvers a long time to solve the ODE and that
this time increases with the number of observations. We found this happens because of a bottleneck
in existing ODE solvers caused by extremely dense time grids (such as in Fig. 3). Such time grids
force the solver to choose small steps which prevents it from adaptively selecting the optimal step
size thus reducing its efficiency. To alleviate this bottleneck, we move away from the original dense
time grid t1 , . . . , tN to an auxiliary sparse grid τ1 , . . . , τn , with n ≪ N , where the first and last time
points coincide with the original grid: τ1 = t1 , τn = tN (see Fig. 2). Then, we solve for the latent
state z(t) only at the sparse grid, which allows the ODE solver to choose the optimal step size and
results in approximately an order of magnitude (up to 9x) faster simulations (see Sec. 5). Finally,
we use the computed latent states z(τ1 ), . . . , z(τn ) to approximate the original latent state z(t) at
intermediate time points via interpolation: z̃(t) = interpolate(t; z(τ1 ), . . . , z(τn )).

Latent state decoding (Eq. 9). Next, we need to recover the latent spatiotemporal state u(t, x)
from the low-dimensional representation z̃(t). We define the latent spatiotemporal state u(t, x) as
a function ϕ(z̃(t), x) of the latent state z̃(t) and evaluation location x (Eq. 9). In particular, we
parameterize ϕ(z̃(t), x) by an MLP which takes z̃(t) + proj(x) as the input and maps it directly to
u(t, x), where proj(x) ∈ Rdz is a trainable linear mapping of x to Rdz . This formulation results in
space-time continuous u(t, x) which can be evaluated at any time point and spatial location, which is
required to define the intensity function λ(u(t, x)) and observation function g(u(t, x)).

Intensity function (Eq. 10). We parameterize the intensity function λ(u(t, x)) by an MLP which
takes u(t, x) as the input and maps it to intensity of the Poisson process (Eq. 10). To ensure non-
negative values of the intensity function and improve its numerical stability we further exponentiate
the output of the MLP and add a small constant to it.

Observation function (Eq. 11). The observation function g(u(t, x)) maps the latent spatiotemporal
state u(t, x) to parameters of the observation model (Eq. 11). Therefore, its exact structure depends
on the observation model. In this work the observation model is a normal distribution, where the
variance is fixed and the observation function g(u(t, x)) returns the mean.
Details of the model specification and parameterization can be found in Appendix B and C.


4.2    PARAMETER AND L ATENT S TATE I NFERENCE

To infer the model parameters and posterior of the latent initial state z1 we use variational inference
(Blei et al., 2017). We define an approximate posterior q(z1 ; ψ) with variational parameters ψ
to approximate the true posterior p(z1 |{ti , xi , yi }N
                                                       i=1 ) and then minimize the Kullback-Leibler
divergence

                                   KL q(z1 ; ψ)∥p(z1 |{ti , xi , yi }N

                                                                     i=1 )                                  (13)

over the model and variational parameters to obtain an estimate of the model parameters and
approximation of the posterior.
To avoid optimizing the local variational parameters ψ for each trajectory in the dataset, we use
amortization (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and define ψ as the output of an encoder:

                                      ψ = Encoder({ti , xi , yi }N
                                                                 i=1 ),                                     (14)

which maps observations {ti , xi , yi }N
                                       i=1 to the local variational parameters ψ. This allows to optimize
a fixed set of encoder parameters instead of a dataset size-dependent set of local variational parameters.
We discuss the structure of the encoder in the next section.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Model diagram. Black crosses on the time axis are observation times, while white crosses
on field images are the corresponding observation locations. The initial observations (context) are
mapped by the encoder to the latent initial state distribution q(z1 ). The initial state z1 is then sampled
from that distribution and evolved through time using the dynamics model. The latent trajectory
is evaluated only at the sparse time grid τ1 , . . . , τn and the latent state z̃(t) at other time points is
evaluated via interpolation. The latent state z̃(t) is then mapped by ϕ to the spatiotemporal state
u(t, x), which is used to parameterize the point process and observation distribution (via mappings λ
and g, respectively) for predicting subsequent observation times and locations.


In practice, instead of minimizing the KL divergence we, equivalently, maximize the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) which for our model is defined as:
        N
                                                           "N                    Z              #
       X                                                    X
  L=       Eq(z1 ;ψ) [ln p(yi |ti , xi , z1 )] + Eq(z1 ;ψ)    ln λ(u(ti , xi )) − λ(u(t, x))dxdt (15)
       i=1                                                      i=1
       |                     {z                   }   |                          {z                 }
              (i) Expected observation log-lik.                       (ii) Expected STPP log-lik.

      −      KL[q(z1 ; ψ)∥p(z1 )].                                                                      (16)
             |        {z        }
           (iii) KL between prior and posterior

The ELBO is maximized wrt. the model and encoder parameters. Appendix B contains detailed
derivation of the ELBO, and fully specifies the model and the approximate posterior. While the
term (iii) can be computed analytically, computation of terms (i) and (ii) involves approximations:
Monte Carlo integration for the expectations and intensity integral, and numerical ODE solvers for
the solution of the initial value problems. Appendix B details the computation of ELBO.

4.3   E NCODER

Our encoder maps the observations {ti , xi , yi }N
                                                 i=1 to the local variational parameters ψ of q(z1 ; ψ)
using Eq. 14. This process begins by embedding each observation into a high-dimensional feature
space. The embedded sequence is then processed by a stack of transformer encoder layers (Vaswani
et al., 2017), after which the output is mapped to the variational parameters ψ. Below, we describe
this process in more detail.
First, we convert the observation sequence {ti , xi , yi }N                                   N
                                                          i=1 into a sequence of vectors {bi }i=1 , where

                                          bi = proj(ti ) + proj(xi ) + proj(yi ),                       (17)
and proj are separate trainable linear projections. This additive decomposition is simple yet shows
strong empirically performance in our experiments. Since ti and xi already provide positional
information, we omit positional encodings. Additionally, we introduce an aggregation token, [AGG],
with a learnable representation to indicate where the encoder should aggregate information about
the observations. This gives us the following encoder input sequence: {{bi }N i=1 , [AGG]}. Next, a
stack of transformer encoder layers processes the input sequence, producing the output sequence
{{bi }N
      i=1 , [AGG]}. Finally, we map the output aggregation token [AGG] to the variational parameters
ψ. This mapping depends on the form of the approximate posterior (see Appendix B for specification
of the mapping).


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Examples of trajectories from our datasets. White crosses indicate the observation
locations x, marks on the horizontal time grid indicate the corresponding observation times t, and
color-coded fields denote the system state with observations y at white crosses (t, x). Row 1:
Burger’s (1D) dataset. The full trajectory is shown, with 1-D measurement location x along the
vertical and time t along the horizontal directions. Rows 2, 3 and 4: Shallow Water, Navier-Stokes,
and Scalar Flow datasets, respectively. Due to the 2D nature of the systems, only snapshots of the
system state are plotted.


4.4   F ORECASTING

Given a set of initial observations {t∗i , x∗i , yi∗ }N    ctx
                                                        i=1 of a test trajectory (we call it ”context”), we want
to predict how the system behaves at some time point t > tNctx and spatial location x. Given the
context, we predict the observation y at t and x as the expectation of the following approximate
posterior predictive distribution:
                                                               Z
                       p(y|t, x, {t∗i , x∗i , yi∗ }N ctx
                                                   i=1   )  =    p(y|t, x, z1 )qψ∗ (z1 )dz1 ,               (18)

where ψ ∗ = Encoder({t∗i , x∗i , yi∗ }Ni=1 ), and the expectation is approximated via Monte Carlo
                                          ctx

integration. In Eq. 18, we omit explicitly conditioning on training data for brevity. Similarly, the
distribution over the observation times and locations is evaluated as:
                                                     Z
                                 ∗    ∗     ∗ Nctx
                        p(t, x|{ti , xi , yi }i=1 ) = p(t, x|z1 )qψ∗ (z1 )dz1 .                 (19)

In our experiments, the context for each trajectory is defined as all observations withing a fixed initial
time period (see Appendix A for details).

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section we demonstrate properties of our method and compare it against other methods from
the literature. Our datasets are generated by three commonly-used PDE systems: Burgers’ (models
nonlinear 1D wave propagation), Shallow Water (models 2D wave propagation under the gravity),
and Navier-Stokes with transport (models the spread of a pollutant in a liquid over a 2D domain).
In addition to the synthetic data, we include a real-world dataset Scalar Flow (Eckert et al., 2019),
which contains observations of smoke plumes raising in warm air. See Appendix A for details about
the dataset generation. Figure 3 shows examples of trajectories from the datasets.
In all cases our model has at most 3 million parameters, and training takes at most 1.5 hours on a
single GeForce RTX 3080 GPU. The training is done for 25k iterations with learning rate 3e-4 and
batch size 32. We use the adaptive ODE solver (dopri5) from torchdiffeq package with relative


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and absolute tolerance set to 1e-5. As performance metrics we use mean absolute error (MAE)
for the observations yi , and event-averaged log-likelihood of the point process for ti and xi , both
evaluated on the test set. See Appendix C for details about our training setup.


Context Size. Our encoder maps the initial observations (con-
text) {t∗i , x∗i , yi∗ }N
                        i=1 to parameters ψ of the approximate pos-
                          ctx

terior q(z1 ; ψ). Here we look at how accuracy of the state
predictions and process likelihood is affected by the context
size. We train and test our model with different context sizes:
full (using all Nctx points), half of the context (using points
from Nctx /2 to Nctx ), etc., and show the results in Figure 4.
We see that both MAE and process likelihood improve as we
increase the context size, but the improvements tend to saturate
for larger contexts. This indicates that the encoder mostly uses      Figure 4: Test MAE (↓) and log-
observations that are close to the time point at which the latent     likelihood (↑) vs. context size. For
state is inferred, and does not utilize observations that are too     Scalar Flow we use the right axis
far away from it. This effect is especially visible with synthetic    for better visibility.
data, but the plots suggest the real-world dataset Scalar Flow
could still benefit from larger context.


                                                                        Dataset         Interp.   Seq.
                                                                        Burgers’         0.007    0.018
                                                                        Shallow Water    0.011    0.045
                                                                        Navier-Stokes    0.012    0.108
                                                                        Scalar Flow      0.011    0.089

                                                                 Table 1: Latent state evalua-
                                                                 tion time (sec), interpolation
  Figure 5: Test MAE (↓) and process log-likelihood (↑) for dif- vs. sequential method. Aver-
  ferent temporal grid resolutions (n) and interpolation methods aged time over all trajectories.
  (nn = nearest neighbor, lin = linear). For Scalar Flow we use
  the right axis for better visibility.


Latent State Interpolation. As discussed in Section 4.1, we do not evaluate the latent state at
the full time grid t1 , . . . , tN using the ODE solver (we call it the sequential method). Instead, we
use an adaptive ODE solver to evaluate the latent state only at a sparser time grid τ1 , . . . , τn , and
then interpolate the evaluations to the full grid. Here we look at how this approach affects training
times, and investigate the effects of the grid resolution n and different interpolation methods. We vary
the resolution from coarse n = 2 to fine n = 50, and test nearest neighbor and linear interpolation
methods. Figure 5 shows that both MAE and process log-likelihood improve with the grid resolution,
but only when we use nearest neighbor interpolation. With linear interpolation, the model achieves
its best performance with just n = 2, meaning that interpolation is done between only two points
in the latent space, and further increasing the resolution does not improve the results. To study this
observation in more detail, we provide additional experiments in Appendix D. Both interpolation
methods achieve the same optimal performance when n ≥ 20. This effect is visible for both synthetic
and, to a smaller extent, real data. Furthermore, Table 1 shows that our method results in up to 9x
faster latent state evaluation than the sequential method, which in our case translates in up to 4x faster
training.

Latent Space Dimension. Our model assumes the system dynamics can be accurately modeled in a
low-dimensional latent space. In this experiment we show that this assumption is valid at least for the
four systems that we consider and best predictive accuracy is achieved for relatively low-dimensional
latent space dimension dz . In Figure 6 we show how MAE and process log-likelihood improve as we
increase the latent state dimension. For most datasets the predictive accuracy converges for as low as
16-dimensional latent space, except for the Navier-Stokes dataset, where dz = 64 is required, likely


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


due to its more intricate state (as can be qualitatively observed in Fig. 3). We note that dz affects the
number of model parameters, but the difference between 1- and 64-dimensional latent space is less
than 3%.


Figure 6: Test MAE (↓) and process log-likelihood (↑) for different latent space dimensions (dz ). For
Burgers’ and Navier-Stokes we use the right axis for better visibility.



Interaction Between Observation and Process
Models. In our model the observation times and                              MAE              Log-lik
locations are modeled by a point process model Dataset              MAE
                                                                          (-STPP)
                                                                                   Log-lik.
                                                                                             (-Obs.)
(Eq. 10), while observations are modeled by an Burgers’             0.042   0.043    3.77      3.70
observation model (Eq. 11). Intuitively, one could Shallow Water 0.012 0.012         3.67      3.56
expect some interaction between them and ask the Navier-Stokes 0.071 0.071           5.96      5.92
question of how important is one model for the Scalar Flow          0.090   0.089    8.43      6.87
performance of the other. In this experiment we
look at the effect of removing the point process Table 2: Test MAE (↓) and log-likelihood (↑)
model on the performance of the observation model of the full model, and after removing the point
and vice versa. We remove the point process model process (-STPP) or the observation model (-
by removing Eq. 10 from our model, so that we Obs.).
do not model the observation times and locations. Similarly, we remove the observation model by
removing Eq. 11 from our model and also removing observations yi from our data, so that there is no
information about the observation values. In Table 2 we show that removing the point process model
seems to have practically no effect on MAE, while removing the observation model decreases the
process likelihood. This shows that if we know the system states we can model the observation times
and locations more accurately.

Comparison to Other Methods. We compare our method against two groups of methods from
the literature. The first group consists of neural spatiotemporal dynamic models that can model
only the observations yi but not the time points and spatial locations. This group includes FEN
(Lienen & Günnemann, 2022) (graph neural network-based model, simulates the system dynamics
at every point on the spatial grid), NSPDE (Salvi et al., 2022) (space- and time-continuous model
simulating the dynamics in the spectral domain), and CNN-ODE (our simple baseline that uses a
CNN encoder/decoder to map observations to/from the latent space, and uses neural ODEs (Chen
et al., 2018) to model the latent space dynamics). Note that due to their assumption about multiple
observations per time point, dynamic models require time binning (see Appendix C.4). The second
group consists of neural spatiotemporal point processes that model only the observation times and
locations. This group consists of DSTPP (Yuan et al., 2023), NSTPP (Chen et al., 2021), and
AutoSTPP (Zhou & Yu, 2023). We also provide simple baselines for both groups: median predictor
for dynamic models, and constant (learnable) intensity for the point process group. Hyperparameters
of each method were tuned for the best performance. See Appendix C.4 for details about the models
and hyperparameters used.
Table 3 shows the comparison results. We see that most methods from the first group perform rather
poorly and fail to beat even the MAE of the median predictor, with the CNN-ODE model showing
the best results. However, CNN-ODE still performs considerably worse than our model on synthetic
data, likely because of the loss of information caused by time binning. On the real-world Scalar
Flow dataset CNN-ODE and our model have similar performance. In the second group most methods


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Burgers’                        Shallow Water                     Navier-Stokes                     Scalar Flow
Model
                     MAE (↓)        Log-lik. (↑)     MAE (↓)          Log-lik. (↑)     MAE (↓)          Log-lik. (↑)      MAE (↓)         Log-lik. (↑)
Median Pred.           0.161             -             0.148                 -           0.155                 -            0.140              -
FEN                     N/A              -         0.336 ± 0.008             -       0.158 ± 0.006             -        0.197 ± 0.003          -
NSPDE              0.166 ± 0.002         -         0.339 ± 0.002             -       0.098 ± 0.001             -        0.142 ± 0.003          -
CNN-ODE            0.076 ± 0.000         -         0.032 ± 0.001             -       0.077 ± 0.002             -       0.091 ± 0.001           -
Const. Intensity         -             3.59              -               2.02              -               5.86              -               6.87
DSTPP                    -          0.67 ± 0.13          -            0.08 ± 0.04          -            0.41 ± 0.04          -           3.02 ± 0.01
NSTPP                    -          2.35 ± 0.06          -            1.53 ± 0.13          -            3.83 ± 0.14          -           6.69 ± 0.03
AutoSTPP                 -              N/A              -            3.37 ± 0.01          -            5.91 ± 0.01          -           8.49 ± 0.05
Ours               0.043 ± 0.002   3.77 ± 0.02     0.012 ± 0.001      3.62 ± 0.05    0.071 ± 0.001      5.96 ± 0.01    0.092 ± 0.002      8.41 ± 0.04


Table 3: Model comparisons. MAE (↓) and Log-lik (per event) (↑) on test data. The first group
of methods (FEN, NSPDE, CNN-ODE) contains neural spatiotemporal dynamical models and are
evaluated using MAE. The second group (DSTPP, NSTPP, AutoSTPP) contains neural spatiotemporal
point process models and are evaluated using Log-lik. Error bars represent one standard error
calculated over 5 realizations of a random seed controlling the model initialization.


showed poor results and failed to beat the simple constant intensity baseline, however AutoSTPP
shows very strong performance, although still not outperforming our method on the synthetic data,
and being close to it on the Scalar Flow dataset.
These experiments show the challenging nature of modeling randomly observed dynamical systems,
and demonstrate our method’s properties and strong performance.


6       R ELATED W ORK

Neural Point Processes. Traditionally, intensity functions are simple parametric functions incor-
porating domain knowledge about the system being modeled. While simple and interpretable, this
approach might require strong domain knowledge and might have limited expressivity due to overly
simplistic form of the intensity function. These limitations lead to the development of neural point
processes which parameterize the intensity function by a neural network, leading to improved flexi-
bility and expressivity. For example Mei & Eisner (2017); Omi et al. (2019); Jia & Benson (2019);
Zuo et al. (2020) use neural networks to model time-dependent intensity functions in a flexible and
efficient manner, with neural architectures ranging from recurrent neural networks to transformers
and neural ODEs. These techniques consistently outperform classical intensity parameterizations and
do not require strong domain expertise to choose the right form of the intensity function. Other works
extend this idea to marked point processes where intensity is a function of time and also of a discrete
or continuous mark. For example, Chen et al. (2021); Zhu et al. (2021); Zhou et al. (2022); Zhou
& Yu (2023); Yuan et al. (2023) use spatial coordinates as a mark and model the intensity using a
wide range of methods aimed at improving flexibility and efficiency. Works such as Du et al. (2016);
Xiao et al. (2019); Boyd et al. (2020) use discrete observations as marks, and Sharma et al. (2018)
use continuous marks with underlying dynamic model, which makes their work most similar to ours,
with major differences related to the model, training process, and them working only with temporal
processes, whereas we are dealing with more general spatiotemporal processes.

Neural Spatiotemporal Dynamic Models. To model the spatiotemporal dynamics our method
uses the “encode-process-decode” approach employed in many other works. The main idea of the
approach consists of taking a set of initial observations and using it to estimate the latent initial state.
A dynamics function is then used to map the latent state forward in time to other time points either
discretely (Long et al., 2018; HAN et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022) or continuously (Yildiz et al., 2019;
Salvi et al., 2022). Finally, the latent state is mapped to the observations using discrete (Yildiz et al.,
2019; Wu et al., 2022) or continuous (Yin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023) decoder. Such methods
assume multiple observations per time point and do not model the observation times and locations.
However, in contrary to many previous works that use the encode-process-decode approach to learn a
discriminative model, we use the auto-encoding variational Bayes to learn a generative model of the
underlying dynamical system.

Implicit Neural Representations. Our model represents the continuous latent spatiotemporal state
u(t, x) in terms of a function ϕ(z̃(t), x). This approach to representing continuous field is called


                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


implicit neural representations (Park et al., 2019; Chen & Zhang, 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019;
Chibane et al., 2020), and it has found applications in many other works related to modeling of
spatiotemporal systems (Chen et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023).

7   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we developed a method for modeling spatiotemporal dynamical systems from marked
point process observations. Along with our method, we proposed an interpolation-based technique to
greatly speed up the training time. In the experiments we showed that our method effectively utilizes
the context of various lengths to improve accuracy of the initial state inference, uses the system
state observations to better model the observation times and locations, and that low-resolution linear
interpolation is sufficient to accurately represent the latent trajectories. We further demonstrated that
our method achieves strong performance on challenging spatiotemporal datasets and outperforms
other methods from the literature.

Limitations. Using a Poisson process for sampling event times and locations can be limiting
in certain applications. First, the assumption of non-overlapping time points may not hold in
scenarios where effectively simultaneous observations occur, such as in high-frequency sensor
networks. Second, the lack of interaction between the event occurrences and system dynamics may
not hold if the act of observation influences the system (e.g., triggering human actions or affecting
sensor availability). Finally, during data collection faithfully capturing the event intensity requires
sufficiently dense sensor placement, especially in high-intensity regions. Future work could relax
these assumptions to better model such scenarios, for example, by using different point process
models and adapting the architecture to efficiently account for potential interactions between the
observation events and system dynamics.

R EFERENCES
Cristina Albaladejo, Pedro Sánchez, Andrés Iborra, Fulgencio Soto, Juan A López, and Roque Torres.
  Wireless sensor networks for oceanographic monitoring: A systematic review. Sensors, 10(7):
  6948–6968, 2010.
David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe. Variational inference: A review for statisticians.
  Journal of the American statistical Association, 112(518):859–877, 2017.
Alex Boyd, Robert Bamler, Stephan Mandt, and Padhraic Smyth. User-dependent neural sequence
  models for continuous-time event data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  21488–21499, 2020.
Peter Yichen Chen, Jinxu Xiang, Dong Heon Cho, Yue Chang, G A Pershing, Henrique Teles Maia,
  Maurizio M Chiaramonte, Kevin Thomas Carlberg, and Eitan Grinspun. CROM: Continuous
  reduced-order modeling of PDEs using implicit neural representations. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=FUORz1tG8Og.
Ricky T. Q. Chen.          torchdiffeq, 2018.        URL https://github.com/rtqichen/
  torchdiffeq.
Ricky T. Q. Chen, Brandon Amos, and Maximilian Nickel. Neural spatio-temporal point processes.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Zhiqin Chen and Hao Zhang. Learning implicit fields for generative shape modeling. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5939–5948, 2019.
Julian Chibane, Thiemo Alldieck, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Implicit functions in feature space for 3d
  shape reconstruction and completion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6970–6981, 2020.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Earl A Coddington, Norman Levinson, and T Teichmann. Theory of ordinary differential equations,
  1956.
Daryl J Daley, David Vere-Jones, et al. An introduction to the theory of point processes: volume I:
  elementary theory and methods. Springer, 2003.
Nan Du, Hanjun Dai, Rakshit Trivedi, Utkarsh Upadhyay, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Le Song.
  Recurrent marked temporal point processes: Embedding event history to vector. In Proceedings of
  the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp.
 1555–1564, 2016.
Marie-Lenat Eckert, Kiwon Um, and Nils Thuerey. Scalarflow: A large-scale volumetric data set of
 real-world scalar transport flows for computer animation and machine learning. ACM Transactions
 on Graphics, 38(6):239, 2019.
Nicholas Geneva and Nicholas Zabaras. Modeling the dynamics of pde systems with physics-
  constrained deep auto-regressive networks. Journal of Computational Physics, 403:109056, 2020.
Moustafa Ghanem, Yike Guo, John Hassard, Michelle Osmond, and Mark Richards. Sensor grids for
 air pollution monitoring. In Proc. 3rd UK e-Science All Hands Meeting, Nottingham, UK, 2004.
Pablo Gómez, Gabriele Meoni, and Håvard Hem Toftevaag. torchquad, 2024. URL https:
  //github.com/esa/torchquad.
XU HAN, Han Gao, Tobias Pfaff, Jian-Xun Wang, and Liping Liu. Predicting physics in mesh-
 reduced space with temporal attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XctLdNfCmP.
E Heirer, SP Nørsett, and G Wanner. Solving ordinary differential equations i: Nonstiff problems,
  1987.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (gelus), 2016.
Philipp Holl, Vladlen Koltun, Kiwon Um, and Nils Thuerey. phiflow: A differentiable pde
  solving framework for deep learning via physical simulations. In NeurIPS Workshop on Dif-
  ferentiable vision, graphics, and physics applied to machine learning, 2020. URL https:
  //montrealrobotics.ca/diffcvgp/assets/papers/3.pdf.
Valerii Iakovlev, Markus Heinonen, and Harri Lähdesmäki. Learning continuous-time {pde}s from
  sparse data with graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=aUX5Plaq7Oy.
Junteng Jia and Austin R Benson. Neural jump stochastic differential equations. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Qingkai Kong, Richard M Allen, Louis Schreier, and Young-Woo Kwon. Myshake: A smartphone
  seismic network for earthquake early warning and beyond. Science advances, 2(2):e1501055,
  2016.
PA W Lewis and Gerald S Shedler. Simulation of nonhomogeneous poisson processes by thinning.
  Naval research logistics quarterly, 26(3):403–413, 1979.
Marten Lienen and Stephan Günnemann. Learning the dynamics of physical systems from sparse ob-
 servations with finite element networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HFmAukZ-k-2.
Zichao Long, Yiping Lu, Xianzhong Ma, and Bin Dong. Pde-net: Learning pdes from data. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 3208–3216. PMLR, 2018.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   Bkg6RiCqY7.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yajie Ma, Mark Richards, Moustafa Ghanem, Yike Guo, and John Hassard. Air pollution monitoring
  and mining based on sensor grid in london. Sensors, 8(6):3601–3623, 2008.
Mihai Marin-Perianu, Supriyo Chatterjea, Raluca Marin-Perianu, Stephan Bosch, Stefan Dulman,
 Stuart Kininmonth, and Paul Havinga. Wave monitoring with wireless sensor networks. In 2008
 International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing, pp.
 611–616. IEEE, 2008.
Hongyuan Mei and Jason M Eisner. The neural hawkes process: A neurally self-modulating
  multivariate point process. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger.
  Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4460–4470, 2019.
Sarah E Minson, Benjamin A Brooks, Craig L Glennie, Jessica R Murray, John O Langbein, Susan E
  Owen, Thomas H Heaton, Robert A Iannucci, and Darren L Hauser. Crowdsourced earthquake
  early warning. Science advances, 1(3):e1500036, 2015.
Takahiro Omi, Kazuyuki Aihara, et al. Fully neural network based model for general temporal point
  processes. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf:
  Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 165–174, 2019.
Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter Battaglia. Learning mesh-based
  simulation with graph networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=roNqYL0_XP.
Christopher Rackauckas, Yingbo Ma, Julius Martensen, Collin Warner, Kirill Zubov, Rohit Supekar,
  Dominic Skinner, Ali Ramadhan, and Alan Edelman. Universal differential equations for scientific
  machine learning. August 2020. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-55125/v1. URL http://dx.doi.org/
  10.21203/RS.3.RS-55125/V1.
Cristopher Salvi, Maud Lemercier, and Andris Gerasimovics. Neural stochastic pdes: Resolution-
  invariant learning of continuous spatiotemporal dynamics. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:1333–1344, 2022.
Anuj Sharma, Robert Johnson, Florian Engert, and Scott Linderman. Point process latent variable
  models of larval zebrafish behavior. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Makoto Takamoto, Timothy Praditia, Raphael Leiteritz, Dan MacKinlay, Francesco Alesiani, Dirk
 Pflüger, and Mathias Niepert. PDEBENCH: AN EXTENSIVE BENCHMARK FOR SCI- EN-
 TIFIC MACHINE LEARNING. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Physics for Machine Learning, 2023.
 URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=b8SwOxZQ2kj.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Tailin Wu, Takashi Maruyama, and Jure Leskovec. Learning to accelerate partial differential
  equations via latent global evolution. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=xvZtgp5wyYT.
Shuai Xiao, Junchi Yan, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Le Song, Xiaokang Yang, and Hongyuan Zha. Learning
  time series associated event sequences with recurrent point process networks. IEEE transactions
  on neural networks and learning systems, 30(10):3124–3136, 2019.
Guobao Xu, Weiming Shen, and Xianbin Wang. Applications of wireless sensor networks in marine
  environment monitoring: A survey. Sensors, 14(9):16932–16954, 2014.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cagatay Yildiz, Markus Heinonen, and Harri Lahdesmaki. Ode2vae: Deep generative second order
  odes with bayesian neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Yuan Yin, Matthieu Kirchmeyer, Jean-Yves Franceschi, Alain Rakotomamonjy, and patrick gallinari.
  Continuous PDE dynamics forecasting with implicit neural representations. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=B73niNjbPs.
Yuan Yuan, Jingtao Ding, Chenyang Shao, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. Spatio-temporal diffusion
  point processes. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery
  and Data Mining, KDD ’23. ACM, August 2023. doi: 10.1145/3580305.3599511. URL http:
  //dx.doi.org/10.1145/3580305.3599511.
Zihao Zhou and Rose Yu. Automatic integration for spatiotemporal neural point processes. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Deb1yP1zMN.
Zihao Zhou, Xingyi Yang, Ryan Rossi, Handong Zhao, and Rose Yu. Neural point process for
  learning spatiotemporal event dynamics. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pp.
  777–789. PMLR, 2022.
Shixiang Zhu, Shuang Li, Zhigang Peng, and Yao Xie. Imitation learning of neural spatio-temporal
  point processes. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 34(11):5391–5402,
  2021.
Simiao Zuo, Haoming Jiang, Zichong Li, Tuo Zhao, and Hongyuan Zha. Transformer hawkes process.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 11692–11702. PMLR, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     DATA
As described in Section 3, we assume the following data generating process
                               ∂u(t, x)
          u(t1 , ·) ∼ p(u),             = F (u(t, x), ∇u(t, x))),                                     (20)
                                   ∂t
          ti , xi ∼ nhpp(λ(u(t, x))),                                            i = 1, . . . , N,    (21)
          yi ∼ p(yi |g(u(ti , xi ))),                                            i = 1, . . . , N,    (22)

We selected three commonly used PDE systems: Burgers’, Shallow Water, and Navier-Stokes with
transport. Next we discuss the data generating process for each dataset.

A.1    B URGERS ’

The Burgers’ system in 1D is characterized by a 1-dimensional state
u(t, x) and the following PDE dynamics:
                         ∂u       ∂u      ∂2u
                             +u       =ν 2,                      (23)
                         ∂t       ∂x      ∂t
where ν is the diffusion coefficient. We obtain data for this system
from the PDEBench dataset (Takamoto et al., 2023). The system
is simulated on a time interval [0, 2] and on a spatial domain [0, 1]
with periodic boundary conditions. The dataset contains 10000
trajectories, each trajectory is evaluated on a uniform temporal grid Figure 7: Trajectory lengths
with 101 time points, and uniform spatial grid with 256 nodes.        for Burgers’ dataset.
Since the data is discrete, we define continuous field u(t, x) by linearly interpolating the data across
space and time. Next, we use the interpolant to define the intensity function
                                      λ(u(t, x)) = 1600|u(t, x)|,                                     (24)
and use it to simulate the non-homogeneous Poisson process using the thinning algorithm (Lewis &
Shedler, 1979). As the result, for each the 10000 trajectories, we obtain a sequence of time points
and spatial locations {ti , xi }N
                                i=1 , where N can be different for each trajectory. Finally, we compute
the observations as
                                             yi = u(ti , xi ).                                        (25)

We use the first 0.5 seconds as the context for the initial state inference, and further filter the dataset
to ensure that each trajectory has at least 10 points in the context, resulting in approximately 7000
trajectories. We use 80%/10%/10% split for training/validation/testing.

A.2    S HALLOW WATER

The Shallow Water system in 2D is characterized by a 3-dimensional
state
                 u(t, x) = [h(t, x), u(t, x), v(t, x)]             (26)
and the following PDE dynamics:
                   ∂h ∂(hu) ∂(hv)
                      +      +       = 0,                          (27)
                   ∂t    ∂x      ∂y
                   ∂u    ∂u    ∂u    ∂h
                      +u    +v    +g    = 0,                       (28) Figure 8: Trajectory lengths
                   ∂t    ∂x    ∂y    ∂x
                                                                        for Shallow Water dataset.
                   ∂v    ∂v    ∂v    ∂h
                      +u    +v    +g    = 0,                       (29)
                   ∂t    ∂x    ∂y    ∂y
where g is the gravitational acceleration, h(t, x) is wave height, and u(t, x) and v(t, x) are horizontal
and vertical velocities, respectively. We obtain data for this system from the PDEBench dataset


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Takamoto et al., 2023). The system is simulated on a time interval [0, 1] and on a spatial domain
[−2.5, 2.5]2 . The dataset contains 1000 trajectories, each trajectory is evaluated on a uniform temporal
grid with 101 time points, and uniform 128-by-128 spatial grid.
Since the data is discrete, we define continuous field u(t, x) by linearly interpolating the data across
space and time. Next, we use the interpolant to define the intensity function
                                       λ(u(t, x)) = 500|h(t, x) − 1|,                                    (30)
indicating that measurements are made only when the wave height is below or above the baseline of
1. We use the intensity function to simulate the non-homogeneous Poisson process using the thinning
algorithm (Lewis & Shedler, 1979). As the result, for each of the 1000 trajectories, we obtain a
sequence of time points and spatial locations {ti , xi }N
                                                        i=1 , where N can be different for each trajectory.
Finally, we compute the observations as
                                                yi = h(ti , xi ),                                        (31)
observing only the wave height.
We use the first 0.1 seconds as the context for the initial state inference, and further filter the dataset
to ensure that each trajectory has at least 10 points in the context, resulting in approximately 800
trajectories. We use 80%/10%/10% split for training/validation/testing.

A.3    NAVIER -S TOKES

The Navier-Stokes system with a transport equation is characterized
by a 4-dimensional state
             u(t, x) = [c(t, x), u(t, x), v(t, x), p(t, x)]          (32)
and the following PDE dynamics:
      ∂u ∂v
         +    = 0,                                                   (33)
      ∂x ∂y
                                   2
                                   ∂ u ∂2u

      ∂u    ∂u     ∂u     ∂p
         +u    +v     =−     +ν         +         ,                  (34) Figure 9: Trajectory lengths
      ∂t    ∂x     ∂y     ∂x       ∂x2     ∂y 2
                                   2                                      for Navier-Stokes dataset.
                                          ∂2v

      ∂v    ∂v     ∂v    ∂p       ∂ v
         +u    +v     =−     +ν         +         + c,               (35)
      ∂t    ∂x     ∂y    ∂y       ∂x2     ∂y 2
                             2
                                    ∂2c

      ∂c      ∂c     ∂c      ∂ c
         = −u    −v     +ν       +        ,                          (36)
      ∂t      ∂x    ∂y       ∂x2   ∂y 2
where the diffusion constant ν = 0.002, and c(t, x) is concentration of the transported species,
p(t, x) is pressure, and u(t, x) and v(t, x) are horizontal and vertical velocities, respectively. For
each trajectory, we start with zero initial velocities and pressure, and the initial scalar field c0 (x, y) is
generated as:
                                  N
                                  X
                  c̃0 (x, y) =            λkl cos(2π(kx + ly)) + γkl sin(2π(kx + ly)),                   (37)
                                 k,l=−N
                                 c̃0 (x, y) − min(c̃0 )
                  c0 (x, y) =                           ,                                                (38)
                                 max(c̃0 ) − min(c̃0 )
where N = 2 and λkl , γkl ∼ N (0, 1).
We use PhiFlow (Holl et al., 2020) to solve the PDEs. The system is simulated on a time interval
[0, 1] and on a spatial domain [0, 1]2 with periodic boundary conditions. The solution is evaluated at
randomly selected spatial locations and time points. We use 1089 spatial locations and 25 time points.
The spatial and temporal grids are the same for all trajectories. The dataset contains 1000 trajectories.
Since the data is discrete, we define continuous field u(t, x) by linearly interpolating the data across
space and time. Next, we use the interpolant to define the intensity function
                                          λ(u(t, x)) = 2000|c(t, x)|,                                    (39)


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


indicating that measurement intensity is proportional to the species concentration. We use the intensity
function to simulate the non-homogeneous Poisson process using the thinning algorithm (Lewis &
Shedler, 1979). As the result, for each of the trajectories, we obtain a sequence of time points and
spatial locations {ti , xi }N
                            i=1 , where N can be different for each trajectory. Finally, we compute the
observations as
                                             yi = c(ti , xi ),                                      (40)
observing only the species concentrations.
We use the first 0.5 seconds as the context for the initial state inference, and further filter the dataset
to ensure that each trajectory has at least 10 points in the context, resulting in all 1000 trajectories
satisfying this condition. We use 80%/10%/10% split for training/validation/testing.

A.4     S CALAR F LOW

To demonstrate capabilities of our model on a real-world process, we use the Scalar Flow Dataset
(Eckert et al., 2019). This dataset consists of videos of smoke plumes rising in hot air. Each video
has 150 frames recorded over 2.5 seconds, and each frame has the resolution of 1080x1920 pixels.
The observations are postprocessed camera images of the smoke plumes taken from multiple views.
For simplicity, we use only the front view. We downsample the original frames from 1080x1920 to
120x213 pixels and smooth out the high-frequency noise by applying Gaussian smoothing with the
standard deviation of 1.5.
Then, we emulate a real-world measurement process where each ”sensor” (pixel) makes a mea-
surement with the probability directly proportional to the observed smoke density (higher den-
sity implies more frequent measurements). In particular we set the observation probability to
0.03 × smoke density, resulting in 2000 observations per trajectory on average. As a result, we have
a sequence of smoke density observations made at different time points and spatial locations. Note
that we do not make any Poisson process assumptions here. Instead, we use a realistic measurement
process where sensors are utilized only when some action in the measured process stars to happen,
which is the application we are targeting in our work.
We use the first half (1.25 sec.) of each trajectory as the context for the initial state inference. In total,
the dataset contains 100 trajectories. We train our and other models on 80 trajectories, and use 10
trajectories for validation, and 10 for testing.

B     M ODEL , P OSTERIOR , AND ELBO
B.1     M ODEL

As described in Section 4.1 our model is defined as
                              dz(τ )
              z1 ∼ p(z1 ),            = f (z(τ )),                                                         (41)
                                dt
              z̃(t) = interpolate(t; z(τ1 ), . . . , z(τn )),                                              (42)
              u(t, x) = ϕ(z̃(t), x),                                                                       (43)
              ti , xi ∼ nhpp(λ(u(t, x))),                                              i = 1, . . . , N,   (44)
              yi ∼ p(yi |g(u(ti , xi ))),                                             i = 1, . . . , N..   (45)
The corresponding joint distribution is
                                                                             N
                                                                             Y
                 p(z1 , {ti , xi , yi }N                         N
                                       i=1 ) = p(z1 )p({ti , xi }i=1 |z1 )         p(yi |z1 , ti , xi ),   (46)
                                                                             i=1
where
                 p(z1 ) = N (0, I),                                                                        (47)
                                           N
                                           Y                         Z
                 p({ti , xi }N
                             i=1 |z1 ) =         λ(u(ti , xi )) exp − λ(u(t, x))dxdt ,                     (48)
                                           i=1
                p(yi |z1 , ti , xi ) = N (g(u(ti , xi )), σy2 I),                                   (49)
where N is the normal distribution, 0 is a zero vector, and I is the identity matrix. We set σy to 10−3 .


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2    P OSTERIOR

We define the approximate posterior with ψ = [ψµ , ψσ2 ] as
                                         q(z1 ; ψ) = N (z1 |ψµ , diag(ψσ2 )),                       (50)
where N is the normal distribution, and diag(ψσ2 ) is a matrix with vector ψσ2 on the diagonal.
As discussed in Section 4.3, the encoder maps the context {ti , xi , yi }N ctx
                                                                         i=1 to the local variational
parameters ψ (which we break up into [ψµ , ψσ2 ]). The encoder first converts the context sequence
{ti , xi , yi }N                                 Nctx
               i=1 to a sequence of vectors {bi }i=1 and then adds an aggregation token, which gives
                 ctx

                                        Nctx
the following input sequence: {{bi }i=1 , [AGG]}. We pass it though the transformer encoder and
read the value of the aggregation token at the last layer, which we denote by [AGG]. Then, we map
[AGG] to [ψµ , ψσ2 ] as follows:

                                             ψµ = Linear([AGG]),                                    (51)

                                             ψσ2 = exp Linear([AGG]) ,                              (52)
where Linear are separate linear mappings.

B.3    ELBO

Given definitions in the previous sections, we can write the ELBO as
                                   p(z1 , {ti , xi , yi }N
                       Z
                                                         i=1 )
                 L = q(z1 ) ln                                 dz1                                  (53)
                                            q(z1 )
                                     N
                                          p(yi |z1 , ti , xi )p({ti , xi }N
                                   Q
                                                                          i=1 |z1 )p(z1 )
                       Z
                    = q(z1 ) ln i=1                                                       dz1       (54)
                                                           q(z1 )
                       Z          YN
                    = q(z1 ) ln       p(yi |z1 , ti , xi )dz1                                       (55)
                                          i=1
                             Z
                         +        q(z1 ) ln p({ti , xi }N
                                                        i=1 |z1 )dz1                                (56)
                             Z
                                               p(z1 )
                         +        q(z1 ) ln           dz1                                           (57)
                                               q(z1 )
                         N
                         X
                     =           Eq(z1 ) [ln p(yi |z1 , ti , xi )]                                  (58)
                         i=1
                         |                    {z                  }
                                              L1
                                       "N                             Z                #
                                        X
                         + Eq(z1 )             ln λ(u(ti , xi )) −        λ(u(t, x))dxdt            (59)
                                         i=1
                             |                               {z                            }
                                                             L2
                         − KL[q(z1 )∥p(z1 )] .                                                      (60)
                           |     {z        }
                                        L3
                     = L1 + L2 − L3 .                                                               (61)

Computing ELBO. We compute the ELBO as follows:

      1. Compute local variational parameter from the context as
         ψµ , ψσ2 = Encoder({ti , xi , yi }N
                                           i=1 )
                                             ctx


      2. Sample the latent initial state as z1 ∼ N (z1 |ψµ , diag(ψσ2 )) using reparameterization
      3. Evaluate z(τ1 ), . . . , z(τn ) by solving dz(τ )
                                                     dt = f (z(τ )) with z1 as the initial condition. We
         solve the ODE using torchdiffeq package (Chen et al., 2018).


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      4. Compute the latent states z̃(t1 ), . . . , z̃(tN ) via interpolation as
         z̃(t) = interpolate(t; z(τ1 ), . . . , z(τn ))
      5. Compute u(t1 , x1 ), . . . , u(tN , xN ) as u(ti , xi ) = ϕ(z̃(ti ), xi )
      6. Compute L1 using Monte Carlo integration
      7. Compute L2 using Monte Carlo integration, with the intensity integral computed using
         torchquad (Gómez et al., 2024) package.
      8. Compute L3 analytically

Sampling is done using reparametrization (Kingma & Welling, 2013) to allow for exact gradient
evaluation via backpropagation. Monte Carlo integration is done using sample size of one.

C     E XPERIMENTS S ETUP
C.1   DATASETS

See Appendix A for all details about dataset generation. For all datasets we use 80%/10%10%
train/validation/test splits. The context size Nctx is determined for each trajectory separately based
on the time interval that we consider to be the context, for Burgers’ and Navier-Stokes it is the first
0.5 seconds (out of 2 seconds), while for Shallow Water it is 0.1 seconds (out of 1 second). Since the
number of events occurring within this fixed time interval is different for each trajectory, the context
size consequently differs across trajectories. See encoder architecture description below for details
on how different context lengths are processed.

C.2   T RAINING , VALIDATION , AND T ESTING

We use AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) optimizer with constant learning rate 3e-4 (we use
linear warmup for first 250 iterations). We train for 25000 iterations, sampling a random minibatch
from the training dataset at every iteration. We do not use any kind of scaling for the ELBO terms.
We compute validation error (MAE on observations) on a single random minibatch from the validation
set every 125 iterations. We save the current model weights if the validation error averaged over last
10 validation runs is the smallest so far.
To simulate the model’s dynamics we use differentiable ODE solvers from torchdiffeq package
(Chen et al., 2018). In particular, we use theR dopri5 solver with rtol = atol = 10−5 without the adjoint
method. To evaluate the intensity integral λ(u(t, x)dxdt we use Monte Carlo integration from the
torchquad (Gómez et al., 2024) package with 32 randomly sampled points for training, and 256
randomly sampled points for testing, we found these sample sizes to be sufficient for producing small
variance of the integral estimation in our case.

C.3   E NCODER AND M ODEL A RCHITECTURES

Encoder. We use padding to efficiently handle input contexts of varying length. The time points,
coordinates, and observations are linearly projected to the embedding space (128-dim for Burgers’
and Shallow Water, and 192-dim for Navier-Stokes). Then, the projections are summed and passed
through a stack of transformer encoder layers (4 layers for Burgers’ and Shallow Water, and 5 layers
for Navier-Stokes, 4 attention heads were used in all cases). We introduce a learnable aggregation
token which we append at the end of each input sequence. The final layer’s output is read from the
last token of the output sequence (corresponds to the aggregation token) and is mapped to the local
variational parameters as discussed in Appendix B.

Model. The dynamics function f (z(t)) is an MLP with 3 layers 368 neurons each, and GeLU
(Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) nonlinearities. We set resolution of the uniform temporal grid τ1 , . . . , τn
to n = 50. The dynamics function maps the current latent state z(t) to its time derivative dz(t)
                                                                                            dt , both
are dz -dimensional vectors.
The function ϕ(z̃(t), x) is an MLP with 3 hidden layers with width 368 for Burgers’, 256 for Shallow
Water, and 512 for Navier-Stokes. We use GeLU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) nonlinearities. As the


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


input the MLP takes the sum of z̃(t) ∈ Rdz with proj(x) ∈ Rdz , where proj is a linear projection,
and maps the sum to the output u(t, x) ∈ Rdu .
The intensity function λ(u(t, x)) is an MLP with 3 layers, 256 neurons each, and GeLU (Hendrycks
& Gimpel, 2016) nonlinearities. We further exponentiate the output of the MLP and add a small
constant (1e-4) to it to ensure the intensity is positive and to avoid numerical instabilities.
We set the observation function g(u(t, x)) to the identity function, thus g(u(t, x)) = u(t, x).

C.4     M ODEL C OMPARISON

C.4.1    DYNAMIC S PATIOTEMPORAL M ODELS
In this section we discuss neural spatiotemporal models we used for the comparisons. But first, we
discuss data preprocessing that we do in order to make these models applicable.

Data Preprocessing. All models in this section assume that dense observations are available at
every time point, and some further assume the observations are located on a uniform spatial grid.
To make our data satisfy these requirements we use time binning and spatial interpolation. First,
we use time binning and divide the original time grid into 10 bins and group all time points into
10 groups based on which bin they belong to. We used 10 time bins as it ensured that there was a
sufficient number of time points in each bin while also being sufficient to capture changes of the
system state. We denote by ti the time point that represents the bin i. Next, we use all observations
that belong to bin i and interpolate them to a uniform 32x32 spatial grid. In many cases some points
of the spatial grid were outside of the convex hull of the interpolation points, so we set values of
such points to -1 (values of the state range from 0 to 1). We used linear interpolation. We denote
the resulting interpolated values at time ti as ui which is the interpolated system state at the 32x32
spatial grid. When we compute the loss between ui and the corresponding model prediction we use
only those spatial locations that had proper interpolation values (i.e. were inside the convex hull of
the interpolation points).

Median predictor. This is a simple baseline where we compute the median of the observations yi
on the training data and use it as the prediction on the test data.

CNN-ODE. This is another relatively simple baseline based on latent neural ODEs (Chen et al.,
2018). It operates in some sense similarly to our model as it takes a sequence of initial observations
(context) y1 , . . . , yNctx and uses a CNN encoder to map the context to the latent initial state z1 . Then
it maps z1 to z2 , . . . , zN via a latent ODE, and finally decodes zi to obtain ui via a CNN decoder.
In our case we used the first two observations u1 and u2 as the context.

FEN. This model discretizes the spatial domain into a mesh and uses a graph neural network to
model the dynamics of the state at each node of the mesh. The model starts at u1 and maps it directly
to u2 , . . . , uN via an ODE solver without using any context. We simulated the dynamics as stationary
and autonomous, with the free-form term active. The dynamics function is a 2-layer MLP with the
width of 512 neurons and ReLU nonlinearities. All other hyper-parameters were left as defaults as
we found that changing them did not improve the results. We used the official code from Lienen &
Günnemann (2022).

NSPDE. This model applies a point-wise transformation to map the system state at every spatial
node to a high-dimensional latent representation, then uses the fixed-point method to simulate the
dynamics at every node, and finally maps the high-dimensional latent states back to the observation
space to obtain the predictions. We used the fixed-point method with maximum number of available
modes and a single iteration as we found that larger number of iterations does not improve the results.
All other hyper-parameters were left as defaults as we found that changing them did not improve the
results. We used the official code from Salvi et al. (2022).

C.4.2    N EURAL S PATIOTEMPORAL P ROCESSES
Constant Intensity Baseline. As a simple baseline we use the following intensity function λ(t, x) =
c, where c is a learnable parameter that we fit on the training data.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          hf
                              dz     hϕ
                                             23      92        368     512
                               40    128   0.090    0.091      0.084   0.081
                               40    512   0.075    0.073      0.074   0.072
                              368    128   0.084    0.083      0.084   0.082
                              368    512   0.072    0.073      0.073   0.072

Table 4: Dependence of the test MAE on latent space dimension dz , dynamics complexity hf and
decoder complexity hϕ .


DSTPP. This model uses a transformer-based encoder to condition a diffusion-based density model
on the event history. We use 500 time steps and 500 sampling steps, and train for at most 12 hours.
All other hyper-parameters were left as defaults as we found that changing them did not improve the
results or made the training too slow. We used the official code from Yuan et al. (2023).

NSTPP. This model represents the vent history in terms of a latent state governed by a neural ODE,
with the latent state being discontinuously updated after each event. The latent state is further used to
represent the distribution of spatial locations via a normalizing flow model. We used the attentive
CNF version of the model. All other hyper-parameters were left as defaults as we found that changing
them did not improve the results. We used the official code from Chen et al. (2021).

AutoSTPP. This model uses dual network approach for flexible and efficient modeling of spatiotem-
poral processes. We used 5 product networks with 2 layers 128 neurons each and hyperbolic tangent
nonlinearities. The step size was set to 20 and number of steps was set to 101 in each direction. All
other hyper-parameters were left as defaults as we found that changing them did not improve the
results. We used the official code from Zhou & Yu (2023).

D    E FFECTS OF DYNAMICS FUNCTION AND DECODER COMPLEXITY

Our model (similarly to previous competing models) consists of a composition of mappings that
are parameterized by deep neural networks. Therefore, the role and importance of different model
components depends on a number of hyperparameters. This, in turn, is related to the result reported
in the main text (Figure 5), where we observed that, in the case of linear interpolation, decreasing the
number of interpolation points did not decrease predictive performance of our model. Decreasing
the number of interpolation points to n = 2 corresponds to replacing non-linear dynamics function
with a linear model, but this decrease in complexity of the dynamics model can, in some cases, be
compensated by the capacity of decoder function. In this section, we conduct a series of experiments
to better understand the role of the dynamics and decoder functions in our model. In particular, we
look at the model’s predictive accuracy as a function of the latent space dimension dz , and complexity
of the dynamics function f and decoder ϕ. Since both f and ϕ are 3-layer MLPs, we define their
complexities as the width of the hidden layers hf and hϕ , respectively. In particular, we look at low-
and high-dimensional latent spaces (dz = 40 and dz = 368); we consider medium and large decoder
function ϕ (with hϕ = 128 and hϕ = 512), and dynamics functions of different complexities ranging
from hf = 23 to hf = 512. We use linear interpolation with 50 interpolation points to allow the
model represent complex latent trajectories if it helps to fit the data better. We use the Navier-Stokes
data (since this is the most complex synthetic dataset in our work) and report only the mean absolute
error (as log-likelihood follows the same pattern). The results are in Table 4.
As can be seen, for the low-dimensional latent space (dz = 40) and medium-sized decoder (with
hϕ = 128) increasing complexity of the dynamics function hf leads to a meaningful reduction of
MAE. However, after increasing complexity of the decoder from hϕ = 128 to hϕ = 512, increasing
hf results in no significant improvements. Then, if we switch to a high-dimensional latent space
(dz = 368), we see that complexity of the decoder hϕ becomes the main determinant of the model’s
predictive accuracy, with dynamics function complexity hf having no observable effect.
In summary, we see that increasing complexity of the dynamics function of the neural ODE can be
useful in some cases (low-dimensional latent space and medium-sized decoder), but with a sufficiently


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


large decoder and large latent spaces its benefits become less apparent, meaning that in such cases
the dynamics can be modeled using simple function approximators. While the experimental results
show that in some cases accurate predictions can be achieved with simple dynamics, enabling the
model to represent complex dynamics via Neural ODEs can be useful also for cases where complex
latent trajectories are expected or enforced.


                                                21
