Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


V IDEO ACTION D IFFERENCING
 James Burgess1 , Xiaohan Wang1 , Yuhui Zhang1 , Anita Rau1 , Alejandro Lozano1 ,
 Lisa Dunlap2 , Trevor Darrell2 , Serena Yeung-Levy1
 1
   Stanford, 2 UC Berkeley



                                               A BSTRACT

             How do two individuals differ when performing the same action? In this work, we
             introduce Video Action Differencing (VidDiff), the novel task of identifying subtle
             differences between videos of the same action, which has many applications, such
             as coaching and skill learning. To enable development on this new task, we first
             create VidDiffBench, a benchmark dataset containing 549 video pairs, with human
             annotations of 4,469 fine-grained action differences and 2,075 localization times-
             tamps indicating where these differences occur. Our experiments demonstrate that
             VidDiffBench poses a significant challenge for state-of-the-art large multimodal
             models (LMMs), such as GPT-4o and Qwen2-VL. By analyzing failure cases of
             LMMs on VidDiffBench, we highlight two key challenges for this task: localiz-
             ing relevant sub-actions over two videos and fine-grained frame comparison. To
             overcome these, we propose the VidDiff method, an agentic workflow that breaks
             the task into three stages: action difference proposal, keyframe localization, and
             frame differencing, each stage utilizing specialized foundation models. To en-
             courage future research in this new task, we release the benchmark1 and code2 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
The ability to compare two videos of the same action and discern their detailed differences plays a
critical role in a wide variety of applications. For instance, in fitness coaching, a novice learning
to perform a barbell squat typically watches instructional videos and then compares their actions
in a recorded video to identify discrepancies between their movements and those of an expert. In
medical training, junior surgeons compare videos of themselves performing surgical procedures with
reference videos from experts to identify errors and improve surgical skills.
There are two critical obstacles. First is precise localization of sub-actions: finding differences
requires finding the sub-action frames where the differences might occur, and aligning those frames
between the two videos. Second is fine-grained understanding: the ability to perceive subtle visual
differences in motions.
Current research on video difference understanding largely emphasizes feature visualization (Bal-
akrishnan et al., 2015) or coarse-grained comparisons between different actions or interacting ob-
jects (Nagarajan & Torresani, 2024). However, many real-world applications demand fine-grained
comparisons between videos of the same action, a challenge that has received little attention.
We introduce a new task, Video Action Differencing (VidDiff). Given two videos of the same action,
(vA , vB ), along with a description of the action, the task is to generate two sets of statements: one
that is more true for vA and another for vB . For example, in a video pair featuring an expert and a
novice performing a barbell squat, key differences might include “knees caving in more in video A”
and “the squat is deeper in video B” (Figure 1). Since generating the initial difference candidates
relies heavily on language capabilities, we also introduce a simpler ‘closed’ setting that focuses on
video analysis. In this setting, the target difference strings are provided, and the task is to predict
whether each applies more to video A or B.
To facilitate research in this new direction, we present VidDiffBench, a comprehensive benchmark
designed for video action differencing. VidDiffBench contains 549 video pairs drawn from domains
    1
        Benchmark: https://huggingface.co/datasets/jmhb/VidDiffBench
    2
        Project page: http://jmhb0.github.io/viddiff


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The Video Action Differencing task and benchmark (VidDiffBench). Given a pair of
videos and an action, the task is to generate a list of differences as natural language descriptions.
Our VidDiffBench consists of annotated differences across diverse domains, where the differences
are relevant to human skill learning. The first row emphasizes the first key challenge: localization of
sub-actions between segments of the video for comparison. The second row highlights the second
key challenge: fine-grained image understanding of actions in order to perform comparison.

that require expert feedback, such as fitness, sports, music, and surgery. The videos are annotated
with 4,469 fine-grained differences (∼8 per video pair), along with 2,075 timestamp annotations
that identify where these differences occur. To ensure the annotated differences are relevant to skill
learning, we create a taxonomy of action differences that leverages domain expertise. This makes
VidDiffBench the first large-scale dataset dedicated to video action differencing.
In addition to introducing a new task and benchmark, we propose the VidDiff Method, an agentic
workflow (Anthropic, 2025) for solving VidDiff in zero-shot. The method incorporates large lan-
guage models (LLMs) to propose differences, localizes relevant frames using contrastive language-
image models (CLIP), and compares frames for differences using vision-language models (VLMs).
The key idea is that localizing specific video segments where differences occur enables more effec-
tive visual comparison with VLMs. We further benchmark both open-source (Qwen2-VL, LLaVA-
Video) and proprietary (GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5 pro, Claude 3.5 Sonnet) large multimodal models
(LMMs) on VidDiffBench. Our results demonstrate that VidDiff is a very challenging task for
zero shot models, while the structured approach in the VidDiff Method enhances video comparison.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Skilled Action Understanding in Videos Video comparison has many potential applications, and
our benchmark focuses on the specific goal of natural language feedback in skill learning. Most of
the video action comparison papers from this section’s first paragraph are systems for skill feedback,
showing that skill feedback is well-motivated. Many works give feedback by classifying coarse mo-
tion errors, or by visualizing motions, with applications in yoga (Zhao et al., 2022; Thoutam et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2018; Dittakavi et al., 2022; Chen & Yang, 2020; Xie et al., 2019), physical ther-
apy (Velloso et al., 2013), weightlifting (Parmar et al., 2022; Ogata et al., 2019), and general fitness
(Fieraru et al., 2021; Ashwin et al., 2023). The feedback tends to be coarse-grained. In contrast, our
task focuses on open natural language feedback, and identifying fine-grained feedback. Recently,
the Ego-Exo4D dataset (Grauman et al., 2023) provides videos with expert commentary on skilled
actions, which is promising for developing instructional feedback systems. This, along with exist-
ing works that give language feedback (Li et al., 2024b; Fieraru et al., 2021; Parmar et al., 2022;
Velloso et al., 2013), support our claim that language is a good medium for providing skill feed-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


back to humans. Zooming out from skills feedback, skilled action understanding – which includes
foundational capabilities for feedback systems – has attracted enormous interest. For example, in
sports, music, dance, and surgery, prior works have tackled action recognition (Verma et al., 2020;
Shahroudy et al., 2016; Soomro et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2013; Wang & Zemel, 2016; Chung et al.,
2021); spatial and temporal action localization / segmentation (Shao et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2021b; Zhang et al., 2023b; Ibrahim et al., 2016; Garrow et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021b; Aklilu
et al., 2024); human pose and motion estimation / reconstruction (Cai et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023b;
Wang et al., 2023; Andriluka et al., 2014; Li et al., 2021a; Fieraru et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Bera
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Grauman et al., 2023); and hand and tool pose estimation (Doosti,
2019; Johnson et al., 2020; 2016; Gao et al., 2014; Grauman et al., 2023). Skilled action domains
also tackle higher level reasoning tasks like question answering (Li et al., 2024a), and action quality
assessment (Pirsiavash et al., 2014; Parmar & Tran Morris, 2017).

Visual Difference Understanding Only a few prior works have considered video comparison in
actions. They mostly emphasize skill learning in similar categories to our benchmark, but their
methods tend to tackle single domains. One approach visualizes the user’s motion against a target
expert motion in video or in augmented reality (AR) (Trout, 2013; Motokawa & Saito, 2006; Han
et al., 2016; Kyan et al., 2015; Kurillo et al., 2008). Since interpreting discrepancies between mo-
tions is challenging, especially for novices, other works generate visualizations of differences (Liu
et al., 2023; Liao et al., 2023; Balakrishnan et al., 2015). In contrast, we summarize action differ-
ences in natural language, which enables direct and interpretable feedback. Also, our benchmark
covers many skill categories, encouraging the development of generalizable methods that do not
require domain-specific training data and methods. The most related work by Nagarajan & Torre-
sani (2024) focuses on coarse-grained step differences in instructional videos using question-answer
pairs. In contrast, our approach targets fine-grained action differences, such as a “deeper squat”,
which offers more detailed insights for skill learning. Additionally, our VidDiff method is zero-shot
for a benchmark spanning multiple skilled domains, while their method requires instruction tun-
ing data and is specialized to cooking. Beyond inference-time comparison, a number of important
works in skill assessment leverage video pairs in training – here the supervision signal is typically
a binary variable indicating which video demonstrates greater skill Doughty et al. (2018; 2019);
Pan et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2023a). In appendix E, we discuss all related datasets having video
pairs, finding that none have labels for fine-grained comparison while being large scale, unlike our
VidDiffBench
Describing differences between images in language is an established task called ‘difference caption-
ing’ or ‘change captioning’ (Jhamtani & Berg-Kirkpatrick, 2018; Park et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2021;
Yao et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023). LMM evaluation and instruct-tuning papers address image differ-
encing for pairs or small sets of images (Alayrac et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023;
Jiang et al., 2024). The task of image set differencing with large sets was introduced in (Dunlap
et al., 2023). Our VidDiff method uses image differencing with LMMs as a subroutine, however the
task of video action differencing with natural language has not previously been explored.

3     V IDEO ACTION D IFFERENCING
Video Action Differencing (VidDiff) is a novel and challenging task, offering significant potential
for applications in coaching, skill acquisition, and automated performance feedback. To facilitate
the development of models capable of handling such a task, we define two complementary task
settings: a closed setting, evaluated via multiple-choice format, and a more complex open setting,
requiring generation of action differences. Both are essential for advancing video understanding,
especially in contexts where precise feedback on actions is critical.

3.1   TASK D EFINITION

The goal of video action differencing is to identify skill-based differences between two videos of
the same action, in a zero-shot setting. We first introduce the simpler closed-set version, followed
by the more difficult open-set variation.
Closed-Set Video Action Differencing: In the closed-set task, the input is an action descrip-
tion string s, a video pair (vA , vB ), and a list of k candidate difference statements D =


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


{d0 , d1 , . . . , dk−1 }, such as “the jump is higher”. For each k, the model makes a predictions
P = {p0 , p1 , . . . , pk−1 }, where each prediction is either ‘A’ if the statement applies more to vA ,
or ‘B’ if it applies more to vB . This setup simulates real-world scenarios like coaching, where spe-
cific differences of interest are already known. For benchmark purposes, the dataset only includes
instances where there is a clear ground-truth label (‘A’ or ‘B’) for each difference, which makes
evaluation both reliable and automatic.
Open-Set Video Action Differencing: In the open-set task, the input is the action description string
s, a video pair (vA , vB ), and an integer Ndiff . The model must generate at most Ndiff difference
statements D and their associated predictions P, which label the differences as ‘A’ for video vA or
‘B’ for video vB . This setting is more challenging, as the model must not only identify differences,
but also generate those differences without any pre-defined options, closely mimicking real-world
conditions.

3.2       E VALUATION M ETRIC

Our choice of benchmark evaluation metrics is driven by two major challenges for designing annota-
tions: ambiguity and calibration. First, there is ambiguity around what differences are important for
performing an action skillfully. Second, annotators are calibrated differently – they have different
thresholds for whether a difference like “wider feet stance” is different enough to be annotated.
Closed-Set Evaluation: In the closed-set task, the evaluation is straightforward: prediction ac-
curacy is measured as the percentage of correct predictions, where 50% corresponds to random
guessing and 100% represents perfect performance (assuming a balanced evaluation set). There is
no ambiguity because we provide the possible differences. There is no calibration issue because the
answer must be ‘A’ or ‘B’ (and not ‘C’ for “not different”). Overall, it’s an automatic metric that
focuses on video understanding.
Open-Set Evaluation: In the open-set task, we use an LLM query (GPT-4o) to match the ground
truth difference strings to predicted difference strings in a ‘partial matching’. Then we only consider
“positive differences” – where the ground-truth label is ‘A’ or ‘B’ and not ‘C’. Then the recall@Ndiff
is calculated as the number of correctly matched and predicted positive differences, divided by the
total number of positive differences. To handle the ambiguity of what differences are relevant, we
set Ndiff to be 1.5 times the number of labeled differences, so models can predict more differences
without penalty. This is a reasonable number because the annotation taxonomy is designed to cover
skill-relevant differences. Moreover, we handle the calibration challenge of whether a difference is
‘above a threshold’ by only considering the positive differences where ground truth is ‘A’ or ‘B’.

4       B ENCHMARK DATASET AND A NNOTATIONS
The Video Action Differencing task presents a novel challenge in video understanding, requiring
precise comparison of subtle action differences. As no comprehensive benchmark to evaluate this
task exists, we introduce VidDiffBench, a comprehensive benchmark specifically designed to test
and advance the ability of models to detect fine-grained differences in complex actions. Our bench-
mark consists of publicly available videos and our human-created annotations are freely available
on HuggingFace Hub3 . VidDiffBench covers a wide range of actions relevant to skill learning and
performance feedback, and is constructed to challenge models across varying levels of difficulty, en-
suring its relevance for long-term model development. Table 4 summarizes the key dataset statistics.

4.1       V IDEO DATASETS

The video collection for VidDiffBench was designed to capture a diverse range of actions where
performance feedback is essential, ranging from simple exercises to complex professional tasks.
This diversity ensures that models are challenged not only on temporal localization but also on the
subtlety and complexity of visual differences. Actions in VidDiffBench span multiple levels of
difficulty—from the basic “hip rotations” in fitness exercises to the intricate “surgical knot tying.”
This wide coverage tests models across varying degrees of granularity and action complexity. The
are five categories:
    3
        https://huggingface.co/datasets/jmhb/VidDiffBench


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Category     Source Dataset                     Activity   Video Pair   Difference   Timestamp
   Fitness      HuMMan (Cai et al., 2022)              8         193         1,466          310
   Ballsports   Ego-Exo4d (Grauman et al., 2023)       4         98           996           595
   Surgery      JIGSAWS (Gao et al., 2014)             3         166         1,386          672
   Music        Ego-Exo4d (Grauman et al., 2023)       2         29           180           320
   Diving       FineDiving (Xu et al., 2022)           1         63           441           140
   Total                                               18        549         4,469         2,075

Table 1: Summary of VidDiffBench statistics across categories and datasets: number of unique
activities, video pairs, annotations for differences, and timestamps.

        • Fitness videos are simple, single-human exercises sourced from HuMMan (Cai et al.,
          2022), characterized by clean consistent backgrounds, consistent camera viewing angles,
          and consistent movement patterns.
        • Ballsports includes basketball and soccer actions from Ego-Exo4D (Grauman et al., 2023),
          recorded across various environments with some diversity in background and camera angle,
          as well as action detail.
        • Diving features high-level Olympic performances from the FineDiving dataset (Xu et al.,
          2022), capturing subtle and complex movements in professional diving. The backgrounds
          may be different, but the camera angles are consistent.
        • Music contains guitar and piano exercises from Ego-Exo4D (Grauman et al., 2023), focus-
          ing on detailed finger and hand movements. Background and camera angles can vary.
        • Surgery includes long, intricate procedures such as “knot tying” and “needle passing” from
          the JIGSAWS dataset (Gao et al., 2014). The background and camera angles are consistent.

Within each action, video pairs are randomly sampled to ensure a wide range of comparison diffi-
culty. The range of tasks is broad in terms of action complexity and background variation.

4.2     V IDEO ACTION D IFFERENCE A NNOTATIONS

A critical innovation of VidDiffBench is its detailed human-annotated dataset, designed to address
two major challenges in annotating the video differencing task: ambiguity in identifying relevant
differences and calibration consistency among annotators. To tackle ambiguity, we introduce a
structured difference taxonomy for each action, ensuring clarity on what aspects are being com-
pared. Then we assign annotators to label video pairs with differences – to handle the calibration
challenge we ensure labeling consistency by maintaining a consistent annotator identity within each
action. Additionally, we provide frame-level localization annotations of differences, which can en-
able analysis for future model development. In the following section, we describe these components
in greater detail.

4.2.1      A NNOTATION TAXONOMY
For each action, we define a structured difference taxonomy – a list of key visual differences relevant
to the task. For instance, in the basketball jump shot, a skill-relevant difference might be “the ball
is more in front of the body”; on the other hand, we do not include differences not directly relevant
to skill performance like “the athlete is taller”. Annotators assign labels to video pairs as follows:
‘A’ if the difference is more pronounced in video A, ‘B’ if it’s more pronounced in video B, and
‘C’ if the difference is negligible. By fixing this taxonomy, we address the ambiguity challenge –
that different annotators may not focus on the same differences. This allows for more objective and
consistent comparisons.
We consulted domain experts to create the taxonomies for each action category. For Fitness and
Surgery, we worked with a personal trainer and an attending surgeon, respectively, to identify vi-
sually salient differences between novice and expert performers. For Ballsports and Music, we
extracted relevant differences from expert commentary in the Ego-Exo4D dataset using a large lan-
guage model (LLM). For Diving, we leveraged the FINA diving manual, processed by an LLM, to


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


identify key differences. We filtered differences that were difficult to visually assess, such as “more
wrist snap” in basketball jump shot (because video resolution was not high enough).
This method resulted in 148 distinct difference descriptions, which are detailed in Appendix G.2.
This fixed taxonomy allows for precise evaluation of model performance across video pairs and
helps identify failure cases where models struggle with particular types of differences.

4.2.2    A NNOTATING ACTION D IFFERENCES
For each action aj and its corresponding differences, annotators reviewed video pairs (vA , vB ) side-
by-side, with the ability to step through frames. Each difference was labeled as ‘A’ if it applied
more to video vA , ‘B’ if it applied more to vB , or ‘C’ if the difference was insignificant. Consis-
tent annotation was achieved by assigning a single annotator to each action, ensuring that models
are evaluated uniformly across all samples. This avoids the calibration challenge, that different
annotators may have different thresholds for significance.
To verify annotation quality, a second annotator reviewed 25% of the samples. We assessed dis-
agreements where one annotator marked ‘A’ and the other marked ‘B’, which occurred in only 2%
of cases, indicating low error rates. Annotators were provided with clear visual guidelines to en-
sure accurate and impartial labeling. On average, annotators spent three minutes per video pair to
evaluate about eight differences.

4.2.3    A NNOTATING D IFFERENCE L OCALIZATIONS
In addition to action differences, VidDiffBench provides localization annotations, pinpointing the
exact frames in each video where key differences occur. Since identifying localizing frames and
aligning them across videos is a key step in performing video action differencing, these annotations
enable analysis of model weaknesses, for example through ablation tests in our results section.
We define specific key points for each action, representing critical frames where important move-
ments occur. For example, in a squat, key points might include “knees start to bend” and “reaches
lowest position.” Differences are then linked to these key points: for example the difference “faster
squat descent” is defined as the frame spanning “knees start to bend” and “reaches lowest position”.
Further details are provided in Appendix C.2.

4.3     DATASET S PLITS AND S TATISTICS

Dataset Splits To account for varying levels of difficulty in VidDiffBench, we categorize actions
into easy, medium, and hard splits. GPT-4o was used to assign actions to these splits based on de-
scriptions, difference lists, and video lengths. The easy split includes simple movements like Fitness
exercises, while medium and hard splits contain more complex actions like Ballsports, Diving, Mu-
sic, and Surgery. This ensures that models are challenged across a range of difficulties, from basic
movements to subtle, fine-grained comparisons.

Dataset Statistics VidDiffBench includes 549 video pairs, 4,469 annotated differences, and 2,075
key point annotations across Fitness, Weightlifting, Ballsports, Surgery, Music, and Diving domains.
Video lengths range from a few seconds to several minutes, providing comprehensive coverage of
different action complexities. This diversity ensures that VidDiffBench is a robust benchmark for
testing and advancing models in fine-grained action comparison. Under the closed setting, the A/B
ratio is 0.493/0.507, and in the open setting, the A/B/C ratio is 0.259/0.264/0.476.

5     V ID D IFF M ETHOD
We propose a three-stage framework, the VidDiff Method, that addresses the Video Action Dif-
ferencing task. The method follows an agentic workflow (Anthropic, 2025) consisting of three
components: Difference Proposer, Frame Localizer, and Action Differencer Figure 2. The stages
decompose the differencing task into logical steps, and leverage strong zero-shot models for each
step. The method described is for the open setting. The method for the closed setting is the same,
except the LLM query for candidate differences in stage 1 is replaced with the ground truth differ-
ences.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Proposer
    Proposed Action Differences: “Wider foot stance at start”, “Faster decent”, “Longer
              “Weighted Squat”
                                       (LLM)       Squat”, “Deeper Squat”, “Faster ascent”


                                       Frame
      Retrieval Strings: [“A person rising from a squat with a barbell on their back.”, “A person
                    “Faster ascent”   Localizer
   at the gym lifting from a squat position with a barbell.”, ..]

                                       (LLM)       Number of frames needed: 4



                                                                                                                          Which set of frames
                                       Frame                                                                            contains a faster ascent?

          Video A                     Localizer
                                                                         Answer A, B, or neither
                                       (CLIP)

                                                                                                                                 Action              “Video B has a
                                                                                                                               Differencer
          faster ascent
                                                                                                                                  (VQA)              than video A”
                                       Frame
          Video B                     Localizer

                                       (CLIP)



Figure 2: VidDiff Method. One input is an action description (e.g. “weighted squat”). The Dif-
ference Proposer generates potential differences using a large language model (LLM). The Frame
Localizer assigns frames where these differences are observable. Finally, the Action Differencer
checks each difference using a vision-language model, determining whether it applies more to video
A or video B, or neither.

1. Difference Proposer: The Difference Proposer module generates candidate differences for a
given action description s. It leverages the extensive knowledge embedded in large language models
(LLMs) to predict likely differences between the two videos. For example, given the description “A
practice basketball jump shot”, the module might generate difference candidates such as “the athlete
jumps higher”. These difference statements, which are visually assessable, form the basis for further
analysis. The goal of this stage is to create a diverse set of meaningful and relevant comparisons.
2. Frame Localizer: The Frame Localizer module focuses on identifying the most relevant frames
in the video where the proposed differences can be observed. By retrieving the most salient segments
from both frames, we solve the key challenge of temporal localization of sub-actions, which makes
the next stage more effective. Our approach is to do temporal sub-action segmentation. The LLM
takes uses the action description string to produce a list of sub-actions, along with retrieval strings
to guide localization. A pretrained CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021) is used to compute frame
similarity based on these retrieval strings, and then we assign each frame to one of the sub-actions.
Here, we use a Viterbi-based algorithm (Kukleva et al., 2019), which assigns each frame to a sub-
action based on its similarity score, while enforcing that the frames follow the fixed sequence of
sub-actions. Finally, the LLM predicts a mapping between the sub-actions and their corresponding
differences, yielding a set of precisely localized frames for each difference.
3. Action Differencer: In the final stage, the Action Differencer module validates the proposed
differences using vision-language models (VLMs). Given the localized frames from both videos,
this module poses multiple-choice questions (derived from the generated difference candidates) to a
VLM, which determines whether each difference is more pronounced in vA , vB , or if it is indistin-
guishable. This stage transforms the problem into a structured multiple-choice task. Moreover, by
providing the localized-frames relevant to each difference.
Overall the VidDiff method is structured to localize the key parts of the video where differences are
possible, which should make visual comparison with the VLM easier.


6   R ESULTS

In this section, we present the results of evaluating large multimodal models (LMMs) and our Vid-
Diff Method and on the challenging task of video action differencing on our VidDiffBench bench-
mark. Our experiments show the complexity of this task, particularly in capturing subtle, fine-
grained action differences across diverse video categories. We demonstrate that existing state-of-
the-art LMMs, such as GPT-4o and Gemini, struggle with these challenges, while our proposed
VidDiff Method outperforms the baselines, especially in the close-set evaluation. Through detailed
error analysis and ablation studies, we uncover key factors that influence model performance, shed-
ding light on future directions for improving video-based model capabilities.


                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.1   M AIN R ESULTS

As described in Section 3.2, we evaluate our approach on both the closed-set and open-set tasks.
In the closed-set task, models are provided with predefined difference descriptions and must pre-
dict whether the difference applies to video A or B. In the open-set task, models are tasked with
both generating the difference description and making a prediction. These tasks are fundamental to
assessing models’ capabilities in fine-grained action comparison.
For our experiments, we benchmark large multimodal models (LMMs) that have demonstrated
strong performance in video tasks. Specifically, we use top models from the Video-MME bench-
mark (Fu et al., 2024): GPT-4o (Achiam et al., 2023), Gemini-1.5-Pro (Reid et al., 2024), Claude 3.5
Sonnet Anthropic (2024), and the leading open-source models, Qwen2-VL-7B (Wang et al., 2024;
Bai et al., 2023) and LLaVA-Video (Zhang et al., 2024). Following model guidelines, we provide
Gemini, Qwen, and VideoLLaVA with video inputs, while for GPT-4o and Claude we give frames,
with text prompts explaining which frames belong to which video. For categories with shorter, fine-
grained actions (e.g., Fitness, Ballsports, and Diving), we sample frames at 4-6 fps, while for longer
actions (e.g., Music and Surgery), we sample at 2 fps. Our method, VidDiff, is evaluated alongside
these baselines, were the proposer LLM is gpt-4o-2024-08-06, the localizer embedding model
is CLIP ViT-bigG-14, and frame differencer VLM is gpt-4o-2024-08-06. The results are
results shown in Table 2 and Table 3.


Closed-Set Benchmark Performance The closed-set results are in Table 2, revealing that video
action differencing is a highly challenging task. While some models surpass the random-guessing
baseline of 50% – where gray shading indicates better-than-random with statistical significance –
their improvements are modest, especially in the harder splits where no model performs signifi-
cantly better than chance. Gemini, which has emphasized its results in video understanding, has
the strongest overall performance. Our VidDiff Method, which uses GPT-4o as a visual perception
backbone, outperforms GPT-4o on the raw video frames and is second overall, demonstrating the
value of our scaffolding for this task. LLava-Video is competitive with GPT and Claude, while
Qwen2-VL performs poorly, possibly related to instruction-following challenges appendix G.4


Table 2: Results for closed setting (accuracy). Best scores in bold, second best underlined. Scores
are better than random, with statistical significance highlighted in gray. Significance is p-value<
0.05 on a binomial test.
                                               Easy Med Hard Avg
                        GPT-4o                  58.3     53.2     48.9    53.5
                        Gemini-1.5-Pro          67.8     53.6     51.7    57.7
                        Claude-3.5-Sonnet       57.1     50.5     52.5    53.4
                        LLaVA-Video             56.6     52.0     48.3    52.3
                        Qwen2-VL-7B             49.0     52.6     49.6    50.4
                        VidDiff (ours)          62.7     56.2     50.0    56.3



Open-Set Benchmark Performance In the open-set task (Table 3), our method outperforms all
other models across most splits, except on the medium difficulty. Among the LMMs, GPT-4o per-
forms much better than Gemini. We analyze this gap by breaking down errors into two categories:
difference recall error, where the model fails to generate the ground-truth difference, and flipped pre-
diction error, where the generated difference is correct but the prediction (‘A’ or ‘B’) is incorrect.
The closed-set results show that Gemini has lower flipped prediction error, suggesting that Gemini’s
main weakness is in difference recall. Specifically, on the easy split, Gemini’s recall error is 66%
compared to GPT-4o’s 30%. Despite generating a similar number of differences as GPT-4o, Gemini
struggles to identify the most important ones in our taxonomy, which hampers its performance. Suc-
cess in the open setting requires strong language capabilities, and this limitation is the bottleneck for
handling subtle differences. This explains why, when using the same language proposer, our model
performs similarly to GPT-4o.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Table 3: Results for open setting (recall@Ndiff ). Best scores in bold, second best underlined.
                                           Easy      Med      Hard       Average
                  GPT-4o                    45.7       41.5     38.0       41.7
                  Gemini-1.5-Pro            30.3       30.5     24.1       28.3
                  Claude-3.5-Sonnet         37.8       34.6     34.3       35.6
                  LLaVA-Video               7.8        9.0      8.5        8.4
                  Qwen2-VL-7B               11.2        8.8      1.6        7.2
                  VidDiff (ours)            49.9       37.9     38.5       42.1


6.2   A BLATION S TUDIES

We conducted ablation studies to better understand the individual contributions of different compo-
nents within VidDiff. These studies focus on the Closed setting, isolating the effects of the frame
differencing and frame localization stages.

Frame Differencer Image Comparison In the final stage of VidDiff, the model performs visual
question answering (VQA) on frames retrieved from the two videos. To evaluate the effectiveness of
this process, we conducted a test using the ground-truth timestamp annotations from VidDiffBench.
The results (Table 4) show that even with perfect frame alignment, zero-shot VLMs struggle to
consistently detect subtle differences in images. Performance decreases significantly on the medium
and hard splits, which suggests room for improvement in zero-shot VLMs’ image understanding
capabilities.

Frame Localization Design We also analyzed the per-
formance of the Frame Localizer in the closed-set case
                                                                  Split   Easy    Medium      Hard
for the easy split, using ground-truth difference proposals
to measure VQA accuracy. Table 5 shows that random                Acc     78.6        61.2    51.0
frame retrieval leads to significant performance drops,
while the addition of Viterbi-based decoding (which en-        Table 4: Ablation study results for
forces a fixed action transcript) substantially improves ac-   frame differencing VQA with ground
curacy. The improvement suggests that temporal align-          truth frames. Questions are 3-way
ment plays a critical role in achieving robust video differ-   multiple-choice.
encing.
In summary, these ablation studies confirm that both ac-
curate frame localization and careful VQA processing are
                                                                Method                       Accuracy
essential to achieving strong performance in video action
differencing.                                                   Oracle (GT timestamps)         78.6
                                                                Random                         50.1
                                                                Ours w/o Viterbi Decoding      57.4
6.3   D IFFERENCE -L EVEL E RROR A NALYSIS                      Ours                           62.7

VidDiffBench’s predefined taxonomy allows us to ana-           Table 5: Ablation on frame localization
lyze model performance on 148 specific types of action         using different retrieval techniques on
differences, highlighting where models succeed and fail.       easy.
The results for each difference are detailed in Appendix
Table 14, and we perform a statistical significance test to
compare models against the random-guessing baseline.
We find that model performance is highly dependent on
the visual complexity of the action and the difficulty of localization. Successful examples (Figure 3,
left column) show high accuracy for simple, easily localized actions, such as “wider foot stance” in
hip rotations (83% accuracy) or “guiding the ball” in a basketball layup (90% accuracy). These cases
feature coarse differences that are apparent in most frames, or require only approximate localization.
Conversely, failure cases (Figure 3, right column) often involve precise localization or fine-grained
differences. For instance, identifying the angle of a diver’s entry into the water in a 10m dive’ re-
quires frame-perfect alignment, and recognizing subtle changes in speed in “piano scales” is difficult


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


when reasoning over multi-frames. These challenges highlight the limitations of current models in
handling fine-grained video analysis.

                 Success cases                                             Failure cases
“Wider foot stance”. Accuracy: 80%                     “Body closer to 90° at water entry”. Accuracy: random


    • Coarse visual diﬀerence • No localization             • Moderately fine diﬀerence • Diﬃcult localization

“Non-shooting hand guides the ball”. Accuracy: 90%     “Plays the scales faster”. Accuracy: random


    • Coarse visual diﬀerence • Easy localization    • Fine-grained diﬀerence over multiple frames • Easy localization

“The step out is faster”. Accuracy: 93%               “Instrument applies more force to the tissue”. Accuracy: random


      • Multi-frame reasoning • Easy localization    • Fine-grained diﬀerencing over multiple frames • Complex motion

Figure 3: Examples of ‘success cases’ (left) – differences where GPT-4o has high accuracy – and
failure cases (right). Success cases typically involve coarse differences, easy localization, or simple
actions, while failure cases often involve fine differences, precise localization or complex actions.


7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce the novel task of Video Action Differencing (VidDiff), aimed at com-
paring actions in videos. We define this task, compile a meticulously annotated benchmark, and
propose a zero-shot agent-based framework. Our findings demonstrate that this task is feasible with
current foundation models, although more challenging splits in the benchmark reveal significant op-
portunities for further methodological improvements. We believe that Video Action Differencing
represents a promising research direction with broad applications in fields such as skill acquisition,
sports analytics, and scientific research.


8    F UTURE W ORK AND L IMITATIONS

While our work demonstrates the potential of Video Action Differencing, there are areas for future
improvement. Enhancing frame retrieval techniques could improve performance. While many large
models have emergent capabilities not trained for (Tang et al., 2023a; Burgess et al., 2024), explicit
training for comparing fine-grained features of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) is likely underuti-
lized. Further, developing methods tailored to specialized domains such as healthcare or education
could unlock more targeted applications. Limitations in our current approach include reliance on
general foundation models, which may struggle with domain-specific tasks or fine-grained compar-
isons. We hope this work encourages further exploration into broader video comparison methods
and inspires advancements in these areas.


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Josiah Aklilu, Xiaohan Wang, and Serena Yeung-Levy. Zero-shot action localization via the confi-
  dence of large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14340, 2024.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.
Mykhaylo Andriluka, Leonid Pishchulin, Peter Gehler, and Bernt Schiele. 2d human pose estima-
 tion: New benchmark and state of the art analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
 computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3686–3693, 2014.
Anthropic. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku. Model card, Anthropic, 2024. URL
  https://www.anthropic.com/claude-3-model-cards.pdf.
Anthropic. Building effective agents. Blog post, 2025. URL https://www.anthropic.
  com/research/building-effective-agents. Retrieved from https://www.
  anthropic.com/research/building-effective-agents on February 27, 2025.
TS Ashwin, Vijay Prakash, and Ramkumar Rajendran. A systematic review of intelligent tutoring
  systems based on gross body movement detected using computer vision. Computers and Educa-
  tion: Artificial Intelligence, 4:100125, 2023.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
   Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, local-
   ization, text reading, and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.
Guha Balakrishnan, Frédo Durand, and John Guttag. Video diff: Highlighting differences between
  similar actions in videos. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 34(6):1–10, 2015.
Asish Bera, Mita Nasipuri, Ondrej Krejcar, and Debotosh Bhattacharjee. Fine-grained sports, yoga,
  and dance postures recognition: A benchmark analysis. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation
  and Measurement, 2023.
James Burgess, Kuan-Chieh Wang, and Serena Yeung-Levy. Viewpoint textual inversion: Discov-
  ering scene representations and 3d view control in 2d diffusion models. In European Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 416–435. Springer, 2024.
Zhongang Cai, Daxuan Ren, Ailing Zeng, Zhengyu Lin, Tao Yu, Wenjia Wang, Xiangyu Fan, Yang
  Gao, Yifan Yu, Liang Pan, et al. Humman: Multi-modal 4d human dataset for versatile sensing
  and modeling. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 557–577. Springer, 2022.
Hua-Tsung Chen, Yu-Zhen He, and Chun-Chieh Hsu. Computer-assisted yoga training system.
  Multimedia Tools and Applications, 77:23969–23991, 2018.
Steven Chen and Richard R Yang. Pose trainer: correcting exercise posture using pose estimation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11718, 2020.
Jihoon Chung, Cheng-hsin Wuu, Hsuan-ru Yang, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Haa500:
   Human-centric atomic action dataset with curated videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF inter-
   national conference on computer vision, pp. 13465–13474, 2021.
Bhat Dittakavi, Divyagna Bavikadi, Sai Vikas Desai, Soumi Chakraborty, Nishant Reddy, Vineeth N
  Balasubramanian, Bharathi Callepalli, and Ayon Sharma. Pose tutor: an explainable system for
  pose correction in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 3540–3549, 2022.
Bardia Doosti. Hand pose estimation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.01013, 2019.

                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hazel Doughty, Dima Damen, and Walterio Mayol-Cuevas. Who’s better? who’s best? pairwise
  deep ranking for skill determination. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 6057–6066, 2018.
Hazel Doughty, Walterio Mayol-Cuevas, and Dima Damen. The pros and cons: Rank-aware tempo-
  ral attention for skill determination in long videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7862–7871, 2019.
Lisa Dunlap, Yuhui Zhang, Xiaohan Wang, Ruiqi Zhong, Trevor Darrell, Jacob Steinhardt, Joseph E
  Gonzalez, and Serena Yeung-Levy. Describing differences in image sets with natural language.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02974, 2023.
Mihai Fieraru, Mihai Zanfir, Silviu Cristian Pirlea, Vlad Olaru, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Aifit:
 Automatic 3d human-interpretable feedback models for fitness training. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9919–9928, 2021.
Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yondong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu
  Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive evalua-
  tion benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21075, 2024.
Yixin Gao, S Swaroop Vedula, Carol E Reiley, Narges Ahmidi, Balakrishnan Varadarajan, Henry C
  Lin, Lingling Tao, Luca Zappella, Benjamın Béjar, David D Yuh, et al. Jhu-isi gesture and skill
  assessment working set (jigsaws): A surgical activity dataset for human motion modeling. In
  MICCAI workshop: M2cai, volume 3, pp. 3, 2014.
Carly R Garrow, Karl-Friedrich Kowalewski, Linhong Li, Martin Wagner, Mona W Schmidt, Sandy
  Engelhardt, Daniel A Hashimoto, Hannes G Kenngott, Sebastian Bodenstedt, Stefanie Speidel,
  et al. Machine learning for surgical phase recognition: a systematic review. Annals of surgery,
  273(4):684–693, 2021.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Lorenzo Torresani, Kris Kitani, Jitendra Malik, Triantafyllos
  Afouras, Kumar Ashutosh, Vijay Baiyya, Siddhant Bansal, Bikram Boote, et al. Ego-exo4d:
  Understanding skilled human activity from first-and third-person perspectives. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.18259, 2023.
Ping-Hsuan Han, Kuan-Wen Chen, Chen-Hsin Hsieh, Yu-Jie Huang, and Yi-Ping Hung. Ar-arm:
  Augmented visualization for guiding arm movement in the first-person perspective. In Proceed-
  ings of the 7th Augmented Human International Conference 2016, pp. 1–4, 2016.
Xinyue Hu, Lin Gu, Qi A. An, Mengliang Zhang, Liangchen Liu, Kazuma Kobayashi, Tatsuya
  Harada, Ronald M. Summers, and Yingying Zhu. Expert knowledge-aware image difference
  graph representation learning for difference-aware medical visual question answering. Proceed-
  ings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2023.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260125237.
Mostafa S Ibrahim, Srikanth Muralidharan, Zhiwei Deng, Arash Vahdat, and Greg Mori. A hierar-
 chical deep temporal model for group activity recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
 on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1971–1980, 2016.
Harsh Jhamtani and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Learning to describe differences between pairs of
  similar images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.10584, 2018.
Dongfu Jiang, Xuan He, Huaye Zeng, Cong Wei, Max Ku, Qian Liu, and Wenhu Chen. Mantis:
  Interleaved multi-image instruction tuning, April 2024. URL https://tiger-ai-lab.
  github.io/Blog/mantis.
David Johnson, Isabelle Dufour, Daniela Damian, and George Tzanetakis. Detecting pianist hand
  posture mistakes for virtual piano tutoring. In Proceedings of the international computer music
  conference, pp. 168–171, 2016.
David Johnson, Daniela Damian, and George Tzanetakis. Detecting hand posture in piano playing
  using depth data. Computer Music Journal, 43(1):59–78, 2020.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-
 hamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei
 Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-
 improving pipelines. 2024.
Hoeseong Kim, Jongseok Kim, Hyungseok Lee, Hyun a Park, and Gunhee Kim. Viewpoint-agnostic
  change captioning with cycle consistency. 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision (ICCV), pp. 2075–2084, 2021.
Anna Kukleva, Hilde Kuehne, Fadime Sener, and Jurgen Gall. Unsupervised learning of action
  classes with continuous temporal embedding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12066–12074, 2019.
Gregorij Kurillo, Ruzena Bajcsy, Klara Nahrsted, and Oliver Kreylos. Immersive 3d environment for
  remote collaboration and training of physical activities. In 2008 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference,
  pp. 269–270. IEEE, 2008.
Matthew Kyan, Guoyu Sun, Haiyan Li, Ling Zhong, Paisarn Muneesawang, Nan Dong, Bruce Elder,
 and Ling Guan. An approach to ballet dance training through ms kinect and visualization in a cave
 virtual reality environment. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 6
 (2):1–37, 2015.
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Liangyu Chen, Jinghao Wang, Fanyi Pu, Jingkang Yang, Chunyuan
  Li, and Ziwei Liu. Mimic-it: Multi-modal in-context instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.05425, 2023.
Haopeng Li, Andong Deng, Qiuhong Ke, Jun Liu, Hossein Rahmani, Yulan Guo, Bernt Schiele,
  and Chen Chen. Sports-qa: A large-scale video question answering benchmark for complex and
  professional sports. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01505, 2024a.
Ruilong Li, Shan Yang, David A Ross, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Ai choreographer: Music condi-
  tioned 3d dance generation with aist++. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 13401–13412, 2021a.
Yixuan Li, Lei Chen, Runyu He, Zhenzhi Wang, Gangshan Wu, and Limin Wang. Multisports: A
  multi-person video dataset of spatio-temporally localized sports actions. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 13536–13545, 2021b.
Yuan-Ming Li, Wei-Jin Huang, An-Lan Wang, Ling-An Zeng, Jing-Ke Meng, and Wei-Shi Zheng.
  Egoexo-fitness: Towards egocentric and exocentric full-body action understanding. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 363–382. Springer, 2024b.
Chen-Chieh Liao, Dong-Hyun Hwang, Erwin Wu, and Hideki Koike. Ai coach: A motor skill
  training system using motion discrepancy detection. In Proceedings of the Augmented Humans
  International Conference 2023, pp. 179–189, 2023.
Ruofan Liu, Erwin Wu, Chen-Chieh Liao, Hayato Nishioka, Shinichi Furuya, and Hideki Koike.
  Pianosyncar: Enhancing piano learning through visualizing synchronized hand pose discrepancies
  in augmented reality. In 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
  (ISMAR), pp. 859–868. IEEE, 2023.
Yanchao Liu, Xina Cheng, and Takeshi Ikenaga. Motion-aware and data-independent model based
  multi-view 3d pose refinement for volleyball spike analysis. Multimedia Tools and Applications,
  83(8):22995–23018, 2024.
Yi Liu, Limin Wang, Yali Wang, Xiao Ma, and Yu Qiao. Fineaction: A fine-grained video dataset
  for temporal action localization. IEEE transactions on image processing, 31:6937–6950, 2022.
Yoichi Motokawa and Hideo Saito. Support system for guitar playing using augmented reality
  display. In 2006 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, pp.
  243–244. IEEE, 2006.
Tushar Nagarajan and Lorenzo Torresani. Step differences in instructional video. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.16222, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ryoji Ogata, Edgar Simo-Serra, Satoshi Iizuka, and Hiroshi Ishikawa. Temporal distance matrices
  for squat classification. In Proceedings of the ieee/cvf conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition workshops, pp. 0–0, 2019.

Jia-Hui Pan, Jibin Gao, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Adaptive action assessment. IEEE Transactions on
   Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(12):8779–8795, 2021.

Dong Huk Park, Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. Robust change captioning. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4624–4633, 2019.

Paritosh Parmar and Brendan Tran Morris. Learning to score olympic events. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 20–28, 2017.

Paritosh Parmar, Amol Gharat, and Helge Rhodin. Domain knowledge-informed self-supervised
  representations for workout form assessment. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  105–123. Springer, 2022.

Hamed Pirsiavash, Carl Vondrick, and Antonio Torralba. Assessing the quality of actions. In
  Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-
  12, 2014, Proceedings, Part VI 13, pp. 556–571. Springer, 2014.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-
 baptiste Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Gem-
 ini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.

Amir Shahroudy, Jun Liu, Tian-Tsong Ng, and Gang Wang. Ntu rgb+ d: A large scale dataset for 3d
 human activity analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 1010–1019, 2016.

Dian Shao, Yue Zhao, Bo Dai, and Dahua Lin. Finegym: A hierarchical video dataset for fine-
  grained action understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 2616–2625, 2020.

Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. Ucf101: A dataset of 101 human actions
  classes from videos in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.0402, 2012.

Luming Tang, Menglin Jia, Qianqian Wang, Cheng Perng Phoo, and Bharath Hariharan. Emergent
  correspondence from image diffusion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
  1363–1389, 2023a.

Yansong Tang, Jinpeng Liu, Aoyang Liu, Bin Yang, Wenxun Dai, Yongming Rao, Jiwen Lu, Jie
  Zhou, and Xiu Li. Flag3d: A 3d fitness activity dataset with language instruction. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22106–22117,
  2023b.

Vivek Anand Thoutam, Anugrah Srivastava, Tapas Badal, Vipul Kumar Mishra, GR Sinha, Aditi
  Sakalle, Harshit Bhardwaj, and Manish Raj. Yoga pose estimation and feedback generation using
  deep learning. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2022, 2022.

Josh Trout. Digital movement analysis in physical education. Journal of Physical Education, Recre-
  ation & Dance, 84(7):47–50, 2013.

Eduardo Velloso, Andreas Bulling, and Hans Gellersen. Motionma: Motion modelling and analysis
  by demonstration. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
  Systems, pp. 1309–1318, 2013.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Manisha Verma, Sudhakar Kumawat, Yuta Nakashima, and Shanmuganathan Raman. Yoga-82: a
 new dataset for fine-grained classification of human poses. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 1038–1039, 2020.
Kuan-Chieh Wang and Richard Zemel. Classifying nba offensive plays using neural networks. In
  Proceedings of MIT Sloan sports analytics conference, volume 4, 2016.
Kuan-Chieh Wang, Zhenzhen Weng, Maria Xenochristou, João Pedro Araújo, Jeffrey Gu, Karen
  Liu, and Serena Yeung. Nemo: Learning 3d neural motion fields from multiple video instances
  of the same action. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 22129–22138, 2023.
Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu,
  Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Mengfei Du, Xuancheng Ren, Rui Men, Dayiheng
  Liu, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s
  perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191, 2024.
Haoran Xie, Atsushi Watatani, and Kazunori Miyata. Visual feedback for core training with 3d
  human shape and pose. In 2019 Nicograph International (NicoInt), pp. 49–56. IEEE, 2019.
Jinglin Xu, Yongming Rao, Xumin Yu, Guangyi Chen, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Finediving: A fine-
   grained dataset for procedure-aware action quality assessment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2949–2958, 2022.
Linli Yao, Weiying Wang, and Qin Jin. Image difference captioning with pre-training and contrastive
  learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
Shao-Jie Zhang, Jia-Hui Pan, Jibin Gao, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Adaptive stage-aware assessment skill
  transfer for skill determination. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 2023a.
Shiyi Zhang, Wenxun Dai, Sujia Wang, Xiangwei Shen, Jiwen Lu, Jie Zhou, and Yansong Tang.
  Logo: A long-form video dataset for group action quality assessment. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2405–2414, 2023b.
Weiyu Zhang, Menglong Zhu, and Konstantinos G Derpanis. From actemes to action: A strongly-
 supervised representation for detailed action understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
 tional conference on computer vision, pp. 2248–2255, 2013.
Yuanhan Zhang, Jinming Wu, Wei Li, Bo Li, Zejun Ma, Ziwei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. Video
  instruction tuning with synthetic data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02713, 2024.
Ziyi Zhao, Sena Kiciroglu, Hugues Vinzant, Yuan Cheng, Isinsu Katircioglu, Mathieu Salzmann,
  and Pascal Fua. 3d pose based feedback for physical exercises. In Proceedings of the Asian
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1316–1332, 2022.
Kevin Zhu, Alexander Wong, and John McPhee. Fencenet: Fine-grained footwork recognition in
  fencing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 3589–3598, 2022.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     B ENCHMARK : D OWNLOAD I NSTRUCTIONS
Our benchmark is released at https://huggingface.co/datasets/jmhb/VidDiffBench. It has complete
instructions on how to access annotations, how to download external datasets, and all licenses for
our annotations and the source video datasets.

B     B ENCHMARK : D IFFERENCE A NNOTATION TAXONOMY G ENERATION
Each dataset underwent a thorough taxonomy generation process. Details for each dataset are pre-
sented in this section. Most datasets were first processed with the Difference Proposer.

B.1   G ENERATING JIGSAWS DIFFERENCE ANNOTATION TAXONOMY FOR SURGERY VIDEOS

To produce the JIGSAWS taxonomy for surgery videos, we first used the Difference Proposer to gen-
erate difference candidates. As we found many proposed variations to be irrelevant, we consulted a
surgeon from ¡anonymous hospital¿. We first showed them a variety of videos from the JIGSAWs
dataset and brainstormed visually discernible differences. Next, we shared the GPT-generated varia-
tions with the surgeon and discussed which ones should be added to the brainstormed listed. Lastly,
we dropped all differences that could not be annotated consistently. For instance, we removed ”Sur-
geon exploits robotic instrument’s range of movement more efficiently in Video A than in Video B”,
as the difference is subject to interpretation.

B.2   G ENERATING E GO -E XO 4D DIFFERENCE ANNOTATION TAXONOMY

For datasets with expert annotation, such as Basketball, Soccer, and Music, we processed the ex-
pert commentary with GPT instead of asking for difference proposals directly. We asked GPT to
summarize the expert commentary using the following prompt:

Below are a sequence of text strings.
The strings are written by experts who are watching videos of a task with this
    description: "{action_descriptions}".
As the experts watch each video, they pause the video and record verbal commentary about
     how that person is performing the task.

Return a list of text strings that summarizes what are the key visual cues that the
    expert is looking when they provide feedback.
Each item in the list should be specific and testable, so that anybody watching a single
     video can assess whether that visual cue applies to a particular video.

Your response should be a json with this structure:
{ "summary_texts" : ["text0", "text1", ...] }
The list should have at least 15 items.

Here are the texts to summarize:
{texts}

As GPT has no knowledge of the specifics of the dataset, we then manually parsed the proposed list
and kept items that could be distinguished by non-experts based on visual information only. Some
differences were not visible in our data. For instance, the ”wrist snap” in basketball was excluded,
as it could not be discerned from the videos.
As we found that GPT lost a lot of information from the expert commentary, we also manually
parsed the expert comments and added key visual cues that were mentioned by the experts.

B.3   G ENERATING F INE D IVING DIFFERENCE ANNOTATION TAXONOMY

For the diving dataset, we used the Difference Proposer. As all videos are of experts, there is little
variation between the videos. We thus used the diving score annotations given in the dataset, to find
pairs of images with more variability and used those proposed differences that were discernible in
these pairs.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     B ENCHMARK : ANNOTATION DETAILS

Two annotators were provided with a list of variations and a folder containing all videos as well as
concatenated videos of two actions next to each other. They were instructed to annotate differences
only as such, if they were obvious. The instructions for the annotators were as follows:

You’ll get pairs of videos and be asked questions about how they’re different. They’ll
    be specific querstions:
- E.g. "Which one has a wider foot stance: (a) video A, (b) video B, or (c) they’re the
    same.
- if it’s hard to tell whether there really is a difference, then say "c". Rule of
    thumb: once you’ve found the important point in the video, if it takes you more
    than 10 seconds to make a decision, then say "c".


C.1   B ENCHMARK : THE DIFFERENCE TAXONOMY

The difference taxonomy is available as part of the benchmark release at this link. The full list of
differences can also be previewed in the analysis table 14.

C.2   B ENCHMARK : RETRIEVAL ANNOTATION GENERATION

For the closed-evaluation scenario, we need to temporally align the videos we wish to compare.
For this alignment, we annotate retrievals, which are important and identifiable moments within an
action. To generate retrievals, we used the Frame localizer, where we prompt GPT4-V to propose
stages for a given action (see Section C.3 for details). We found that the stages were sometimes
to coarse. We thus either manually identified key moments that helped retrieve sections of the
videos important for comparing differences, or, for JIGSAWS consulted our expert. The retrieval
annotations are available as part of the VidDiffBench benchmark release, and are in the folder called
‘retrieval’.

C.3   P ROMPTS FOR ACTION ASSIGNMENT TO THE EASY / MEDIUM / HARD SPLITS
I’m designing a benchmark for comparing pairs of videos of the same action.
We have many actions and each action has a list of differences we look for.
The benchmark’s task is to examine differences and say whether the statement applies
    more to "video A" or "video B".

Below we show a dictionary where each element is a single action.
Each action has an "action_description" describing the action.
It also has "average_seconds_per_video", for the median length of videos in seconds.
Each action has a dictionary of "differences", where each difference has these keys:
- ’name’ for the difference
- ’description’ describing the difference

Finally, for each action, there are two unfinished options:
- ’split’ which currently says ’easy|medium|hard’
- ’split_reason’ which currently says ’...’
Your task is to fill in these values:
- Decide whether the ’split’ value is ’easy’, ’medium’ or ’hard’. This evaluation judges
     the difficulty of performing actionn difference comparison for all differences
    within an action. Having a high number of actions should not be considered as
    criteria for difficulty.
- Justify your choice in ’split_reason’.

Return the same dictionary as json, with the values of ’split’ and ’split_reason’
    populated.
Here are the actions.
{actions}

The actions field is replaced with a json with the structure that is described in the prompt.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4      D IFFICULTY SPLITS

The result of the difficulty splits is in table 6.



                           Table 6: The difficulty splits with action code and names
 Split      Action         Action Name                                 Action description
 easy       fitness 0      Hip circle anticlockwise                    fitness exercise called standing hip circle with hands on hips, one rota-
                                                                       tion anticlockwise
 easy       fitness 3      lucky cat                                   fitness exercise called two arm standing lucky cat starting with arms up,
                                                                       one repetition
 easy       fitness 4      Squat Knee Raise side view                  squat without weights, then knee raise on left side
 easy       fitness 6      Hip circle clockwise                        fitness exercise called standing hip circle with hands on hips, one rota-
                                                                       tion clockwise
 medium     ballsports 0   basketball jump shot                        a person is doing a basketball mid-range jump shot, starting with the
                                                                       ball in their hand, no defense, practice only
 medium     ballsports 1   basketball mikan layup                      a person does the Basketball drill called the Mikan layup where they
                                                                       start under the basket, do a layup with the right hand and catch it, do a
                                                                       left hand layup and catch it, no defense, practice only
 medium     ballsports 2   basketball reverse layup                    a person playing basketball does a reverse layup starting from the left
                                                                       side of the basket and lays it up with their right hand on the right hand
                                                                       side, no defense, practice only
 medium     ballsports 3   soccer penalty kick                         a person does a soccer drill where they do a single penalty kick, practice
                                                                       only, no defense, no goalie
 medium     diving 0       diving                                      competitive diving from 10m
 medium     fitness 1      Opening and closing step left side first    fitness exercise called opening and closing step on left side and then
                                                                       opening and closing step on right side
 medium     fitness 2      car deadlift                                a single free weight deadlift without any weight
 medium     fitness 5      Squat Knee Raise diagonal view              a squat then a knee raise on left side
 medium     fitness 7      Opening and closing step right side first   fitness exercise called opening and closing step on right side and then
                                                                       opening and closing step on left side
 hard       music 0        piano                                       a person is playing scales on the piano
 hard       music 1        guitar                                      a person is playing scales on the guitar
 hard       surgery 0      Knot Tying                                  The subject picks up one end of a suture tied to a flexible tube attached
                                                                       at its ends to the surface of the bench-top model, and ties a single loop
                                                                       knot.
 hard       surgery 1      Suturing                                    The subject picks up needle, proceeds to the incision (designated as a
                                                                       vertical line on the bench-top model), and passes the needle through
                                                                       the fake tissue, entering at the dot marked on one side of the incision
                                                                       and exiting at the corresponding dot marked on the other side of the
                                                                       incision. After the first needle pass, the subject extracts the needle out
                                                                       of the tissue, passes it to the right hand and repeats the needle pass three
                                                                       more times.
 hard       surgery 2      Needle Passing                              The subject picks up the needle (in some cases not captured in the video)
                                                                       and passes it through four small metal hoops from right to left. The
                                                                       hoops are attached at a small height above the surface of the bench-top
                                                                       model.


C.5      VALIDATING SPLIT GENERATION - HUMAN STUDY

Choosing the difficulty splits requires a holistic view of all the actions, so we decided it didn’t make
sense for experts to suggest them, since they are only familiar with a few actions each. On the
other hand, we didn’t want to rank the splits based on performance of current models since this felt
like biasing towards current models; and besides, the performance for many actions in ‘medium’
and ‘hard’ is already random, so it would be hard to differentiate these actions. LLMs are a good
candidate because they have a good understanding of the actions and are relatively free of the biases
of this paper’s authors Furthermore, human annotators could not do the ranking, because no human
annotated all the actions.
To further support the choice of an LLM, we asked 3 humans to rank the action comparisons from
easiest to hardest, and compared against the LLM ranking. We then computed the Spearman’s
rank correlation between all ranking sets, and the results are in table 7. The mean of the pairwise
correlations between the humans was 0.602, while the mean of pairwise correlations between the
LLM and humans was higher at 0.673. This shows (i) that there is non-negligible variability in
human rankings, and (ii) that the LLM ranking is reasonable, and actually better correlated with
most humans compared to several of the human annotations.


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Results on human evaluation study on choosing the splits. This is the Spearman’s rank
corrlation between the ranks of action dificulty, comparing our LLM approach and 3 humans.
                                  LLM Human 1 Human 2 Human 3
                     LLM                          53.1        68.0      80.6
                     Human 1        53.1                      45.9      64.5
                     Human 2        68.0          45.9                  70.3
                     Human 3        80.6          64.5        70.3
                     Average        67.3          54.5        61.4      71.8


C.6   F URTHER DATASET CONSTRUCTION CONSIDERATIONS

Camera angles The change of camera angle perspective does make the task harder. For samples
in the ‘Fitness’ category, the camera angle is the same because the source dataset has a fixed camera
rig, and we chose to use the same camera angle. For samples in ‘diving’ and ‘surgery’ categories, the
camera angle is approximately the same. On the other hand, samples from ‘ballsports’ and ‘music’
categories can change. A related attribute (not mentioned here) is differences in background – sim-
ilarly the ‘ballsports’ and ‘music’ categories often had different backgrounds as well. Importantly,
these attributes were considered when assigning the difficulty splits. This may partly explain why
the fitness exercises are all in the easy and medium split.

FPS Each video pair has the same fps. In case others want to leverage our code with new videos,
our code does handles the case where FPS is different. Specifically, the input configuration has a
value for the target FPS for running inference, and we subsample the video to have this FPS. (If the
videos cannot be subsampled to have the exact target fps, then a warning is printed).

Impact of different actor heights For annotator instructions, we clarified that all differences on
things like distance should be relative to the actor’s height. We gave the example of ‘wider foot
stance’, saying that if a 5ft actor and a 6ft actor both had their legs 3ft apart, then the shorter actor
has a ‘wider foot stance’ relative to their height. This reflects what is commonly understood by
descriptions like these in skills coaching.

D     B ENCHMARK STATISTICS
Beyond the main statistics in the main, table 8 shows further statistics broken down by difficulty
splits.


                                     Table 8: Detailed data statistics by split
         Split                                       easy          medium          hard          Overall
         # video pairs                                        95            265            197              557
         Avg video length (secs)                             2.1             3.9          18.7               8.8
         Total video length (mins)                           6.5            34.7         122.5            163.7
         # differences tagged                               1224           4788           3542             9554
         StdDev within retrieval type                      8.4%            5.2%          4.1%              5.9%
         StdDev across retrieval types                    17.3%          25.7%          20.2%            21.0%
         Difference annotations count                        578           1771           2370             4719
         Difference annotations A/B/C distribution   167/190/221   622/605/1143    435/452/884   1224/1247/2248


Average video length is longer as the difficulty gets higher: 2.1/3.9/18.7 seconds, for easy/medi-
um/hard. Compared to video QA datasets, the lengths are relatively shorter because we focus on
fine-grained action understanding in how actions are performed. The total length of videos is 163
minutes.

Retrieval tags, temporal bias For the ‘retrieval tags’, we first show the number of retrieval tags
– 9554 total. To give insight into their distribution within each video, each instance is normalized
to the video length, and compute its ‘video location’. E.g. in a squat, the starting position might
be position 0.1, the bottom of the descent 0.45, and the squat finish at 0.87. Within each retrieval
type, we compute ‘StdDev within retrieval type’, which intuitively measures how well-aligned are


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the key points in the video. For example, if the average squat video records ‘bottom of descent’ at
location 0.45, and ‘within StdDev’ is 0.06, then the mean distance from the average is 0.06 (so at
0.39 or 0.51). The ‘within StdDev’ is on average 0.059, indicating there is some variation in retrieval
position, but there is temporal bias. This is expected since each video is trimmed and contains an
atomic action. Future benchmarks could use untrimmed videos to make retrieval annotations less
aligned, but the present benchmark is already difficult for SOTA models, so this is unnecessary now.

Retrieval tags, coverage We also measure ‘StdDev across retrieval types’, meaning the standard
deviation of different retrieval classes within one video. Intuitively this measures how much of
the video is ‘covered’ by retrieval keypoints. This is 0.21 on average. So if the mean of retrieval
keypoints were 0.5, then the average retrieval annotations is around 0.29 or 0.71 in the video.

A/B/C distribution Additionally, we have shown the count of difference annotations and the
A/B/C distribution; the ‘no difference’ annotation of ‘C’ is the most prevalent.


E     B ENCHMARK : RELATED VIDEO PAIR DATASETS

A small number of prior works have datasets of paired videos with some label of the difference.
However none have labels for fine-grained comparison while also having a large scale.

       • Nagarajan & Torresani (2024) has a large-scale dataset of video differences in instructional
         video – large enough to be used for instruction tuning. However their differences are very
         coarse-grained, for example ‘cooking video A forgot to add salt’. Here, large-scale is pos-
         sible because differences can be derived automatically from annotated instructional video
         datasets.
       • (Balakrishnan et al., 2015) considers fine-grained action differences. However their dataset
         is very small (less than 50), and they have no labels.
       • (Doughty et al., 2018) has a dataset of paired actions called EPIC-Skills2018. Here, the
         scale is large, but the difference label is more coarse: a binary for which video shows more
         skill.


F     E VALUATION

The evaluation code is available at this GitHub repo https://github.com/jmhb0/viddiff.

F.1   C LOSED EVALUATION DESIGN CHOICE

Our closed evaluation setting has options for ‘A’ and ‘B’, but not ‘c’. Our initial approach to for-
mulating this did include an option ‘C’ for insignificant differences. However, the challenge of
calibration made fair evaluation difficult. For example, when comparing two videos of a basketball
shot to evaluate stance width, the question arises: how different is “different enough” to be both
relevant for skill learning and perceptible? Different annotators may apply varying thresholds for
what constitutes a significant difference, leading to inconsistencies. Introducing option ‘C’ further
complicates evaluation because it requires calibrating not only the human annotators but also the
VLMs, which may have different internal thresholds for perceiving significance. To address these
challenges, we adopted the following approach:

       • Annotators were instructed to choose either ‘A’ or ‘B’ only when the difference was clearly
         perceptible.
       • We limited the evaluation of VLMs to cases where there was a very clear ground truth
         answer of either ‘A’ or ‘B’.

This method ensures fairness by focusing on scenarios with unambiguous ground truth, avoiding
complications introduced by subjective calibration thresholds. While we briefly discuss this in the
section on annotation creation, we recognize that this is a nuanced point.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2   E VALUATION : MATCHING WITH LLM S

As described in section 3.2, we use an LLM
We use ‘gpt-4o-2024-08-06’ with the following prompt for matching ground truth to predicted de-
scriptions. We do one prompt per video pair sample.

You are analyzing videos of people performing a specific action described as "{
    action_description}."

In this task, a "difference" refers to how two people might perform the same action in
    distinct ways.
Each difference consists of:
- A name (key) and
- A description that explains how the two performances differ visually.

You are provided with two dictionaries:
- Dictionary 0: {differences0}
- Dictionary 1: {differences1}

Your task is to match the differences from Dictionary 0 to Dictionary 1. Here’s how:
1. For each entry in Dictionary 0, find the best match in Dictionary 1.
2. Each item in Dictionary 1 can only be used once.
3. Only match entries if their description strings are visually similar, even if the
    word choices differ. If no suitable match exists, return "None."

Your output should be a JSON object where:
- The keys are from Dictionary 0: {dict0_keys}.
- The values are a key from Dictionary 1 or "None" if no match is found.
- The available keys from Dictionary 1 are: {dict1_keys}.

Example output format:
{
    "0": "3",
    "1": "None",
    "2": "1",
    "3": "5",
    ...
    "{final}" : "0"
}
Important: the keys in this dictionary should be" {dict0_keys}

We replace:

       • {action description} with a string describing the action
       • {differences0} with a dictionary where keys are gt difference keys ("0","1",...
         and values which are strings describing differences.
       • {differences1} is the same as {differences0}, except for the predicting differ-
         ences.
       • {dict keys} are the keys in {differences0}
       • {dict1 keys} are the keys in {differences1}
       • {final} is the highest key in {differences0}

An issue with matching is that the prediction actually has the opposite value to the ground truth –
e.g. “the arms are more straight” vs “the arms are more bent”. If this is the case, then the prediction
‘a’ should be reversed to ‘b’ and vise versa. To identify those cases, we use this prompt, and we
evaluate them in batches of 6 difference sequences at once.

Task:
You will be given pairs of statements. Your task is to determine the logical
    relationship between each pair.



                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Instructions:
1. Analyze Each Pair: For each pair of statements, carefully analyze their meaning and
    relationship.
2. Categorization:
   - Return "0" if the statements are equivalent, very similar, or differ only in minor
       details.
     Example: "X is bigger than Y" and "X is larger than Y" should both return "0".
   - Return "1" if the statements are direct opposites in meaning.
     Example: "X is bigger than Y" and "X is smaller than Y" should return "1".
3. Edge Cases:
   - Avoid returning "1" for statements that are not true opposites, even if they have
       some differences in detail or degree.
     Example: "X is much bigger than Y" and "X is slightly bigger than Y" should still
         return "0".

Output Format:
- Your response should be a JSON object with a single key "results" and an array of
    string values "0" or "1" as its value.
- The array should exactly match the number of statement pairs given in the input.

Input Format:
- The list of statement pairs will be provided in the following format:

{statements}

Important Requirements:
- Ensure that each value in the output array is either "0" or "1".
- The length of the "results" array must exactly match the number of input pairs.

We replace the {statements} with a list, where each element is a two element list of strings,
which are matched difference descriptions.

F.3   P ROMPTS FOR LMM BASELINES

The LMM baselines – GPT, Gemini, and Qwen – all receive the same prompts. Prompts for action
assignment to the easy/medium/hard splits:

Here are two videos of an action with the following description: "{action_description}".
{video_representation_description}


Below is a set of identified differences that describe how the action be performed
    differently.
Each difference is associated with a unique key:
{differences_annotated}

Your task is to predict, for each difference, whether it is more true for video ’a’ or
    video ’b’.
{target_out}

The {action description} is replaced with a string describing the action which is the same
as in table 13. The {differences annotated} is a dictionary mapping the ground truth
difference key to a difference description, and are the same stringes used in table 14. The
{video representation description} tells the model how the video data is passed in.
If 2 videos – for Gemini and Qwen – then it’s:

We have passed ’video a’ and ’video b’ as videos to the prompt in that order.

If passing in the videos as frames – for GPT – then it’s:

We have passed a sequence of images into the prompt.
The first {vid0_nframes} are video a. The last {vid1_nframes} are video b.
The frame rate is the same and is {fps}.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The open prompt is:

Here are two videos of an action with the following description: "{action_description}".
{video_representation_description}

Return a list of ’differences’ in how the action is being performed.
Each difference should have a ’description’ that is a specific statements that is more
    true in one video compared to the other video.
Then there is a ’prediction’ which is ’a’ if the statement applies more to video a and ’
    b’ if it applies more to video b.

The difference descriptions should be visual and about how the action is performed.
For example ’the jump is higher’, or ’the arm is more straight’.

The difference descriptions should not refer to a specific video.
For example you would not say ’the jump in video B is higher’.
Instead, the ’description’ would be ’the jump is higher’, and the ’prediction’ is ’b’.

Suggest no more than {n_differences} differences.


Return a json like this, replacing ’...’ with actual content:
{
    "0" : {
            "description" : "....",
            "prediction" : "a|b"
        },
    "1" : {
            "description" : "....",
            "prediction" : "a|b"
        },
    ...
}


F.4   VALIDATION OF MATCHING PROCESS

We leverage LLMs in open evaluation to identify matching between the ground truth difference
description strings and the predicted differences. Here we validate that this is a reasonable approach.

Robustness to multiple LLM runs The LLM evaluation is robust to random seed. We repeated
the evaluation five times with different random seeds and observed a standard deviation of only 0.7
in the final evaluation score. This indicates that the results are consistent across runs. Although the
prompt was specifically engineered for the GPT-4o-2024-08-06 model, we ensured consistency by
fixing the model for all evaluations, treating all comparisons under identical conditions.

Comparison with Human Evaluation To measure alignment with humans, we recruited 3 human
annotators to perform open evaluation matching, each with 44 video pairs and 347 individual dif-
ferences. For each video pair, they were provided with a list of ground truth differences, and asked
to match each one to a predicted difference from a list, or to suggest no match. We calculated inter-
rater agreement across annotators and the automated LLM system. The results are in table 9. We can
see semantic matching proved to be challenging for humans – the mean of pairwise rater agreement
from each human to the other humans was 75.7%. Meanwhile, the mean agreement between our
automated system and human annotators was 73.9%. Therefore, our LLM-based approach is on par
with human annotators, while being completely automatic.

Details of Prompt for LLM Evaluation The LLM prompt was carefully developed using a
prompt engineering workflow. We selected a set of four evaluation samples, covering two actions
and two models, and iteratively refined the prompt based on performance in individual runs. For
example, we added the instruction: ”Only match entries if their description strings are visually sim-
ilar, even if the word choices differ.” This adjustment was necessary because the LLM struggled
to match equivalent descriptions phrased differently (e.g., “the feet stance is wider” vs. “the legs


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Table 9: Agreement rate of LLM and human predictions for the evaluation matching.
                                 LLM Human 1 Human 2 Human 3
                    LLM                      72.4        74.0          70.1
                    Human 1        72.4                  75.0          78.2
                    Human 2        74.0      75.0                      73.9
                    Human 3        70.1      78.2        73.9
                    Average        72.2      75.2        74.3          74.0


are spread wider apart”). While this approach achieved satisfactory results, we acknowledge that
the prompt could be further optimized using more systematic methods, such as DSPy Khattab et al.
(2024). Exploring such techniques is a promising direction for future work.

G     R ESULTS : MORE ANALYSES
G.1   R ESULTS : ACTION - LEVEL MODEL COMPARISON

We have performed a more thorough comparison of the different state-of-the-art LMMs on VidDIff-
Bench, added a small subsection to the results, and a discussion in appendix. Specifically we look
at each action, and compare the different LMMs.
First, we show the correlations in the per-action scores between models in table 10


        Table 10: Correlations between models where the data is the action-level accuracy.
                               GPT Gemini Claude LLava-Video Qwen2-VL
        GPT-4o                          0.152     0.375              0.243          0.273
        Gemini-1.5-Pro         0.152              0.215              0.111          0.223
        Claude-3.5-Sonnet 0.375         0.215                        0.261          0.220
        LLaVA-Video            0.243    0.111     0.261                             0.376
        Qwen2-VL-7b            0.273    0.223     0.220              0.376

The correlations are generally low, but there are 3 clusters of models. LLaVA-Video and Qwen-2-
VL are in a cluster; they are both open-source, and have the same LLM backbone. Then GPT-4o
and Claude-Sonnet cluster together, and Gemini is not similar to any other model. We can speculate
that for video data, Claude and GPT have similar training strategies, while Gemini’s is different.
Next we compare model performance within one action, and this is two large tables. table 11 is the
action-level performance of each model. Then table 12 is the ‘relative performance’: the difference
between the model score on that action compared to the mean score across all models for the action.
The most significant results in the benchmark are on the easy split. Here, the improvement in score
is uniform for all models. The models generally close perform similarly each other. The relative
performance is usually less than 10 points – when it is higher, the sample size is very small.
By comparing models at the level of actions, we are considering smaller sample sizes than in the
main results, which compare models at the level of easy/medium/hard splits. There is therefore
lower statistical power to identify significant result differences, so the results are less certain. We
elected not to compare model performance at the level of action differences, because here the sample
sizes are very small, so any correlations would not meet significance thresholds.

G.2   D ETAILED DIFFERENCE ANALYSIS

In Section 6.3, we discuss an analysis of the accuracy at the difference level. The vary long table
14 gives the per-difference accuracies and p-values compared for the accuracy against a random
guessing baselines. Each difference is associated with an action key, whose description is in table
13.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Action-level scores for each model, and their differences compared to the average model
score for that action. The model names are abbreviated and the full model names are GPT-4o,
Gemini-1.5-Pro, Claude-3.5-Sonnet, LLaVA-Video-7B, Qwen2-VL-7B
 Split    Action         Action Name                Count    Scores
                                                             GPT           Gemini        Claude        LLaVA-Vid       Qwen2         Avg
                         Hip circle
 easy     fitness 0                                   129        56.6          58.1          56.6            51.9          45.0      53.6
                         anticlockwise
 easy     fitness 3      lucky cat                     62        53.2          58.1          43.5            58.1          45.2      51.6
                         Squat Knee Raise
 easy     fitness 4                                    43        65.1          69.8          37.2            69.8          55.8      59.5
                         side view
 easy     fitness 6      Hip circle clockwise         123        58.5          76.4          69.9            56.1          52.8      62.8
                         basketball
 medium   ballsports 0                                 96        55.2          57.3          52.1            57.3          61.5      56.7
                         jump shot
                         basketball
 medium   ballsports 1                                148        56.8          49.3          46.6            51.4          56.1      52.0
                         mikan layup
                         basketball
 medium   ballsports 2                                125        46.4          55.2          49.6            44.0          50.4      49.1
                         reverse layup
                         soccer
 medium   ballsports 3                                 70        51.4          60.0          57.1            70.0          54.3      58.6
                         penalty kick
 medium   diving 0       diving                       240        53.8          52.1          53.3            50.8          54.2      52.8
                         Opening and closing step
 medium   fitness 1                                   186        57.5          54.8          52.7            51.1          51.6      53.5
                         left side first
 medium   fitness 2      car deadlift                 137        55.5          62.8          62.0            47.4          54.0      56.4
                         Squat Knee Raise
 medium   fitness 5                                    70        35.7          32.9          38.6            62.9          44.3      42.9
                         diagonal view
                         Opening and closing
 medium   fitness 7                                   155        52.9          52.9          63.2            49.7          52.9      54.3
                         step right side first
 hard     music 0        piano                         94        51.1          51.1          58.5            51.1          52.1      52.8
 hard     music 1        guitar                        20        55.0          40.0          45.0            50.0          65.0      51.0
 hard     surgery 0      Knot Tying                   237        47.7          43.5          43.5            46.4          44.3      45.1
 hard     surgery 1      Suturing                     309        48.9          51.5          48.2            47.6          50.2      49.3
 hard     surgery 2      Needle Passing               211        51.7          46.9          49.8            48.8          50.2      49.5


Table 12: Action-level difference scores for each model relative to the mean model score on that
action. This is the difference with respect to the table 11. The model names are abbreviated and the
full model names are GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5-Pro, Claude-3.5-Sonnet, LLaVA-Video-7B, Qwen2-VL-
7B
 Split    Action         Action Name                Count    Differences
                                                             GPT                Gemini        Claude       LLaVA-Vid        Qwen2
                         Hip circle
 easy     fitness 0                                   129               2.9            4.5          2.9             -1.7          -8.7
                         anticlockwise
 easy     fitness 3      lucky cat                     62               1.6            6.5          -8.1             6.5          -6.5
                         Squat Knee Raise
 easy     fitness 4                                    43               5.6           10.2      -22.3               10.2          -3.7
                         side view
 easy     fitness 6      Hip circle clockwise         123               -4.2          13.7          7.2             -6.7          -9.9
                         basketball
 medium   ballsports 0                                 96               -1.5           0.6          -4.6             0.6           4.8
                         jump shot
                         basketball
 medium   ballsports 1                                148               4.7           -2.7          -5.4            -0.7           4.1
                         mikan layup
                         basketball
 medium   ballsports 2                                125               -2.7           6.1          0.5             -5.1           1.3
                         reverse layup
                         soccer
 medium   ballsports 3                                 70               -7.1           1.4          -1.4            11.4          -4.3
                         penalty kick
 medium   diving 0       diving                       240               0.9           -0.8          0.5             -2.0           1.3
                         Opening and closing step
 medium   fitness 1                                   186               4.0            1.3          -0.9            -2.5          -1.9
                         left side first
 medium   fitness 2      car deadlift                 137               -0.9           6.4          5.7             -8.9          -2.3
                         Squat Knee Raise
 medium   fitness 5                                    70               -7.1      -10.0             -4.3            20.0           1.4
                         diagonal view
                         Opening and closing
 medium   fitness 7                                   155               -1.4          -1.4          8.9             -4.6          -1.4
                         step right side first
 hard     music 0        piano                         94               -1.7       -1.7              5.7            -1.7          -0.6
 hard     music 1        guitar                        20                4.0      -11.0             -6.0            -1.0          14.0
 hard     surgery 0      Knot Tying                   237                2.6       -1.6             -1.6             1.4          -0.8
 hard     surgery 1      Suturing                     309               -0.4        2.2             -1.0            -1.7           0.9
 hard     surgery 2      Needle Passing               211                2.2       -2.6              0.3            -0.7           0.8


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 13: Actions keys and their descriptions
    Action           Action description
    ballsports 0     a person is doing a basketball mid-range jump shot, starting with the ball in
                     their hand, no defense, practice only
    ballsports 1     a person does the Basketball drill called the Mikan layup where they start under
                     the basket, do a layup with the right hand and catch it, do a left hand layup and
                     catch it, no defense, practice only
    ballsports 2     a person playing basketball does a reverse layup starting from the left side of
                     the basket and lays it up with their right hand on the right hand side, no defense,
                     practice only
    ballsports 3     a person does a soccer drill where they do a single penalty kick, practice only,
                     no defense, no goalie
    diving 0         competitive diving from 10m
    fitness 0        fitness exercise called standing hip circle with hands on hips, one rotation anti-
                     clockwise
    fitness 1        fitness exercise called opening and closing step on left side and then opening
                     and closing step on right side
    fitness 2        a single free weight deadlift without any weight
    fitness 3        fitness exercise called two arm standing lucky cat starting with arms up, one
                     repetition
    fitness 4        squat without weights, then knee raise on left side
    fitness 5        a squat then a knee raise on left side
    fitness 6        fitness exercise called standing hip circle with hands on hips, one rotation clock-
                     wise
    fitness 7        fitness exercise called opening and closing step on right side and then opening
                     and closing step on left side
    music 0          a person is playing scales on the piano
    music 1          a person is playing scales on the guitar
    surgery 0        The subject picks up one end of a suture tied to a flexible tube attached at its
                     ends to the surface of the bench-top model, and ties a single loop knot.
    surgery 1        The subject picks up needle, proceeds to the incision (designated as a vertical
                     line on the bench-top model), and passes the needle through the fake tissue,
                     entering at the dot marked on one side of the incision and exiting at the cor-
                     responding dot marked on the other side of the incision. After the first needle
                     pass, the subject extracts the needle out of the tissue, passes it to the right hand
                     and repeats the needle pass three more times.
    surgery 2        The subject picks up the needle (in some cases not captured in the video) and
                     passes it through four small metal hoops from right to left. The hoops are at-
                     tached at a small height above the surface of the bench-top model.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Table 14: Difference-level accuracy scores for VidDiff. The ‘action’ values can be looked up at table 13. The grayed
                         columns indicate a p-value < 0.05 for the two-tailed binomial significance test

 Split    Action             Difference Description                                                                                         Mean    Num    p-value
                                                                                                                                            score   Sam-
                                                                                                                                                    ples
 easy     fitness 6          the head remains more vertical during the rotation                                                             1       13     0
 medium   fitness 2          the gaze is forward at the bottom of the deadlift                                                              1       7      0.016
 medium   ballsports 2       they gather the ball with both hands                                                                           1       2      0.5
 hard     music 1            The player uses a plectrum.                                                                                    1       4      0.125
 medium   fitness 7          the motion is faster                                                                                           0.93    14     0.011
 medium   ballsports 1       uses the non-shooting hand (the guide hand) for stabilizing the ball during the shot in the 1st shot           0.9     10     0.02
 medium   fitness 2          the knees bend less at the bottom of the deadlift                                                              0.89    19     0.004
 easy     fitness 6          the toes are more pointed out                                                                                  0.88    16     0.004
 medium   ballsports 1       they jump higher on the first shot                                                                             0.83    12     0.107
 easy     fitness 6          the feet stance is wider                                                                                       0.83    24     0.005
 medium   fitness 2          the feet stance is wider                                                                                       0.8     15     0.028
 easy     fitness 3          the feet stance is wider                                                                                       0.8     5      0.313
 easy     fitness 0          the feet stance is wider                                                                                       0.8     25     0.003
 medium   ballsports 1       uses the non-shooting hand (the guide hand) for stabilizing the ball during the shot in the 2nd shot           0.8     10     0.088
 medium   ballsports 0       the shooter’s arm is more extended towards the basket                                                          0.79    14     0.122
 medium   fitness 7          the arms are elevated in an uneven way on the first step                                                       0.75    20     0.03
 hard     surgery 1          The left graser supports the right grasper, by pressing down on the tissue.                                    0.75    4      0.5
 medium   ballsports 0       as the shooter begins extending the elbow to shoot, the non-shooting hand (the guide hand) is on the side of   0.75    12     0.107
                             the ball and does not influence the balls trajectory
 medium   ballsports 3       they kick the ball harder                                                                                      0.75    12     0.107
 medium   ballsports 2       the non-jumping leg has a more elevated knee                                                                   0.73    15     0.183
 medium   fitness 2          the gaze is forward at the start of the motion                                                                 0.73    11     0.322
 hard     surgery 2          The instrument tips are never out of view (occluded by instruments, or out of frame)                           0.73    11     0.322
 medium   fitness 7          the arms reach higher on the first step                                                                        0.71    17     0.189
 hard     surgery 2          The second grasper is used to stabalize the target.                                                            0.69    26     0.093
 medium   fitness 2          the hands are lower at the bottom of the deadlift                                                              0.68    19     0.192
 easy     fitness 3          the upper arms are parallel to the ground at the start of the motion                                           0.68    19     0.192
 medium   fitness 1          the torso moves out further closer to the foot during the second step out                                      0.67    21     0.194
 easy     fitness 6          the range of motion in the hips is larger                                                                      0.67    24     0.156
 easy     fitness 6          The upper body rocks more in a forward-backward way                                                            0.67    9      0.492
 medium   fitness 2          the body is more locked out at the top of the deadlift                                                         0.67    6      0.625
 medium   fitness 1          the arms reach higher on the first step                                                                        0.67    18     0.243
 medium   ballsports 2       the ball is closer to the corner of the square on the backboard                                                0.67    9      0.492
 easy     fitness 0          The upper body rocks more in a forward-backward way                                                            0.67    18     0.243
 medium   ballsports 3       they rotate their hips more during the strike                                                                  0.67    18     0.243
 medium   ballsports 3       the head is facing the ball leading up to the strike                                                           0.67    6      0.625
 hard     music 0            Rhythmic consistency is better maintained in Video A than in Video B.                                          0.67    12     0.387
 easy     fitness 0          the toes are more pointed out                                                                                  0.65    17     0.297
 medium   diving 0           The size and volume of the splash created upon entry is larger for video A than video B.                       0.65    48     0.052
 easy     fitness 6          the speed of hip rotation is faster                                                                            0.64    25     0.122
 medium   ballsports 1       they jump with two feet on the 1st shot                                                                        0.64    11     0.451
 medium   diving 0           Diver enters the water at an angle closer to 90 degrees in video A than in video B.                            0.63    30     0.161
 medium   fitness 1          the arms are elevated in an uneven way on the second step                                                      0.63    19     0.192
 easy     fitness 0          the range of motion in the hips is larger                                                                      0.63    19     0.192
 hard     surgery 0          The tube in Video A moves more than in Video B.                                                                0.63    27     0.194
 easy     fitness 4          the squat is deeper, measured by angle of the thigh to the ground                                              0.63    16     0.244
 easy     fitness 3          the toes are more pointed out                                                                                  0.63    8      0.438
 medium   fitness 7          the toes are more pointed outwards on the first step out                                                       0.63    8      0.438
 hard     music 0            Forearm movement is more controlled and minimal in Video A than in Video B.                                    0.62    13     0.419
 medium   fitness 1          the second step out is wider                                                                                   0.62    13     0.419
 medium   fitness 1          the arms reach higher on the second step                                                                       0.61    18     0.334
 easy     fitness 0          the head remains more vertical during the rotation                                                             0.61    18     0.334
 medium   ballsports 1       the non-jumping leg has a more elevated knee in the 2nd shot                                                   0.6     5      0.625
 medium   ballsports 0       the shooter’s jump is more vertical than forward                                                               0.6     5      0.625
 medium   ballsports 2       the gaze is more up and forward instead of down on the 2nd last step                                           0.6     10     0.41
 medium   ballsports 1       the arm is more fully extended towards the basket in the follow through in the 2nd shot                        0.6     15     0.305
 medium   ballsports 0       the shooter’s feet stance is wider when starting the shooting motion                                           0.6     10     0.41
 medium   ballsports 1       the body moves more forward during the 2nd shot, rather than up or back                                        0.6     10     0.41
 medium   ballsports 3       the non-kicking foot is planted closer to the ball                                                             0.6     10     0.41
 hard     surgery 0          The tension on the suturing material and the tissue is better controlled in Video A than in Video B.           0.59    32     0.162
 easy     fitness 6          the hand position is higher on the body                                                                        0.58    12     0.451
 medium   ballsports 3       the non-kicking foot is planted more next to the ball and less behind the ball                                 0.58    12     0.451
 medium   ballsports 1       they catch the ball in a higher position on the 1st shot                                                       0.58    12     0.451
 easy     fitness 0          the hand position is higher on the body                                                                        0.58    12     0.451
 hard     music 0            The speed of playing is higher in Video A than in Video B.                                                     0.58    19     0.352
 hard     surgery 1          The instrument tips are never out of view (occluded by instruments, or out of frame)                           0.58    19     0.352
 hard     surgery 1          The suturing speed is higher in Video A than in Video B                                                        0.58    52     0.157
 hard     surgery 2          The movement of the needle through the hoop is more radial in Video A than in Video B.                         0.58    26     0.288
 hard     surgery 1          The tension on the suturing thread is lower in Video A than in Video B.                                        0.57    28     0.279
 medium   fitness 7          the arms are elevated in an uneven way on the second step                                                      0.56    16     0.349
 medium   fitness 1          the arms are elevated in an uneven way on the first step                                                       0.56    16     0.349
 hard     surgery 2          The number of movements to arrange the needle before threading is lower in Video A than in Video B.            0.56    41     0.223
 hard     surgery 1          The movement is more fluid in Video A than in Video B.                                                         0.56    43     0.218
 hard     surgery 1          The grasper in Video A is more quickly positioned on the needle than in Video B.                               0.56    43     0.218
 medium   fitness 7          the toes are more pointed outwards on the second step out                                                      0.56    9      0.492
 medium   diving 0           Diver rotates forward relative to themselves.                                                                  0.56    27     0.299
 medium   ballsports 2       they get deeper knee bend before jumping                                                                       0.56    9      0.492
 easy     fitness 0          the speed of hip rotation is faster                                                                            0.55    20     0.32
 medium   ballsports 1       they jump higher on the second shot                                                                            0.55    11     0.451
 easy     fitness 4          the toes are more pointed out                                                                                  0.54    13     0.419
 medium   ballsports 0       the shooter’s feet position are more staggered, meaning the feet are at a different distance from the basket   0.54    13     0.419


                                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 medium   diving 0       Duration from jump off the board to water entry in longer in video A than in video B.                               0.54   39   0.251
 medium   ballsports 0   the shooter’s knees are more bent before taking the shot                                                            0.54   13   0.419
 medium   ballsports 2   they use the non-shooting hand (the guide hand) for stabilizing the ball during the shot                            0.53   17   0.371
 medium   fitness 5      the squat is deeper, measured by angle of the thigh to the ground                                                   0.53   17   0.371
 hard     surgery 2      The needle is grasped closer to the tip in Video A than in video B.                                                 0.52   21   0.336
 hard     surgery 2      The force on the target is lower in Video A than in Video B                                                         0.51   37   0.257
 medium   diving 0       Diver’s body is more straight in video A than in video B.                                                           0.51   39   0.251
 medium   ballsports 1   they have better balance when landing on the 1st shot                                                               0.5    2    1
 medium   diving 0       Speed at which divers rotate during the dive in larger in video A than in video B.                                  0.5    38   0.257
 medium   fitness 7      the arms reach higher on the second step                                                                            0.5    14   0.419
 medium   ballsports 1   they have better balance when landing on the 2nd shot                                                               0.5    2    1
 hard     music 1        Smooth transitions between strings with minimal disruption to the rhythm or tempo. Transitions in Video             0.5    2    1
                         A are smoother than in Video B.
 hard     music 1        Guiatrist uses finger vibrato.                                                                                      0.5    2    1
 medium   ballsports 3   the body (or torso) is more facing the net, or more ’square’ to the net                                             0.5    12   0.451
 medium   fitness 7      the first step out is wider                                                                                         0.47   17   0.297
 hard     surgery 0      The movements in Video A are more precise than in Video B.                                                          0.47   34   0.216
 easy     fitness 3      the speed of the arms is faster                                                                                     0.47   17   0.297
 medium   ballsports 2   they land on two feet                                                                                               0.47   17   0.297
 medium   ballsports 2   they follow through more and towards the basket                                                                     0.47   15   0.305
 medium   fitness 2      the toes are more pointed out                                                                                       0.47   15   0.305
 medium   fitness 2      there is a pause at the bottom of the deadlift                                                                      0.47   15   0.305
 medium   fitness 7      the second step out is wider                                                                                        0.46   13   0.314
 hard     surgery 1      The needle is inserted in the fabric more perpendicular to the incision.                                            0.46   13   0.314
 medium   fitness 1      the toes are more pointed outwards on the first step out                                                            0.46   13   0.314
 hard     music 0        The smoothness of thumb crossing is more evident in Video A than in Video B.                                        0.46   13   0.314
 easy     fitness 3      the upper arms more stable through the entire motion                                                                0.46   13   0.314
 medium   ballsports 1   they jump off the right foot for right-hand shot (the 2nd shot)                                                     0.45   11   0.322
 medium   ballsports 2   before raising the ball to shoot, the ball is more to the right side of the hip                                     0.45   11   0.322
 hard     surgery 1      The force is applied in a more radial way in Video A than in Video B.                                               0.45   31   0.192
 medium   fitness 7      the torso moves out further closer to the foot during the first step out                                            0.44   18   0.243
 medium   fitness 2      the arms are in front of the body at the bottom of the deadlift                                                     0.44   9    0.328
 hard     surgery 2      The passage of the needle between two hands is more fluid in Video A than in Video B.                               0.44   25   0.266
 medium   fitness 5      the feet stance is wider                                                                                            0.44   16   0.349
 hard     music 0        The wrist should be straight and not dipped or raised, facilitating fluid motion and avoiding strain. The           0.43   14   0.244
                         wrist position is more appropriate in Video A than in Video B.
 medium   fitness 2      the entire motion is faster                                                                                         0.43   21   0.194
 hard     surgery 0      The movements in Videos A are faster than in Video B.                                                               0.43   42   0.116
 hard     surgery 0      More errors are corrected in Video A than in Video B.                                                               0.42   31   0.131
 hard     surgery 2      The thread is more efficiently managed in Video A than in Video B.                                                  0.42   24   0.156
 medium   fitness 1      the toes are more pointed outwards on the second step out                                                           0.41   17   0.189
 hard     surgery 1      The instrument applies more force to the tissue and needle in Video A than in Video B                               0.41   44   0.078
 hard     surgery 0      The movements in Video A are more efficient than in Video B.                                                        0.4    42   0.076
 medium   ballsports 1   the body moves more forward during the 1st shot, rather than up or back                                             0.4    5    0.625
 medium   ballsports 0   the shooter’s feet are oriented more square to the basket when starting the shooting motion, meaning the            0.38   13   0.175
                         feet point more forward
 medium   ballsports 0   as the shooter begins extending the elbow to shoot, the ball is more in front of the body, rather than behind       0.38   16   0.244
                         the head
 hard     surgery 1      The dot is more accurately hit in Video A than in Video B                                                           0.36   14   0.122
 hard     music 0        The body is closer to the piano in Video A than in Video B.                                                         0.35   17   0.094
 medium   fitness 5      the speed of the whole motion is faster                                                                             0.35   17   0.094
 medium   ballsports 2   they release the ball at a higher position                                                                          0.35   20   0.148
 medium   ballsports 1   the non-jumping leg has a more elevated knee in the 1st shot                                                        0.33   9    0.141
 hard     surgery 0      Both graspers are used efficiently.                                                                                 0.33   9    0.141
 hard     surgery 0      The surgeon in Video A stops more often to plan next steps than the surgeon in Video B.                             0.33   3    0.25
 hard     music 0        There are more wrong note corrections in Video A than in Video B.                                                   0.33   6    0.188
 medium   fitness 1      the motion is faster                                                                                                0.33   18   0.065
 medium   ballsports 1   they have more fluid motion in moving between the shots                                                             0.33   12   0.107
 hard     music 1        The left fingers in Video A are more curved / less collapsed than in video B.                                       0.33   3    0.25
 medium   fitness 7      the torso moves out further closer to the foot during the second step out                                           0.33   9    0.141
 medium   diving 0       Diver faces the water at jump off.                                                                                  0.32   19   0.044
 medium   fitness 1      the first step out is wider                                                                                         0.31   16   0.133
 medium   fitness 5      during the squat descent, the knees cave inwards, instead of tracking over the feet                                 0.3    20   0.074
 medium   fitness 1      the torso moves out further closer to the foot during the first step out                                            0.29   17   0.036
 hard     surgery 1      The grasper grasps the needle approximately 2/3 from the needle tip. The needle is grasped more precisely           0.29   34   0.006
                         in Video A than in Video B.
 easy     fitness 4      the feet stance is wider                                                                                            0.29   14   0.044
 hard     music 1        The unused left finger tips in Video A stay closer to the board than in video B.                                    0.25   4    0.5
 hard     surgery 0      The suturing thread tangles.                                                                                        0.24   17   0.01
 medium   ballsports 1   the arm is more fully extended towards the basket in the follow through in the 1st shot                             0.18   11   0.011
 hard     music 1        Fingers should press strings at the center of the frets, avoiding the metal fret bars for clear sound production.   0      2    0.5
                         Video A shows more accurate finger placement on the fretboard than Video B.
 hard     music 1        Only one finger of the left hands rests on a string at a time.                                                      0      3    0.25


                                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 15: Evaluating ‘easy’ split with variable video fps for three models. Our evaluation protocol
chooses 4fps.
                                         1 fps 2 fps 4 fps 8 fps average
                 GPT-4o                   58.0 59.4 58.8 59.10               58.8
                 Gemini-1.5-Pro           59.7 66.9 65.8           66.9      64.8
                 Claude-3.5-Sonnet 58.1 58.5 56.6                  52.9      56.5


G.3    R ESULTS : DEPENDENCE ON FPS

The frame sampling rate, fps, is an important consideration for evaluating fine-grained actions.
While typical video benchmarks like Video-MME Fu et al. (2024) sample videos at 1fps, we have
sampled at a higher rate depending on category. The categories with shorter videos were sampled
at a higher rate: 4fps for ‘fitness’, 5fps for ‘ballsports’, and 6fps for ‘diving’ (they are slightly dif-
ferent so they can be compatible with fps in the source dataset). We chose this relatively higher rate
because we are interested in more fine-grained differences, while prior benchmarks are more coarse-
grained; however we did not sample at even higher due to practical cost constraints of processing
too many frames. The longer videos ‘surgery’ and ‘music’ were sampled at 1fps: these are longer
videos where differences are discernible at lower sampling rates, and where the longer videos make
high-fps sampling impractical.
To show that our fps is reasonable, we tested the three closed-source models on a range of fps
levels on the ‘easy’ subset of closed evaluation. We chose this set because this is where statistically
significant differences were clear. The results are in table 15.
Across all models, the sampling rate that we use, 4 fps, has reasonable scores, either at or above the
average over the other fps values. For all models, the variability is low: GPT’s scores are within 0.8
points of the average; all other models have scores within 2.1 points of the average (except for the
low sampling rate of 1fps in Gemini, where it degrades by 5.2 points). Moreover, the optimal fps is
different for different models.
To help explain the results, we refer to the qualitative examples in the main results sections. The only
‘success cases’ for all our models were those having easy localization, and coarse differences. We
hypothesize that fps is not important for these cases. Where fps is likely important -– fine-grained
multiframe reasoning – the current LMMs cannot perform better than random. So although 2fps
currently has good performance, we believe that as LMMs improve, they will perform better on
subtle motions and using a higher fps will be important.

G.4    R ESULTS : Q WEN 2-VL OPEN EVALUATION

Qwen2-VL performs especially poorly in open evaluation, which we investigate here. The key issue
is that Qwen2-VL-7b was failing to follow the evaluation prompt, while the other compared models
did follow it. We sampled 3 video pairs for each action and manually inspected Qwen’s responses,
identifying multiple key issues. Below, we list each issue, and provide a quantitative estimate for
the prevalence of each issue.

       • (45% of differences) Proposing differences not relevant to *how* to perform actions, but
         instead are visual things like “The person in video a is wearing a blue jacket, while the
         person in video b is wearing a plaid shirt.” We estimated prevalence by using a gpt-4o
         query that we manually prompt engineered.
       • (26% of differences) Proposing a difference that is actually not a difference, e.g. “The
         person in video a is performing the exercise with their arms out to the sides, while the
         person in video b is performing the exercise with their arms out to the sides.” We estimated
         prevalence by using a gpt-4o query that we manually prompt engineered.
       • (56% of differences) are repeated, meaning when trying to propose multiple differences,
         it proposes the same difference multiple times. We could directly measure this prevalence
         exactly.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • (23% of actions) Proposing only a small number of differences – less then half as many as
         what is prompted for. We could directly measure this prevalence exactly.
       • (≤5% of differences) Proposing vague differences that are harder to interpret visually like
         “The player in video a has a more versatile and adaptable skill set than the player in video
         b”. We estimated prevalence by using a gpt-4o query that we manually prompt engineered.

Overall, only 31.9% of proposed differences by Qwen did not suffer from any of these errors. (Note
that some differences suffered from multiple errors at the same time)

G.5   N O MULTIPLE CHOICE BIAS IN CLOSED EVALUATION

In multiple choice benchmarking, models may be biased towards one particular option, which can
impact evaluation robustness. We find no evidence of this. Firstly, in closed evaluation, the A/B
ratio is 0.493/0.507. Second, we test the impact of video order on GPT-4o for the ‘fitness’ category,
which has samples in the easy and medium subsets(sample size 193). We test flipping the order
of videos which flips the A/B answer. The performance is 54.8% in the original evaluation, and
reversing the order of videos gives performance of 55.5%, showing a 0.7% difference. This result
suggests that the performance on VidDiffBench is not significantly sensitive to video order.

G.6   E XPERIMENT ON DUPLICATING VIDEO

One idea to validate the reasonable-ness of the benchmark is to check what happens when passing an
identical video as A and B to the system – we should expect that in closed evaluation, the predictions
should be A/B 50% of the time. We did this experiment on the closed setting, for the ‘easy’ subset
for GPT-4o. Over two random seeds, the results were 49.3 and 50.2. This is an interesting validation
check that the benchmark passes.

G.7   N O MULTIPLE CHOICE BIAS IN CLOSED EVALUATION

In multiple choice benchmarking, models may be biased towards one particular option, which can
impact evaluation robustness. We find no evidence of this. Firstly, in closed evaluation, the A/B
ratio is 0.493/0.507. Second, we test the impact of video order on GPT-4o for the ‘fitness’ category,
which has samples in the easy and medium subsets(sample size 193). We test flipping the order
of videos which flips the A/B answer. The performance is 54.8% in the original evaluation, and
reversing the order of videos gives performance of 55.5%, showing a 0.7% difference. This result
suggests that the performance on VidDiffBench is not significantly sensitive to video order.

G.8   S AMPLE RETRIEVALS

In our methods, we leverage a frame localizer to find either a single frame or a small sequence of
frames. These localized frames are then passed to the next stage. In fig. 4, we show a few examples
of predictions vs ground truth for some frames

H     V ID D IFF METHOD

The code for VidDiff method is available at this GitHub repo https://github.com/jmhb0/viddiff.
Here we show the prompts used in the different components.

Proposer stage Part 1 chooses candidate differences (Open setting only):

I have two videos of an action with the following description: "{action}".

Propose a set of ’differences’ in how this action may be performed between the two
    videos.
For each difference, give a ’name’, ’description’, ’query_string’, and ’num_frames’.

The ’name’ is a very short name that can be used as a key.


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              “the arms reach higher on the first step”                       “there is a longer pause at the bottom”
              Prediction                   GT

                                                                              Prediction                 GT
                                                                         t0


              “the release the ball higher with their right hand”
                                                                         t1
              Prediction                   GT


                                                                                                                        890
                                                                         t2

              “diver faces the water at jump oﬀ”
              Prediction                   GT


                   Figure 4: Sample frame localizations: prediction vs ground truth.



The ’description’ is a slightly longer description of the difference.
The ’query_string’ is the same as ’description’.
                      530be visual and about how the action is performed. For example ’
The descriptions should
    the jump is higher’, or ’the arm is more straight’.
The difference descriptions should not refer to a specific video. For example you would
    not say ’the jump in video B is higher’.
Instead, the ’description’ would be ’the jump is higher’, and the statemet could be more
     true of one video or the other.

Now suppose you had to judge whether the difference was stronger in one video, but you
    could only look at individual frames.
 - What’s the smallest number of frames you need, assuming the frame is well-chosen? Put
      the answer in ’num_frames’. The answer should be ’1’ or ’gt_1’ (meaning ’greater
     than 1’).
 - Once you have the frames to compare, create a ’query_string’ that is a simple
     statement about this difference that is more true in one video vs the other video
     (based on the frames only). For example "the left leg is higher" or "movement is
     faster".

List {n_differences} differences.
Return a json like this, where the differences keys are stringified ints starting from
     0.
{
 ’0’ : {
  "name" : "...",
  "description" : "...",
  "query_string" : "...",
  "num_frames": "1|gt_1",
 },
 ...
}

Proposer part 2 estimates sub-action stages:

I have two videos of an action with the following description: "{action}".

Provide a ’stage transcript’ as a list. These are sub-actions that make up that action.
Give 5 steps or fewer in the action transcript.

For each stage, give a ’name’ for the stage, and a ’description’ of that stage.

For each stage, give a list of ’retrieval_strings’.


                                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These are strings that describe what is visible in the frame.
Only describe the visual features. Only describe what is visible in a single frame.
    Focus on appearance. Focus on pose. Do not use the name of the action. Start each
    string with something similar to "A photo of a ...".
Give at least {n_retrieval_keys} retrieval strings per stage.

Return a json like this:
{
 "stages" : [
  {
  "name : "",
  "description" : "...",
  "retrieval_strings" : ["A photo of a ...", ...],
  },
  ...
]}

And proposer part 3 does linking between those stages

I have two videos of an action with the following description: "{action}".

Here are a list of stages or subactions that make up that action:
{stages}

We also have differences in how this action may be performed between the two videos.
The differences are specific statements that are more true in one video vs another.
Here they are:
{differences}

Now we need to match each differences to a stage.
Return a list of the stages using their names.
If a difference is relevant to a particular stage, put its name in the ’difference’ list
    .
It’s okay for a ’difference’ to be visible in multiple stages.
It’s okay for some stages to have no difference.
Refer to stages and differences by their ’name’ attribute.

Return a json like this:
[
 "<stage_name0>" : ["<difference_name0>", "<difference_name1>", ...],
 "<stage_name1>" : [],
 "<stage_name2>" : ["<difference_name1>", "<difference_name2>", ...],
 ...
]
Please be careful. Every difference must appear at least once


Frame Differencer The prompt also takes the image frames.

I have two videos of people performing an action with description: "{action}".
The first {num_frames} frames are from video A and the last {num_frames} frames are from
     video B.
For each video, the frames are very close together in the video: they are {time_diff}
    seconds apart.
Which one shows more of the variation with this description: "{query_string}"?
(a) video 1, (b) video 2, (c) similar or can’t tell.
Answer in json: {’answer_detailed’ : "...", ’answer’:"a|b|c"}""",



I   C OMPUTATIONAL C OSTS FOR V ID D IFF M ETHOD

Our method’s runtime is less than one minute per video pair using an A6000 GPU for running CLIP
inference Radford et al. (2021). Additionally, we utilize the GPT API at an average cost of $0.2


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


per sample Achiam et al. (2023). Notably, over 95% of the GPT cost arises from verbose VLM
responses. Attempts to prompt for shorter responses resulted in degraded performance.
Methodologically, we rely on pre-trained zero-shot models, which limits their applicability in spe-
cialized domains, as discussed in our results. For evaluation, the Open setting formulation neces-
sitates an LLM in the evaluation pipeline. One challenge is the subjectivity in annotations: deter-
mining which differences are relevant and what magnitude of difference is significant, though we
thoroughly discuss this problem and mitigations.


                                                33
