Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ACHED M ULTI -L ORA C OMPOSITION FOR M ULTI -
C ONCEPT I MAGE G ENERATION
 Xiandong Zou, Mingzhu Shen∗, Christos-Savvas Bouganis, Yiren Zhao
 Imperial College London, UK
 {xiandong.zou20, m.shen23, christos-savvas.bouganis, a.zhao}@imperial.ac.uk



                                             A BSTRACT
            Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as a widely adopted technique in text-
            to-image models, enabling precise rendering of multiple distinct elements, such
            as characters and styles, in multi-concept image generation. However, current
            approaches face significant challenges when composing these LoRAs for multi-
            concept image generation, particularly as the number of LoRAs increases, result-
            ing in diminished generated image quality. In this paper, we initially investigate
            the role of LoRAs in the denoising process through the lens of the Fourier fre-
            quency domain. Based on the hypothesis that applying multiple LoRAs could
            lead to “semantic conflicts”, we have conducted empirical experiments and find
            that certain LoRAs amplify high-frequency features such as edges and textures,
            whereas others mainly focus on low-frequency elements, including the overall
            structure and smooth color gradients. Building on these insights, we devise a fre-
            quency domain based sequencing strategy to determine the optimal order in which
            LoRAs should be integrated during inference. This strategy offers a methodical
            and generalizable solution compared to the naive integration commonly found in
            existing LoRA fusion techniques. To fully leverage our proposed LoRA order
            sequence determination method in multi-LoRA composition tasks, we introduce
            a novel, training-free framework, Cached Multi-LoRA (CMLoRA), designed to
            efficiently integrate multiple LoRAs while maintaining cohesive image genera-
            tion. With its flexible backbone for multi-LoRA fusion and a non-uniform caching
            strategy tailored to individual LoRAs, CMLoRA has the potential to reduce se-
            mantic conflicts in LoRA composition and improve computational efficiency. Our
            experimental evaluations demonstrate that CMLoRA outperforms state-of-the-art
            training-free LoRA fusion methods by a significant margin – it achieves an aver-
            age improvement of 2.19% in CLIPScore, and 11.25% in MLLM win rate com-
            pared to LoraHub, LoRA Composite, and LoRA Switch.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
In the realm of generative text-to-image models (Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Podell
et al., 2023; Esser et al., 2024; Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022), the integration of Low-
Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) in image generation stands out for its ability to fine-tune
image synthesis with precision and minimal computational cost. LoRA stands out in its capability
for controllable generation, it enables the creation of specific characters, particular types of clothing,
unique styles, or other distinctive visual features, and can be trained and later used to produce varied
and precise representations of these elements in the generated images. However, existing image
generation methodologies utilizing LoRAs encounter limitations in effectively combining multiple
LoRAs, particularly as the quantity of LoRAs to be amalgamated increases, thus hindering the
composition of complex images. Given this limitation, a critical question emerges: How can we
effectively composite multiple trained LoRAs in a training-free manner, while still retaining their
unique individual attributes in image generation?
As shown in Figure 2, we find that directly applying pre-trained LoRA modules to compose the
image often leads to semantic conflicts. This failure primarily arises because independent LoRAs
    ∗
        Mingzhu Shen is the corresponding author.
    1
        The source code is released at https://github.com/Yqcca/CMLoRA.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The denoising process
with a Character LoRA and a
Background LoRA. The plot il-         Figure 2: Observation: Prompt-only generation (Naive) and
lustrates the difference in ampli-    existing LoRA combination methods (Merge and Switch) of-
tude of high-frequency components     ten lead to semantic conflicts. This failure primarily arises be-
∆H0.2 (xt ; 40) between 40-step in-   cause independent LoRAs are integrated to contribute equally
terval generated by the Character     to image generation during the denoising process. CMLoRA
LoRA and Background LoRA af-          employs a frequency-domain-based LoRA scheduling mech-
ter the inverse Fourier Transform,    anism to integrate multiple concept LoRAs, effectively ad-
matching each step t.                 dressing semantic conflicts.
are integrated to contribute equally to image generation during the denoising process. We hypoth-
esize that the difficulty in scaling multiple LoRA modules comes from the “semantic conflicts”
among them, as LoRAs are typically trained independently and fuse features with varying ampli-
tudes across different frequency domains to the generated image. When these independent LoRAs
are integrated to contribute equally to image generation, inherent conflicts may arise. To investi-
gate LoRA behavior during the denoising process, we shift the perspective to the Fourier domain,
a research area that has received limited prior investigation, because of its advantages: 1) efficient
image feature detection 2) robustness to noise in the spatial domain (Frank et al., 2020). Figure 1
exhibits a disparity in how Character and Background LoRAs function differently during the de-
noising process, indicating that their fusion of semantic information with varying amplitudes across
different frequency spectra into the generated image. It is evident that the Character LoRA fuses a
higher proportion of high-frequency components, resulting in greater variation in edges and textures
compared to the Background LoRA, during the inference. This finding suggests that certain LoRAs
introduce more pronounced high-frequency modifications during denoising, whereas others primar-
ily influence low-frequency elements. This can be explained as follows: (1) Some LoRAs enhance
high-frequency components, corresponding to rapid changes like edges and textures. (2) Others tar-
get low-frequency components, representing broader structures and smooth color transitions. Fur-
thermore, high-frequency components are predominantly fused during the early stages of inference,
aligning with the observation made in prior work: high-frequency components vary more signifi-
cantly than low-frequency ones throughout the denoising process (Si et al., 2024). Consequently,
improper integration of various LoRAs may result in visual artifacts or semantic inconsistencies in
the generated images.
In light of the phenomenon found in Figure 1, we propose a Fourier-based method to classify Lo-
RAs with different frequency responses and group them into distinct sets. Through our profiling ap-
proach, we categorize LoRAs into high-frequency and low-frequency sets. During inference, high-
frequency LoRAs are employed predominantly in the early denoising stages, while low-frequency
LoRAs are applied dominantly later. Building upon these insights, we introduce Cached Multi-
LoRA (CMLoRA), a novel framework for multi-LoRA composition. During inference, CMLoRA
employs a flexible multi-LoRA injection backbone: denoising the noisy image with the predominant
contributions of dominant LoRAs, while incorporating supplementary contributions from cached
non-dominant LoRAs. Guided by an effective frequency-domain-based scheduling mechanism,
CMLoRA selects a dominant LoRA from the high-frequency set in the early stages of denoising,
transitioning to a dominant LoRA from the low-frequency set in the later stages. Additionally, we
introduce a specialized modulation factor as a hyperparameter, which scales the contribution of the
dominant LoRA during inference, providing precise control over its influence on the overall compo-
sition. As a result, CMLoRA effectively resolves the semantic conflicts that frequently occur during
multi-LoRA composition, enhancing the quality of generated images and computational efficiency.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our findings, encompassing both qualitative and quantitative results, demonstrate that CMLoRA
outperforms existing LoRA composition approaches, and we make the following contributions:
• We introduce a Fourier-based approach for LoRA partition that leverages frequency characteris-
  tics. Our method is grounded in frequency-domain profiling of LoRAs during the inference stage
  of the diffusion model, enabling us to classify LoRAs into high- and low-frequency sets. This
  classification allows for more effective LoRA fusion by grouping LoRAs with similar frequency
  behaviors, reducing potential semantic conflicts and improving the coherence of generated images.
• We propose a flexible LoRA composition framework: Cached Multi-LoRA, designed to optimize
  LoRA integration without requiring additional training. Our method overcomes existing con-
  straints on the number of LoRAs that can be integrated, offering enhanced flexibility, improved
  image quality, compared to state-of-the-art LoRA integration methods.
• We address the problem of the lack of evaluation methodologies and metrics in multi-LoRA image
  generation by introducing an improved evaluator built upon MiniCPM-V. We set a new compre-
  hensive benchmark for assessing four aspects of multi-LoRA composition: 1) element integration,
  2) spatial consistency, 3) semantic accuracy, and 4) aesthetic quality.

2     M ETHOD
2.1   P RELIMINARY
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) belong to a
class of generative models that gradually introduce noise into an image during the forward diffusion
process and learn to reverse this process to synthesize images. When combined with pre-trained
text embedding, text-to-image diffusion models (Podell et al., 2023; Esser et al., 2024) are capable
of generating high-fidelity images based on text prompts. The diffusion model, denoted as ϵθ , with
trainable parameters θ, is optimized to predict the noise added to the noisy latent representation zt ,
conditioned on the provided text c. Typically, a mean-squared error loss function is utilized as the
denoising objective:
                                  L = Ez,c,ϵ,t [||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, c) ||],                           (1)
where ϵ ∼ N (0, 1) is the additive Gaussian noise, zt is the latent feature at timestep t and ϵθ is the
denoising U-Net with learnable parameter θ.
Low-Rank Adaptation The Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) technique freezes the pre-trained
model weights and introduces trainable low-rank decomposition matrices into each layer of the neu-
ral network architecture, thereby significantly reducing the number of trainable parameters required
for downstream tasks (Hu et al., 2021). For a pre-trained weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n in a diffusion
model ϵθ , we constrain its update by representing the latter with a low-rank decomposition, i.e.,
updating W to Ŵ , where Ŵ = W + ∆W = W + BA. B ∈ Rm×r and A ∈ Rr×n are matrices of
a low-rank factor r, satisfying r ≪ min(n, m).
2.2   L O RA D ISPARITY BASED ON F OURIER A NALYSIS
We hypothesize that the challenges in scaling multiple LoRA modules stem from the ”semantic
conflicts” that arise among them, given that LoRAs are typically trained independently and fuse
features with varying amplitudes across different frequency domains during the denoising process.
Building on the notable disparities in how different LoRAs fuse high-frequency components during
the denoising process, as illustrated in Figure 1, we expand our investigation to delineate the spe-
cific contributions of various LoRAs within this process and to explore the internal characteristics
of LoRAs based on their profiled categories. We aim to establish a Fourier-based method to classify
LoRAs according to their frequency responses and group them into distinct sets, as shown in Fig-
ure 2. Using our profiling approach, LoRAs are categorized into high-frequency and low-frequency
sets. During inference, high-frequency LoRAs are primarily utilized in the early stages of denoising
to enhance detail and texture, while low-frequency LoRAs are predominantly applied in the later
stages to refine overall structure and coherence.
To evaluate the salient characteristics of the contribution of high-frequency components modifica-
tion from different LoRAs in the denoising process, we conduct a controlled experiment based on
the testbed ComposLoRA (Zhong et al., 2024), comprising of 5 different LoRA categories: Charac-
ter, Clothing, Style, Background and Object. We first use the diffusion model combined with each
LoRA in different profiled LoRA categories to generate a batch of images. Then we use the 2D Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) to transform images from the spatial domain to the frequency domain and


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


compute their frequency spectrum. Finally, we extract the amplitude of the high-frequency compo-
nents and compute their change in amplitude during the whole denoising process. Mathematically,
these operations are performed as follows:
We first computer the average feature map along the channel dimension by taking the mean:
                                                  C
                                              1 X
                                        xt =         xt,i ,                                        (2)
                                              C i=1
where xt,i represents the i-th channel of the feature map xt at denoising timestep t. C denotes the
total number of channels in xt . Then, we quantify the amplitude of high-frequency components
in the generated image by analyzing its distribution across the frequency spectrum. We calculate
the 2D FFT for xt and extract the amplitude of h percentage of high-frequency components in the
frequency domain:
                        F(xt ) = 2DFFT (xt )
                                                                                                (3)
                       Hh (xt ) = F (xt ) · 1{∥u(F (xt ))∥>h·max ∥u(F (xt ))∥} ,
where 2D FFT(·) denotes the 2D Fast Fourier transform averaged in the radial axis, |·| calculates the
amplitude of components across the frequency spectrum, and u(·) calculates the frequency range in
the Fourier domain. Subsequently, the change in amplitude of high-frequency components between
interval t − z and t is determined as follows:
                  ∆F (xt ; z) = F (xt ) − F (xt−z )
                                                                                                  (4)
                ∆Hh (xt ; z) = ∆F (xt ; z) · 1{∥u(∆F (xt ;z))∥>h·max ∥u(∆F (xt ;z))∥} ,
Based on Equation (4), we profile the LoRA
categories in the testbed through the following
steps: 1) Establishing a prioritized LoRA order
strategy, denoted as O, by ranking the variation
in the intensity of high-frequency components,
∆Hh (xt ; z), across different LoRA categories.
2) Using the strategy O, we can categorize Lo-
RAs into a high-frequency dominant set H and
a low-frequency dominant set L for a multi-
LoRA composition task. 3) LoRAs from the
high-frequency dominant set H are employed Figure 3: Summary of the change in amplitude of
predominantly during the initial stages of de-
noising, where their dynamic features can en- high-frequency components, ∆H0.2 (xt ; 20), dur-
hance the image’s detail and texture. In con- ing the denoising process for generated images
trast, LoRAs from the low-frequency dominant with LoRAs across different LoRA categories.
set L are utilized primarily in the later stages of the denoising process.
We set h = 0.2 to conduct our exploration. We calculate the amplitude of high-frequency compo-
nents, denoted as H0.2 (xt ), and change in amplitude of high-frequency components, represented as
∆H0.2 (xt ; z), for certain step t for all LoRAs within the various profiled categories in our testbed.
These values are averaged among the LoRAs within their respective categories, for instance, we
have multiple LoRAs coming from the Character category or the Cloth category. This then yields
H0.2 (xt ) and ∆H0.2 (xt ; z) for all LoRA categories.
We perform the profiling on the following categories: Chracter, Cloth, Style, Background and Ob-
ject. Figure 3 illustrates the variation in the intensity of high-frequency components, ∆H0.2 (xt ; z),
across all LoRA categories in our testbed throughout the denoising process. Evidently, certain high-
frequency dominant LoRAs, such as Style and Character, incorporate larger amplitudes of high-
frequency features into the generated image compared to others, particularly during the early stages
of inference.
Building upon these insights, we subsequently leverage the change in amplitudes of high-frequency
components ∆H0.2 (xt ; z) as a criterion for selecting LoRA candidates throughout the denoising
process. We establish a prioritized LoRA order strategy O using the ranking of ∆H0.2 (xt ; 20)
across different LoRA categories: Style, Character, Cloth, Object and Background. We aim to
maximize the contribution of the LoRAs ranked highest in the order O during the early stages of the
denoising process.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Following the strategy O, we can categorize LoRAs into a high-frequency dominant set H and a
low-frequency dominant set L for a multi-LoRA composition task. Specifically, we reserve the
LoRA candidate ranked last in the order O for inclusion in the low-frequency dominant set L,
while placing the remaining LoRAs into the high-frequency dominant set H. As a result, LoRAs
from the high-frequency dominant set H are employed predominantly during the initial stages of
denoising, where their dynamic features can effectively enhance the image’s detail and texture. In
contrast, LoRAs from the low-frequency dominant set L are utilized primarily in the later stages
of the denoising process. This strategic transition between dominant LoRAs mitigates the semantic
conflicts that may arise from the fusion of multiple LoRAs.
2.3     C ACHED M ULTI -L O RA
In this paper, we investigate multi-LoRA composition within the context of diffusion models, align-
ing with prior studies on LoRA merging (Gu et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024). Building on the
training-free LoRA integration methods introduced by Zhong et al. (2024), we focus on two well-
established frameworks: LoRA Switch and LoRA Composite, as outlined in Appendix A.3. Based
on our evaluations detailed in Section 3.2, while LoRA Composite injects all activated LoRAs at
each timestep during the denoising process, LoRA Switch – activating only one LoRA per timestep
– performs better in the multi-LoRA composition task.
Since LoRA Switch outperforms LoRA Composite based on the evaluation in Section 3.2, we hy-
pothesize that LoRA Switch mitigates the “semantic conflicts” in multi-LoRA fusion by limiting
activation to a single LoRA per timestep. However, by applying the frequency profiling approach
described in Section 2.2 to classify LoRAs into high-frequency (H) and low-frequency (L) sets, we
conjecture that LoRA Composite can potentially surpass LoRA Switch, since the effective LoRA
partitioning strategy could allow LoRA Composite to integrate multiple LoRAs efficiently while
minimizing semantic conflicts. Thus, we introduce a flexible multi-LoRA framework based on
LoRA Composite, termed Cached Multi-LoRA.
2.3.1    L O RA C OMPOSITE
CMLoRA is grounded in the LoRA partition approach illustrated in Section 2.2, focusing on the
systematic investigation of optimal dominant LoRA fusion sequences to enhance multi-LoRA in-
tegration. Our framework involves calculating both unconditional and conditional score estimates
for each LoRA individually at every denoising step. With a set of N LoRAs in place, let θ̂i denote
the parameters of the diffusion model eθ after incorporating the i-th LoRA. The collective guidance
ê(zt , c) based on textual condition c is derived by aggregating the scores from each LoRA:
                                         N
                                      1 X
                         ê(zt , c) =       wi [(1 − s) · eθ̂i (zt ) + s · eθ̂i (zt , c)],      (5)
                                      N i=1
                                                                     PN
where wi is a real scalar weight allocated to each LoRA and i=1 wi < ∞, intended to adjust the
influence of the i-th LoRA. By aggregating these scores, the technique ensures balanced guidance


Figure 4: Overview of our multi-LoRA composition framework during a 7-step denoising process.
Each color represents a distinct LoRA, where solid shapes indicate dominant LoRAs performing full
inference, and hollow shapes represent non-dominant LoRAs leveraging the caching mechanism at
their respective steps. The weight scale wdomi on each dominant LoRA signifies its influence during
the denoising process, where wdom0 = wdom1 > · · · > wdom5 .

                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


throughout the image generation process, facilitating the cohesive integration of all elements repre-
sented by different LoRAs. Additionally, we introduce a specialized modulation factor wdom as a
hyperparameter, which scales the contribution of the dominant LoRA during inference, as demon-
strated in Dominant LoRA Scale in Appendix F.
Figure 4 illustrates the main features of our multi-LoRA composition framework:
• Dominant LoRA swaps among LoRAs in the high-frequency dominant set H per timestep.
• The weight scale of dominant LoRA, wdom ∈ R, is decaying during the denoising process.
• Non-dominant LoRAs use the caching mechanism demonstrated in Section 2.3.2.

2.3.2   T HE C ACHING M ECHANISM
To amplify the contribution of the determined dominant LoRA and ensure more stable frequency
fusion in multi-LoRA composition, we further introduce caching strategies for non-dominant LoRAs
during the denoising process.


Figure 5: Character LoRA and Background
LoRA composition. Visual artifacts (green
flowers) appear in the image generated by        Figure 6: The percentage of steps with a similar-
LoRA Composite framework, as illustrated         ity greater than 0.9 to the current step for cached
in Appendix A.3. Introducing the caching         latent feature maps, which is the output of the up-
mechanism can alleviate the semantic con-        sampling block U2t of U-net with one LoRA during
flict we have here.                              LoRA composition.
Figure 5 illustrates the semantic conflicts that arise in LoRA Composite framework, as discussed in
Appendix A.3, although we have performed a partitioning already in the frequency domain. Since
LoRA Composite assigns equal weights to all frequency components of the LoRAs during the de-
noising process, it is prone to feature conflicts in the fused outputs of different LoRAs in Fourier
space. Drawing inspiration from the DeepCache technique proposed by Ma et al. (2024), we inves-
tigate how the caching mechanism can be leveraged as a potential remedy.
According to the reverse process, zt−1 is conditionally generated based on the previous result zt .
Initially, we generate zt in the same way as usual, where the calculations are performed across
all entire U-Nets {eθ̂1 , · · · , eθ̂N } incorporating LoRAs with weight matrices {W1 , · · · , WN }. To
obtain the next output zt−1 , we retrieve the high-level features produced in the previous collective
guidance ê(zt , c). Specifically, consider a skip branch si in the U-Net incorporating the i-th LoRA
eθ̂i , which bridges Dsi and Usi , we cache the feature maps from the previous up-sampling block at
the time t as the following:
                                               t          t
                                             Fi,cache ← Ui,m+1 (·),                                   (6)
which is the feature from the main branch at timestep t. These cached features are reused in sub-
sequent inference steps. At the next timestep, t − 1, if full inference for the U-Net incorporating
the i-th LoRA eθ̂i is unnecessary, we perform a dynamic partial inference. Based on the previously
generated collective guidance ê(zt , c), we compute only the necessary components for the m-th skip
branch, while substituting the main branch computation with a retrieval operation from the cache in
                                                                                t
Equation 6. Thus, for the U-Net incorporating the i-th LoRA, the input for Ui,m    at timestep t − 1 is
formulated as:                                        t−1    t
                                           Concat(Di,m (·), Fi,cache ),                               (7)
       t−1
where Di,m (·) represents the output of the m-th down-sampling block.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cache Interval Determination As shown in Figure 6, the percentage of steps with a similarity
greater than 0.9 between cached latent feature maps and the current step follows a distinct trend
across all LoRAs in LoRA Composite framework. To capture the similarity trend of feature maps
fused by LoRAs, we propose a non-uniform caching interval strategy with two specialized hyper-
parameters: c1 , c2 ∈ Z. These hyper-parameters control the strength of the caching behavior during
inference. Specifically, for a denoising process with T timesteps, the sequence of timesteps that
performs full inference is:
               I = I1 ∪ I2 ∪ I3
              I1 = {c1 · t | 0 ≤ c1 · t < ⌊0.4 · T ⌋ , where t ∈ Z}
                                                                                                    (8)
              I2 = {⌊0.4 · T ⌋ + c2 · t | ⌊0.4 · T ⌋ ≤ c2 · t < ⌊0.9 · T ⌋ , where t ∈ Z}
              I3 = {⌊0.9 · T ⌋ + c1 · t | ⌊0.9 · T ⌋ ≤ c1 · t < T, where t ∈ Z}.

The interval [⌊0.4 · T ⌋ , ⌊0.9 · T ⌋] are established based on the condition that the similarity of the
cached features exceeds 20% with a 90% confidence interval, as demonstrated in Caching Inter-
val and Modulation Hyper-parameters in Appendix F. This strategic approach aims to further
mitigate the issue of semantic conflict in multi-LoRA composition. Notably, it offers two key ad-
vantages. First, it amplifies the features contributed by the dominant LoRA feature map, while
minimizing changes in features fused from non-dominant LoRAs, allowing the dominant LoRA to
play a more critical role during the denoising process. Second, it mitigates the negative effects of
frequency conflicts in the Fourier domain, thereby achieving a more balanced trade-off between
multi-concept fusion and texture preservation for the activated LoRAs during the inference. The
effectiveness of our proposed caching strategy is discussed in Section 3.2.2.
In summary, by leveraging a Fourier-based approach to partition LoRAs based on their frequency
characteristics, we can determine the optimal order of dominant LoRA application during the de-
noising process. Building on this partitioning strategy, we introduce CMLoRA, a novel LoRA com-
position framework that employs a flexible multi-LoRA injection backbone: denoising the noisy
image with the predominant contributions of dominant LoRAs, while incorporating supplementary
contributions from cached non-dominant LoRAs.

3     E XPERIMENTS
3.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Models and Evaluation Setup We begin by examining the prompt-only generative method with-
out incorporating concept LoRAs (Rombach et al., 2022), denoted as the naive model. In addi-
tion, we utilize training-free multi-LoRA composition methods with the same text prompt used in
the naive model, including LoRA Switch (Zhong et al., 2024), LoRA Composite (Zhong et al.,
2024), and LoRA Merge (HuggingFace, 2023). Alongside these methods, we incorporate the Lo-
raHub (Huang et al., 2023) framework, which fluidly combines multiple LoRA modules with few-
shot learning, as our baseline. For each baseline method, we apply our proposed caching method,
denoting the results as LoRA Switch (CacheD), LoRA Composite (CacheD), and LoRA Merge
(CacheD ), respectively. We also consider a uniform cache interval strategy governed by a hyper-
parameter c. For all T denoising steps, the sequence of timesteps that performs full inference is
defined as:
                               I = {c · t|0 ≤ c · t ≤ T, where t ∈ Z}.                          (9)
This extension allows us to integrate multi-LoRA composition methods with varying uniform
caching strategies for evaluation, as analyzed in Appendix F.2. Additionally, we integrate our pro-
posed LoRA partitioning strategy to LoRA Switch also as a baseline, referred as Switch-A. The
analysis of computational cost is detailed in Appendix B.2.
Based on the testbed ComposLoRA (Zhong et al., 2024), we curate two unique subsets of LoRAs
representing realistic and anime styles. Each subset comprises a variety of elements: 3 characters,
2 types of clothing, 2 styles, 2 backgrounds, and 2 objects, culminating in a total of 22 LoRAs.
We discuss the challenges in constructing a well-defined multi-LoRA composition testbed in Ap-
pendix D.

Evaluation Metrics We employ CLIPScore (Hessel et al., 2022) and ImageReward (Xu et al.,
2023) to evaluate the comprehensive image generation capabilities of all multi-LoRA composition


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


methods. While both metrics perform effectively within their evaluation domains, we find that
they struggle to accurately assess out-of-distribution (OOD) concepts. Notably, ImageReward ex-
hibits more pronounced issues with OOD instances compared to CLIPScore, as illustrated in Table 4
(which assigns negative scores to images generated by anime LoRAs). We discuss this limitation in
Appendix D. Consequently, we include CLIPScore as a key evaluation metric to assess the efficacy
of multi-LoRA composition frameworks at first.
Recent advancements in multi-modal large language models (LLMs), such as Yao et al. (2024);
OpenAI (2024); Yang et al. (2023), have shown significant potential in multi-modal tasks, position-
ing them as promising tools for evaluating image generation. In this study, we harness capabilities of
MiniCPM-V (Yao et al., 2024), an end-side multi-modal LLM designed for vision-language under-
standing, to evaluate composable image generation, utilizing in-context few-shot learning to address
challenges posed by OOD concepts. The full evaluation process is provided in Appendix E.
Implementation Details We use the open-source platform Diffusers (von Platen et al., 2022) as
the pipeline to conduct our experiments. We employ stable-diffusion-v1.5 implemented by Rom-
bach et al. (2022) in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) as the backbone model. For the anime style
subset, the settings differ slightly with 200 denoising steps, a guidance scale s of 10, and an image
size of 512 × 512. The DPM-Solver++ proposed by Lu et al. (2022) is used as the scheduler in the
generation process. The LoRA scale for all LoRAs is set to 1.4, which is applied within the cross-
attention module of the U-Net. The dominant weight scale wdom is initially set at N − 0.5, where N
is the total number of activated LoRAs. Then this weight scale is adjusted using a decaying method.
                                                                                  i        i−1
For the i-th turn of switching the dominant LoRA, the weight is defined as: wdom      = wdom   − 0.5i .
In addition, we select c1 = 2 and c2 = 3 for the caching strategy applied to non-dominant LoRAs.
The hyper-parameters are selected using grid search methods described in Appendix F.
3.2     R ESULTS
3.2.1    CLIPS CORE E VALUATION
               Table 1: ClipScore for Selected multi-LoRA Composition Methods.
                                                                  ClipScore
                                 Model
                                                        N=2      N=3      N=4      N=5
                       Naive (Rombach et al., 2022)    35.014   34.927   34.384   33.809
                       Merge (HuggingFace, 2023)       33.726   34.139   33.399   32.364
                        Switch (Zhong et al., 2024)    35.394   35.107   34.478   33.475
                      Composite (Zhong et al., 2024)   35.073   34.082   34.802   32.582
                       LoraHub (Huang et al., 2023)    35.681   35.127   34.970   33.485
                                Switch-A               35.451   35.383   34.877   33.366
                            Merge (CacheD )            33.554   33.917   33.465   32.654
                            Switch (CacheD )           35.528   35.112   34.845   34.056
                          Composite (CacheD )          35.295   34.984   34.981   33.097
                           LoraHub (CacheD )           35.609   34.919   35.135   33.659
                          Switch-A (CacheD )           35.139   35.383   34.930   34.250
                          CMLoRA (CacheD )             35.422   35.215   35.208   34.341

We first present the comparative evaluation results obtained using CLIPScore (Hessel et al., 2022).
Table 1 presents the ClipScore performance for several LoRA composition methods across different
numbers of LoRAs (N = 2 to N = 5). Additional experimental results are included in Appendix B
and visualization demonstrations are provided in Appendix C. Three key observations emerge from
the analysis:
• In general, LoRA Switch shows higher CLIPScore than LoRA Composite across most cases. For
  N = 5, LoRA Switch scores 33.475, outperforming LoRA Composite’s 32.582. This trend indi-
  cates that LoRA Switch handles multi-LoRA integration more effectively than LoRA Composite,
  particularly when the number of LoRAs increases. However, Switch-A (LoRA Switch with fre-
  quency partitioning), does not offer a better performance compared to CMLoRA with large N
  values, which confirms our hypothesis in Section 2.2.
• Our proposed method, CMLoRA with dynamic caching (CacheD ), consistently delivers the highest
  or near-highest CLIPScore across all scenarios. For N = 3, CMLoRA achieves a CLIPScore
  of 35.215, outperforming both LoraHub (34.919) and Switch-A (35.383). Similarly, for N =
  5, CMLoRA records the highest score of 34.341, outperforming other methods. These results
  highlight the efficiency and robustness of CMLoRA in the multi-LoRA integration task.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• The task of multi-concept image generation remains highly challenging, especially as the number
   of elements to be composed increases. As the number of LoRAs increases from N = 2 to N = 5,
   the CLIPScore of generated images generally decreases across all methods. This trend highlights
   the increasing challenge of compositional image generation when more elements are involved.
CLIPScore’s evaluations fall short in assessing specific compositional and quality aspects due to its
inability to discern the nuanced features of each element (Zhong et al., 2024). To address this limita-
tion and provide a more thorough analysis, we complement our findings with an MLLM evaluation
across all multi-LoRA composition methods.
3.2.2   M INI CPM-V- BASED E VALUATION
The evaluation using MiniCPM-V involves scoring the performance of CMLoRA (CacheD ) versus
others across four dimensions, as well as determining the win/loss rate based on these scores. The
specific score and win/loss rate are illustrated in the radar map Figure 7 and the win/loss rate plot:
Figure 8. Additional experimental results are available in Appendix B and visualization demon-
strations are presented in Appendix C. As demonstrated in Table 6, the Naive model exhibits the
lowest score in Semantic Accuracy, highlighting that incorporating multiple LoRA mechanisms can
significantly enhance the generative model’s performance in multi-concept image generation. Based
on our observations, we conclude that our proposed CMLoRA achieves significant improvements
across various metrics for multi-concept image generation, particularly in aesthetic quality. More-
over, CMLoRA demonstrates superior overall composition quality, with a win rate that is 20% higher
than LoRA Merge and 10% higher than other methods.


                                                Figure 8:     Comparison of CMLoRA
Figure 7: The performance evaluation results of (CacheD ) against other Multi-LoRA com-
LoRA integration methods on the ComposLoRA position methods based on win rate.
testbed using MiniCPM-V are presented. Detailed
scores are available in Table 6.


Figure 9: Comparison of Composite against Figure 10: Comparison of CMLoRA against
Composite(CacheD ) based on win rate.              CMLoRA(CacheD ) based on win rate.
In addition, to verify our hypothesis presented in Section 2.3.2 – caching non-dominant LoRAs
strategically during the denoising process can amplify the contribution of the determined dominant
LoRA and ensure more stable frequency fusion in multi-LoRA composition – we assess both LoRA
Composite and CMLoRA, including their caching versions, based on win rate. Figure 9 and Fig-
ure 10 illustrate that the caching strategy can significantly improve the quality of multi-concept


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


image generation. Specifically, LoRA Composite benefits more from the caching strategy compared
to CMLoRA because LoRA Composite does not implement the LoRA partition strategy during the
denoising process. In summary, we conclude the following results:
• CMLoRA demonstrates greater potential than other multi-LoRA fusion methods in addressing the
  semantic conflicts that arise during multi-LoRA composition. The MiniCPM-V evaluation further
  reinforces CMLoRA’s advantages, particularly in aesthetic quality, where it achieves a higher win
  rate than other competing methods in the multi-LoRA composition image generation task.
• Our analysis confirms that strategically caching non-dominant LoRAs enhances the performance
  of dominant LoRAs during the denoising process. Notably, LoRA Composite benefits more from
  this caching strategy compared to CMLoRA, likely due to the absence of the Fourier LoRA parti-
  tion approach during denoising in LoRA Composite.
4   R ELATED W ORK
4.1 M ULTI - CONCEPT T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION
Multi-concept composable image generation plays a crucial role in digital content customization,
allowing for the creation of images that align with predefined specifications. Existing research in
this domain primarily focuses on the following approaches: adjusting the generative processes of
diffusion models to better align with specified requirements (Jiang et al., 2024; Kumari et al., 2023;
Xiao et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024), or integrating a series of independent modules that impose desired
constraints (Kwon et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024).
While traditional methods excel at producing images based on general concepts, they often struggle
with the precise integration of user-defined objects (Kumari et al., 2023; Gafni et al., 2022). Other
approaches can compose specific objects into images but often require extensive fine-tuning and
struggle with multiple objects simultaneously (Huang et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2023). To address
these limitations, we propose a training-free, instance-level LoRA composition framework, which
enables the accurate assembly of user-specified elements in image generation.
4.2 M ULTI -L O RA I NTEGRATION M ANIPULATIONS
Recent research has focused on leveraging large language models (LLMs) or diffusion models as
base models, aiming to manipulate LoRA weights for various objectives. These include element
composition in image generation (Yang et al., 2024; Shah et al., 2023), reducing the parameters
needed for multi-modal inference (Chen et al., 2024; Chavan et al., 2023), and adapting models
for domain-specific applications (Zhang et al., 2023; Kong et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024). In the
realm of LoRA composition techniques, approaches like LoraHub (Huang et al., 2023) utilize few-
shot demonstrations to learn coefficient matrices for merging LoRAs, allowing for the fusion of
multiple LoRAs into a single new LoRA. LoRA Merge (HuggingFace, 2023) employs addition and
negation operators to merge LoRA weights through arithmetic operations. Different from weight-
based composition methods, LoRA Switch and LoRA Composite (Zhong et al., 2024) maintain all
LoRA weights intact and manipulate the interactions between LoRAs during inference.
Nevertheless, these methods often lead to instability in the merging process as the number of LoRAs
increases, leading to semantic conflicts and visual artifacts of generated images. Additionally, they
do not adequately utilize the interactive dynamics between the LoRA models and the base model.
To address these challenges, our study proposes a novel perspective: analyzing the contributions of
different LoRAs in the Fourier domain and developing a novel LoRA-composition framework to
mitigate the semantic conflicts arising from multi-LoRA composition.
5   C ONCLUSION
In this study, we investigate the contributions of various LoRAs to multi-LoRA composition in the
Fourier domain. To understand the origins of semantic conflicts in multi-LoRA image generation,
we perform a frequency-based analysis of their latent feature maps, revealing significant dispari-
ties in frequency contributions among different LoRAs. This finding leads us to propose a versatile
Fourier-based profiling method to sequence the fusion of dominant LoRAs during inference, which
can be seamlessly integrated into various multi-LoRA frameworks. Finally, we introduce a power-
ful training-free framework called Cached Multi-LoRA, which denoises images by prioritizing the
contributions of dominant LoRAs while incorporating supplementary information from cached non-
dominant LoRAs. To validate our approach, we evaluate CMLoRA on the ComposLoRA testbed
and introduce a scalable, automated evaluation framework based on MiniCPM-V, designed to avoid
out-of-distribution issues.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and insightful feedback.
This work was performed using the Sulis Tier 2 HPC platform hosted by the Scientific Comput-
ing Research Technology Platform at the University of Warwick. Sulis is funded by EPSRC Grant
EP/T022108/1 and the HPC Midlands+ consortium. Mingzhu Shen is funded by Imperial Pres-
ident’s PhD Scholarships. For the purpose of open access, the authors have applied a Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising.

R EFERENCES
Arnav Chavan, Zhuang Liu, Deepak Gupta, Eric Xing, and Zhiqiang Shen. One-for-all: Generalized
  lora for parameter-efficient fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07967, 2023.

Shaoxiang Chen, Zequn Jie, and Lin Ma. Llava-mole: Sparse mixture of lora experts for mitigating
  data conflicts in instruction finetuning mllms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16160, 2024.

Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
  high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.

Joel Frank, Thorsten Eisenhofer, Lea Schönherr, Asja Fischer, Dorothea Kolossa, and Thorsten
  Holz. Leveraging frequency analysis for deep fake image recognition. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 3247–3258. PMLR, 2020.

Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-
  scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2203.13131.

Yuchao Gu, Xintao Wang, Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yujun Shi, Yunpeng Chen, Zihan Fan, Wuyou Xiao,
  Rui Zhao, Shuning Chang, Weijia Wu, et al. Mix-of-show: Decentralized low-rank adaptation
  for multi-concept customization of diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.

Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2104.08718.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Chengsong Huang, Qian Liu, Bill Yuchen Lin, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, and Min Lin. Lorahub: Effi-
  cient cross-task generalization via dynamic lora composition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13269,
  2023.

HuggingFace. Merging loras with diffusers. https://github.com/huggingface/
  diffusers/blob/main/docs/source/en/using-diffusers/merge_loras.
  md, 2023. Accessed: 2024-09-29.

Jiaxiu Jiang, Yabo Zhang, Kailai Feng, Xiaohe Wu, and Wangmeng Zuo. Mc2: Multi-concept
   guidance for customized multi-concept generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05268, 2024.

Rui Kong, Qiyang Li, Xinyu Fang, Qingtian Feng, Qingfeng He, Yazhu Dong, Weijun Wang,
  Yuanchun Li, Linghe Kong, and Yunxin Liu. Lora-switch: Boosting the efficiency of dynamic
  llm adapters via system-algorithm co-design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17741, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1931–1941, 2023.
Gihyun Kwon, Simon Jenni, Dingzeyu Li, Joon-Young Lee, Jong Chul Ye, and Fabian Caba Heil-
  bron. Concept weaver: Enabling multi-concept fusion in text-to-image models. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8880–8889, 2024.
Zou Li, Ning Pang, and Xiang Zhao. Instruction tuning large language models for multimodal
  relation extraction using lora. In International Conference on Web Information Systems and Ap-
  plications, pp. 364–376. Springer, 2024.
Wang Lin, Jingyuan Chen, Jiaxin Shi, Yichen Zhu, Chen Liang, Junzhong Miao, Tao Jin, Zhou Zhao,
 Fei Wu, Shuicheng Yan, et al. Non-confusing generation of customized concepts in diffusion
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06914, 2024.
Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast
  ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:5775–5787, 2022.
Xinyin Ma, Gongfan Fang, and Xinchao Wang. Deepcache: Accelerating diffusion models for free.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  15762–15772, 2024.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-
  ward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01703.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 8821–8831. Pmlr, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Viraj Shah, Nataniel Ruiz, Forrester Cole, Erika Lu, Svetlana Lazebnik, Yuanzhen Li, and Varun
  Jampani. Ziplora: Any subject in any style by effectively merging loras. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.13600, 2023.
Chenyang Si, Ziqi Huang, Yuming Jiang, and Ziwei Liu. Freeu: Free lunch in diffusion u-net.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  4733–4743, 2024.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Ra-
  sul, Mishig Davaadorj, Dhruv Nair, Sayak Paul, William Berman, Yiyi Xu, Steven Liu, and
  Thomas Wolf. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models. https://github.com/
  huggingface/diffusers, 2022.
Guangxuan Xiao, Tianwei Yin, William T Freeman, Frédo Durand, and Song Han. Fastcomposer:
  Tuning-free multi-subject image generation with localized attention. International Journal of
  Computer Vision, pp. 1–20, 2024.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao
   Dong. Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation,
   2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05977.
Yang Yang, Wen Wang, Liang Peng, Chaotian Song, Yao Chen, Hengjia Li, Xiaolong Yang, Qinglin
  Lu, Deng Cai, Boxi Wu, et al. Lora-composer: Leveraging low-rank adaptation for multi-concept
  customization in training-free diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11627, 2024.
Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Jianfeng Wang, Chung-Ching Lin, Zicheng Liu, and Li-
  juan Wang. The dawn of lmms: Preliminary explorations with gpt-4v (ision). arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.17421, 9(1):1, 2023.
Yuan Yao, Tianyu Yu, Ao Zhang, Chongyi Wang, Junbo Cui, Hongji Zhu, Tianchi Cai, Haoyu Li,
  Weilin Zhao, Zhihui He, et al. Minicpm-v: A gpt-4v level mllm on your phone. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.01800, 2024.
Jinghan Zhang, Junteng Liu, Junxian He, et al. Composing parameter-efficient modules with arith-
   metic operation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:12589–12610, 2023.
Ming Zhong, Yelong Shen, Shuohang Wang, Yadong Lu, Yizhu Jiao, Siru Ouyang, Donghan Yu,
 Jiawei Han, and Weizhu Chen. Multi-lora composition for image generation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2402.16843, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     L O RA- BASED M ANIPULATIONS
A.1   L O RA M ERGE THROUGH A W EIGHT F USION P ERSPECTIVE

Component-wise Composition of LoRA LoRA Merge is usually realized by linearly combin-
ing multiple LoRAs to synthesize a unified LoRA, subsequently plugged into the diffusion model.
Formally, when introducing N distinct LoRAs, the consequent updated matrix Ŵ in ϵθ is given by:

                                         N
                                         X                    N
                                                              X
                            Ŵ = W +           wi ∆Wi = W +         wi Bi Ai ,                     (10)
                                         i=1                  i=1
      PN
where i=1 wi = 1 (HuggingFace, 2023). This manner prevents any adverse impact on the em-
bedding of the original model, but it leads to the loss of individual LoRA characteristics, as the
composition weight wi for each trained LoRA is reduced.

Element-wise Composition of LoRA This process integrates the corresponding parameters of the
LoRA modules, requiring the modules being combined to have the same rank r to properly align the
structures (Huang et al., 2023). Given that ∆Wi = Bi Ai , the combined LoRA module Ŵ can be
obtained by:

             Ŵ = (w1 B1 + w2 B2 + · · · + wN BN )(w1 A1 + w2 A2 + · · · + wN AN ),                (11)
where the set of optimal weights {w1 , w2 , · · · , wN } are trained through a black-box optimization.

A.2   L O RA M ERGE THROUGH A G RADIENT F USION P ERSPECTIVE

Compared to weight fusion, gradient fusion aligns the inference behavior of each individual concept,
significantly reducing identity loss (Gu et al., 2024). The gradient fusion method first decodes
the individual concepts using their respective LoRA weights. It then extracts the input and output
features associated with each LoRA layer. These input/output features from different concepts are
concatenated, and fused gradients are used to update each layer W using the following objective:

                                         N
                                         X
                          W = arg min          ||(W0 + ∆Wi )Xi − W Xi ||2F ,                       (12)
                                     W
                                         i=1
where Xi represents the input activation of the i-th concept and || · || denotes the Frobenius norm.

A.3   L O RA M ERGE THROUGH A D ECODING -C ENTRIC P ERSPECTIVE

LoRA Switch With a set of N LoRAs, the methodology initiates with a prearranged sequence of
permutations. Starting from the first LoRA, the model transitions to the subsequent LoRA every τ
step (Zhong et al., 2024). The active LoRA at each denoising timestep t, ranging from 1 to the total
number of steps required, is determined by the following equations:

                                 λ = ⌊((t − 1)mod(N τ ))/τ ⌋ + 1,
                                                                                                    (13)
                                Ŵt = W + wi ∆Wi = W + wi Bi Ai ,
where i indicates the index of the currently active LoRA, iterating from 1 to N , ⌊·⌋ is the floor func-
tion, and the weight matrix Ŵt is updated to reflect the contribution from the weighted active LoRA
wi ∆Wi . By selectively enabling one LoRA at a time, LoRA Switch ensures focused attention to the
details pertinent to the current element, thus preserving the integrity and quality of the generated
image throughout the process (Zhong et al., 2024).

LoRA Composite LoRA Composite method involves calculating both unconditional and condi-
tional score estimates for each LoRA individually at every denoising step. By aggregating these
scores, the technique ensures balanced guidance throughout the image generation process (Zhong
et al., 2024).


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With N LoRAs in place, let θ̂i denote the parameters of the diffusion model eθ after incorporating the
i-th LoRA. The collective guidance ê(zt , c) based on textual condition c is derived by aggregating
the scores from each LoRA, as depicted in the equation below:

                                           N
                                      1 X
                       ê(zt , c) =         wi [(1 − s) · eθ̂i (zt ) + s · eθ̂i (zt , c)],               (14)
                                      N i=1
where wi is a scalar weight allocated to each LoRA, intended to adjust the influence of the i-th
LoRA (Zhong et al., 2024).

A.4     CML O RA

A.4.1    R ELATION TO C LASSIFIER F REE G UIDANCE
With a set of N LoRAs in place, let θ̂i denote the parameters of the diffusion model eθ after in-
corporating the i-th LoRA. For a generative model eθ integrated with i-th LoRA, its classifier-free
guidance ẽθ̂i (zt , c) based on textual condition c is:
                                      (1 − s) · eθ̂i (zt ) + s · eθ̂i (zt , c).                          (15)

The collective guidance ê(zt , c) based on textual condition c is derived by aggregating the scores
from the generative model integrated with each LoRA:
                                          N
                                      1 X
                       ê(zt , c) =         wi [(1 − s) · eθ̂i (zt ) + s · eθ̂i (zt , c)],               (16)
                                      N i=1
                                                                         PN
where wi is a real scalar weight allocated to each LoRA and                 i=1 wi < ∞, intended to adjust the
influence of the i-th LoRA.
By aggregating these scores, the technique ensures harmonized guidance throughout the image gen-
eration process, facilitating the cohesive integration of all elements represented by different LoRAs.


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS


B.1   I MAGE R EWARD AND C LIP S CORE



To ensure the reliability of our experimental results, we conduct image generation using three ran-
dom seeds. All reported results in this paper represent the average evaluation scores across these
three runs. The experiments were run with a mix of NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 40GB memory and
NVIDIA V100 GPUs with 16GB memory. The total amount of inference time for all multi-LoRA
composition methods under all metrics is around 1300 GPU hours.


Table 2: Comparison of ImageReward and ClipScore with the selected LoRA integration methods
under different number of Anime LoRAs in the ComposLoRA testbed.


                                     ImageReward                             ClipScore
         Model
                           N=2      N=3        N=4     N=5       N=2       N=3       N=4      N=5
    Merge (CacheD )        0.359    0.227    -0.462   -0.506    34.974    35.147   34.143    32.705
         Merge             0.357    0.211    -0.346   -0.590    35.136    35.421   34.164    32.636
   Merge (Cachec=2 )       0.353    0.187    -0.428   -0.662    34.930    35.139   33.584    32.137
   Merge (Cachec=3 )       0.320    0.165    -0.444   -0.674    34.520    34.591   34.063    31.560
   Merge (Cachec=5 )       0.313    0.006    -0.484   -0.586    34.653    34.669   33.450    31.924
    Switch (CacheD )       0.416    0.201    -0.176   -0.322    35.510    35.576   35.367    35.347
         Switch            0.424    0.207    -0.184   -0.306    35.285    35.482   34.532    34.148
   Switch (Cachec=2 )      0.405    0.184    -0.182   -0.494    35.141    34.814   34.335    34.113
   Switch (Cachec=3 )      0.389    0.157    -0.186   -0.464    35.175    35.468   34.285    34.113
   Switch (Cachec=5 )      0.378    0.105    -0.186   -0.466    35.130    35.189   34.151    33.799
  Composite(CacheD )       0.366    0.125    -0.226   -0.288    35.120    35.131   34.589    33.888
      Composite            0.360    0.147    -0.214   -0.588    34.343    34.378   34.161    32.936
 Composite (Cachec=2 )     0.349    0.144    -0.268   -0.612    33.694    34.286   33.747    32.937
 Composite (Cachec=3 )     0.333    0.136    -0.278   -0.780    33.719    33.950   33.817    32.855
 Composite (Cachec=5 )     0.329    0.084    -0.298   -0.810    33.661    33.731   33.650    32.422
   LoraHub(CacheD )        0.388    0.157    -0.410   -0.574    35.257    35.221   34.582    34.412
       LoraHub             0.399    0.154    -0.340   -0.532    35.316    35.525   34.476    33.885
  LoraHub (Cachec=2 )      0.364    0.040    -0.408   -0.624    35.094    35.164   34.291    32.049
  LoraHub (Cachec=3 )      0.366    0.032    -0.476   -0.652    35.172    35.100   33.538    31.764
  LoraHub (Cachec=5 )      0.330    0.027    -0.496   -0.666    34.834    34.928   33.662    30.694
  CMLoRA (CacheD )         0.421    0.244    -0.160   -0.324    35.543    35.600   35.528    35.355
      CMLoRA               0.455    0.242    -0.112   -0.310    35.556    35.555   35.791    35.691
  Switch-A (CacheD )       0.346    0.170    -0.258   -0.415    35.484    35.964   35.265    35.655
       Switch-A            0.525    0.227    -0.205   -0.488    35.705    35.912   35.661    34.479
 Switch-A (Cachec=2 )      0.278    0.226    -0.241   -0.419    34.465    35.589   35.296    35.404
 Switch-A (Cachec=3 )      0.386   -1.602    -0.267   -0.435    35.301    35.089   35.450    35.430
 Switch-A (Cachec=5 )      0.484    0.109    -0.226   -0.493    35.036    35.371   35.511    35.065
 CMLoRA (Cachec=2 )        0.417    0.214    -0.174   -0.352    35.222    35.548   35.432    35.063
 CMLoRA (Cachec=3 )        0.382    0.179    -0.190   -0.406    34.876    35.076   35.359    34.823
 CMLoRA (Cachec=5 )        0.389    0.196    -0.262   -0.402    34.440    35.426   34.742    34.222



                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Comparison of ImageReward and ClipScore with the selected LoRA integration methods
under different number of Reality LoRAs in the ComposLoRA testbed.


                                   ImageReward                          ClipScore
         Model
                          N=2     N=3      N=4      N=5       N=2      N=3      N=4      N=5
    Merge (CacheD )      0.849    0.717    0.071    -0.274   32.133   32.686   32.787   32.603
         Merge           0.922    0.741    0.145    -0.299   32.316   32.857   32.633   32.091
   Merge (Cachec=2 )     0.805    0.726    0.015    -0.376   31.925   32.759   32.408   31.534
   Merge (Cachec=3 )     0.796    0.663   -0.011    -0.508   31.253   32.600   32.588   32.449
   Merge (Cachec=5 )     0.771    0.572    0.007    -0.445   32.067   32.112   32.408   32.017
    Switch (CacheD )     1.225    1.233    0.952     0.642   35.545   34.647   34.323   32.765
         Switch          1.217    1.141    0.864     0.554   35.502   34.731   34.424   32.801
   Switch (Cachec=2 )    0.839    1.116    0.835     0.405   34.636   34.305   35.050   33.373
   Switch (Cachec=3 )    1.051    1.047    0.812     0.578   35.189   34.469   35.056   33.372
   Switch (Cachec=5 )    1.038    1.037    0.725     0.491   35.296   34.316   34.376   33.203
  Composite (CacheD )    1.224    0.934    0.667     0.498   35.469   33.836   35.373   32.305
       Composite         1.011    0.933    0.654     0.380   35.804   33.786   35.443   32.228
 Composite (Cachec=2 )   1.040    0.956    0.638     0.227   35.469   34.393   35.309   31.921
 Composite (Cachec=3 )   0.992    0.889    0.628     0.158   35.070   33.857   35.373   31.852
 Composite (Cachec=5 )   0.881    0.870    0.617     0.176   34.864   33.623   34.297   31.348
   LoraHub (CacheD )     1.093    1.077    0.923     0.680   35.961   34.617   35.687   32.905
        LoraHub          1.096    1.127    0.907     0.693   36.045   34.729   35.463   33.084
  LoraHub (Cachec=2 )    1.033    1.025    0.905     0.631   35.486   34.470   34.687   32.752
  LoraHub (Cachec=3 )    1.059    0.992    0.873     0.642   35.277   34.355   34.561   32.727
  LoraHub (Cachec=5 )    0.907    0.991    0.885     0.651   35.271   34.254   34.510   32.590
  CMLoRA (CacheD )       1.216    1.156   1.051      0.697   35.302   34.829   34.888   33.326
      CMLoRA             1.165    1.188   0.942      0.613   35.559   35.842   34.501   33.588
  Switch-A (CacheD )     1.262    1.094   0.758      0.621   34.793   34.802   34.595   32.845
       Switch-A          0.817    1.096   0.811      0.591   35.196   34.854   34.694   32.252
 Switch-A (Cachec=2 )    1.241    1.098   0.885      0.628   35.138   34.691   34.141   32.232
 Switch-A (Cachec=3 )    1.222    1.129   0.899      0.544   35.363   34.733   34.141   32.622
 Switch-A (Cachec=5 )    1.261    1.141   0.911      0.697   34.947   34.902   33.962   32.468
 CMLoRA (Cachec=2 )      0.977    1.117   0.960      0.314   35.259   34.357   34.388   33.219
 CMLoRA (Cachec=3 )      1.090    0.986   0.829      0.035   34.773   34.180   34.081   32.948
 CMLoRA (Cachec=5 )      0.951    1.031   0.711     -0.204   34.559   34.302   34.291   32.125


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Element-wise Average of ImageReward and ClipScore with the selected LoRA integration
methods under different numbers of Anime and Reality LoRAs in the ComposLoRA testbed.


                                     ImageReward                              ClipScore
         Model
                            N=2      N=3       N=4      N=5       N=2      N=3       N=4       N=5
    Merge (CacheD )        0.604    0.472    -0.196    -0.390   33.554    33.917    33.465    32.654
         Merge             0.640    0.476    -0.101    -0.444   33.726    34.139    33.399    32.364
   Merge (Cachec=2 )       0.579    0.457    -0.206    -0.519   32.928    33.999    32.996    31.836
   Merge (Cachec=3 )       0.558    0.414    -0.228    -0.591   32.887    33.596    33.326    32.004
   Merge (Cachec=5 )       0.542    0.289    -0.239    -0.515   33.360    33.391    32.929    31.971
    Switch (CacheD )       0.821    0.667     0.388     0.160   35.528    35.112    34.845    34.056
         Switch            0.821    0.674     0.340     0.124   35.394    35.107    34.478    33.475
   Switch (Cachec=2 )      0.622    0.650     0.326     0.006   34.889    34.559    34.693    33.743
   Switch (Cachec=3 )      0.720    0.602     0.313     0.107   35.182    34.968    34.670    33.742
   Switch (Cachec=5 )      0.708    0.571     0.270     0.053   35.213    34.752    34.264    33.501
  Composite (CacheD )      0.795    0.529     0.221     0.105   35.295    34.984    34.981    33.097
       Composite           0.686    0.540     0.220    -0.104   35.073    34.082    34.802    32.582
 Composite (Cachec=2 )     0.694    0.550     0.185    -0.193   34.582    34.339    34.528    32.929
 Composite (Cachec=3 )     0.663    0.513     0.175    -0.311   34.394    33.904    34.595    32.353
 Composite (Cachec=5 )     0.605    0.477     0.160    -0.317   34.262    33.677    33.974    31.885
   LoraHub (CacheD )       0.740    0.617     0.256     0.053   35.609    34.919    35.135    33.659
        LoraHub            0.748    0.640     0.284     0.081   35.681    35.127    34.970    33.485
  LoraHub (Cachec=2 )      0.699    0.533     0.248     0.004   35.290    34.817    34.489    32.401
  LoraHub (Cachec=3 )      0.713    0.512     0.198    -0.005   35.225    34.728    34.050    32.245
  LoraHub (Cachec=5 )      0.619    0.509     0.195    -0.008   35.053    34.591    34.086    31.642
  CMLoRA (CacheD )         0.819     0.700    0.446     0.186   35.422    35.215    35.208    34.341
      CMLoRA               0.810     0.715    0.415     0.151   35.558    35.699    35.146    34.640
  Switch-A (CacheD )       0.804     0.632    0.250     0.103   35.139    35.383    34.930    34.250
       Switch-A            0.671     0.662    0.303     0.052   35.451    35.383    35.177    33.366
 Switch-A (Cachec=2 )      0.760     0.662    0.322     0.105   34.802    35.140    34.718    33.818
 Switch-A (Cachec=3 )      0.804    -0.236    0.316     0.055   35.332    34.911    34.796    34.026
 Switch-A (Cachec=5 )      0.872     0.125    0.342     0.102   34.992    35.137    34.736    33.766
 CMLoRA (Cachec=2 )        0.697     0.666    0.393    -0.019   35.241    34.953    34.910    34.141
 CMLoRA (Cachec=3 )        0.736     0.583    0.320    -0.186   34.825    34.628    34.720    33.885
 CMLoRA (Cachec=5 )        0.670     0.614    0.225    -0.303   34.499    34.864    34.516    33.174


B.2   C OMPUTATIONAL C OST A NALYSIS


Across the investigated caching mechanisms, our proposed caching mechanism CacheD demon-
strates the best performance, indicating that multi-LoRA composition methods utilizing CacheD
degrade the semantic accuracy and aesthetic quality of the generated images the least. While the
computational cost of the cache mechanism CacheD lies between that of uniform caching mecha-
nisms Cachec=2 and Cachec=3 , multi-LoRA composition methods with CacheD outperform those
using other uniform caching mechanisms, as shown in Table 4. Notably, CacheD can achieve, and
in some cases surpass, the performance of advanced multi-LoRA composition methods, such as
Switch-A and CMLoRA, especially as the number of composed LoRAs N increases. Visual demon-
strations of these results are provided in Figures 13 to 16. However, we find that there also exists
a trade-off between the performance of multi-LoRA composition methods and their computational
cost. Although CMLoRA achieves superior performance compared to Merge and Switch, it comes
with higher computational costs. For instance, at N = 2, CMLoRA incurs 912.350 G MACs com-
pared to 789.770 G for Merge and 734.053 G for Switch. Similarly, at N = 5, CMLoRA reaches
1570.335 G MACs, significantly higher than 946.721 G for Merge and 731.811 G for Switch.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Comparison of Multiply-Accumulate Operations (MACs) with the selected LoRA integra-
tion methods under different number of LoRAs.

                                                                    MACs
                  Model
                                           N=2                N=3              N=4               N=5
            Merge (CacheD )              481.965 G        515.452 G          582.421 G       599.164 G
                 Merge                   789.770 G        834.613 G          924.299 G       946.721 G
           Merge (Cachec=2 )             525.940 G        561.047 G          631.261 G       648.815 G
           Merge (Cachec=3 )             437.990 G        469.858 G          533.582 G       549.513 G
           Merge (Cachec=5 )             367.642 G        396.907 G          455.439 G       470.071 G
            Switch (CacheD )             440.406 G        438.067 G          444.335 G       438.736 G
                 Switch                  734.053 G        730.914 G          739.322 G       731.811 G
           Switch (Cachec=2 )            482.356 G        479.902 G          486.476 G       480.604 G
           Switch (Cachec=3 )            398.457 G        396.232 G          402.194 G       396.868 G
           Switch (Cachec=5 )            331.337 G        329.295 G          334.768 G       329.879 G
          Composite(CacheD )             830.898 G       1341.700 G         1788.934 G      2236.167 G
              Composite                 1401.066 G       2169.199 G         2892.266 G      3615.333 G
         Composite (Cachec=2 )           912.350 G       1459.914 G         1946.553 G      2433.191 G
         Composite (Cachec=3 )           749.445 G       1223.486 G         1631.315 G      2039.143 G
         Composite (Cachec=5 )           619.121 G       1034.343 G         1379.124 G      1723.905 G
           LoraHub(CacheD )              481.965 G        515.452 G          582.421 G       599.164 G
               LoraHub                   789.770 G        834.613 G          924.299 G       946.721 G
          LoraHub (Cachec=2 )            525.940 G        561.047 G          631.261 G       648.815 G
          LoraHub (Cachec=3 )            437.990 G        469.858 G          533.582 G       549.513 G
          LoraHub (Cachec=5 )            367.642 G        396.907 G          455.439 G       470.071 G
          Switch-A (CacheD )            440.406 G         438.067 G          444.335 G       438.736 G
               Switch-A                 734.053 G         730.914 G          739.322 G       731.811 G
         Switch-A (Cachec=2 )           482.356 G         479.902 G          486.476 G       480.604 G
         Switch-A (Cachec=3 )           398.457 G         396.232 G          402.194 G       396.868 G
         Switch-A (Cachec=5 )           331.337 G         329.295 G          334.768 G       329.879 G
          CMLoRA (CacheD )              627.265 G         947.652 G         1060.289 G      1272.106 G
              CMLoRA                    912.350 G        1223.486 G         1358.518 G      1570.335 G
         CMLoRA (Cachec=2 )             667.992 G         987.057 G         1102.893 G      1314.711 G
         CMLoRA (Cachec=3 )             586.539 G         908.248 G         1017.685 G      1229.502 G
         CMLoRA (Cachec=5 )             521.377 G         845.201 G          949.519 G      1161.336 G


B.3   MLLM E VALUATION



Table 6: Average performance metrics for images generated by different base models, evaluated
by MiniCPM across four criteria: Element Integration, Spatial Consistency, Semantic Accuracy,
Aesthetic Quality, and their average.

                                              MiniCPM Evaluation
       Model      Element Integration   Spatial Consistency   Semantic Accuracy   Aesthetic Quality    Average
        Naive           7.041                 6.815                 5.127                8.129          6.778
      CMLoRA            7.935                 7.968                 7.993                8.675          8.393
      Switch-A          7.162                 7.020                 6.505                7.683          7.093
        Merge           6.983                 6.715                 6.345                7.583          6.906
        Switch          7.175                 6.995                 6.533                7.735          7.110
      Composite         7.088                 6.983                 6.505                7.685          7.065
       LoraHub          7.135                 7.007                 6.543                7.740          7.106



                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Average performance metrics for different models with our cache mechanism, evaluated by
MiniCPM across four criteria: Element Integration, Spatial Consistency, Semantic Accuracy, and
Aesthetic Quality, along with their average.

                                               MiniCPM Evaluation
       Model           Element Integration   Spatial Consistency   Semantic Accuracy   Aesthetic Quality   Average
 CMLoRA (CacheD )            7.955                 7.973                 7.978              8.665           8.143
 Switch-A (CacheD )          7.283                 7.132                 6.643              7.778           7.209
   Merge (CacheD )           6.933                 6.735                 6.343              7.550           6.765
   Switch (CacheD )          7.118                 6.993                 6.258              7.725           6.773
 Composite (CacheD )         7.378                 7.170                 6.720              7.900           7.292
  LoraHub (CacheD )          7.160                 6.993                 6.553              7.738           7.111


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P RESENTATION OF G ENERATED I MAGE ACROSS E VALUATED
      M ULTI -L O RA M ETHODS

C.1   D EMONSTRATION OF A NIME M ULTI -L O RA C OMPOSITION


Figure 11: Generated images with different N LoRA candidates (L1 Character, L2 Clothing, L3
Style, L4 Background and L5 Object) across our proposed framework and baseline methods.


Figure 12: Generated images with different N LoRA candidates (M 1 Character, M 2 Clothing, M 3
Style, M 4 Background and M 5 Object) across our proposed framework and baseline methods.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Generated images with different N LoRA candidates (S1 Character, S2 Clothing, S3
Background and S4 Object) across CMLoRA with different caching mechanisms.


Figure 14: Generated images with different N LoRA candidates (S1 Character, S2 Clothing, S3
Background and S4 Object) across Merge with different caching mechanisms.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Generated images with different N LoRA candidates (S1 Character, S2 Clothing, S3
Background and S4 Object) across Switch with different caching mechanisms.


Figure 16: Generated images with different N LoRA candidates (S1 Character, S2 Clothing, S3
Background and S4 Object) across Composite with different caching mechanisms.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   D EMONSTRATION OF R EALITY M ULTI -L O RA C OMPOSITION


Figure 17: Generated images with different N LoRA candidates (R1 Character, R2 Clothing, R3
Style, R4 Background and R5 Object) across our proposed framework and baseline methods.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     L IMITATIONS AND FAILURE C ASES


There are some limitations of our work. First, it is important to note that there is a lack of a detailed
image generation class taxonomy. This gap poses challenges in systematically classifying well-
defined conceptual groups, particularly due to the semantic overlaps that inherently exist among
some conceptual categories. These overlaps blur the boundaries between different conceptual cat-
egories, making it difficult to establish a robust and well-defined multi-LoRA composition testbed.
However, if different LoRA categories possess distinct frequency characteristics, our proposed CM-
LoRA approach can still perform effectively. Secondly, as a training-free method, CMLoRA oper-
ates independently of additional prior knowledge related to region or layout features, such as bound-
ing box constraints or masked attention maps. This characteristic simplifies its deployment but also
introduces certain limitations in handling spatial relationships effectively. As a result, CMLoRA
struggles to effectively combine multiple LoRAs within similar semantic categories. This limitation
is particularly problematic when multiple concepts within the same conceptual category need to be
localized independently. The absence of explicit mechanisms for managing these localizations can
lead to potential semantic conflicts, such as concept vanishing or distortion. These issues become
especially pronounced when the frequency spectra of overlapping concepts interfere excessively.
Finally, we initially employ the traditional image metric, CLIPScore, to evaluate the comprehensive
image generation capabilities of all multi-LoRA composition methods. While CLIPScore performs
well to evaluate general image-text alignment within its domains, it encounters limitations when
applied to scenarios requiring the assessment of out-of-distribution (OOD) concepts, such as user-
specific instances. Its evaluations fall short in capturing specific compositional and quality aspects,
as it lacks the capability to discern the nuanced features of individual elements (Zhong et al., 2024).
This limitation inherently results in a compressed range of evaluation scores for multi-LoRA com-
position methods, causing improvements to appear marginal despite significant advancements in
comprehensive compositional quality. To address this evaluation gap, we leverage the capabilities
of multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) to evaluate composable multi-concept image gen-
eration in Section 3.2.2.



D.1   D EMONSTRATION OF FAILURE C ASES IN M ULTI -L O RA C OMPOSITION


Figure 18: Generated images with different N LoRA candidates (F 1 Character, F 2 Animal, F 3
Background and F 4 Building) across our proposed framework and baseline methods.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     E VALUATION M ETHODOLOGY
Existing traditional image generation metrics primarily focus on text-image alignment but often
overlook the complexity of individual elements within an image and the quality of their composition.
Thus, we construct the following evaluation pipeline based on the MLLM.

E.1   E VALUATION P IPELINE

Image generation: Use both models to generate images based on the same set of prompts (both
simple and complex).
In-context few-shot learning: Give a few evaluation examples to the evaluator.
Blind scoring: Let the evaluator rate the images based on the criteria without knowing which model
created them.
Score aggregation: Average the scores for each dimension across all prompts to identify overall
performance trends.
Comparative analysis: Compare the total and individual dimension scores between models to draw
insights on strengths and weaknesses.

E.2   I MAGE E VALUATION M ETRICS

1) E LEMENT I NTEGRATION

Score on a scale of 0 to 10, in 0.5 increments, where 10 is the best and 0 is the worst.
Description: How seamlessly different elements are combined within the image.
Criteria:
       • Visual Cohesion: Assess whether elements appear as part of a unified scene rather than
         disjointed parts.
       • Object Overlap and Interaction: Check for natural overlaps and interactions between
         objects, avoiding unnatural placements or intersections.

2) S PATIAL C ONSISTENCY

Score on a scale of 0 to 10, in 0.5 increments, where 10 is the best and 0 is the worst.
Description: Uniformity in style, lighting, and perspective across all elements.
Criteria:
       • Stylistic Uniformity: All elements should share a consistent artistic style (e.g., realism,
         cartoonish).
       • Lighting and Shadows: Ensure consistent light sources and shadow directions to maintain
         realism.
       • Perspective Alignment: Elements should adhere to a common perspective, avoiding mis-
         matched viewpoints.

3) S EMANTIC ACCURACY

Score on a scale of 0 to 10, in 0.5 increments, where 10 is the best and 0 is the worst.
Description: Correct interpretation and representation of each element as described in the prompt.
Criteria:
       • Object Accuracy: Objects should match their descriptions in type, attributes, and context.
       • Action and Interaction: Actions or interactions between objects should be depicted cor-
         rectly.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4) A ESTHETIC Q UALITY

Score on a scale of 0 to 10, in 0.5 increments, where 10 is the best and 0 is the worst.
Description: Overall visual appeal and artistic quality of the generated image.
Criteria:

       • Color Harmony: Use of color palettes that are visually pleasing and appropriate for the
         scene.
       • Composition Balance: Balanced arrangement of elements to create an engaging composi-
         tion.
       • Clarity and Sharpness: Images should be clear, with well-defined elements and no un-
         wanted blurriness.

F    A BLATION A NALYSIS
To enhance our understanding of the proposed methods, we further conduct the following ablation
studies in the field of LoRA fusion sequence and caching strategy of non-dominant LoRA based on
our proposed CMLoRA.
Dominant LoRA Order Sequence Determination Building on our previous discussions, we can
identify optimal dominant LoRA candidates during the denoising process, leading us to formulate
the following combination optimization problem: How to derive the denoising range (step-length)
of the activated dominant LoRA?
Utilizing the structure of our Cached Multi-LoRA (CMLoRA) framework, feature maps generated
by different LoRAs can be dynamically fused at each inference step. We define the total denoising
range (step-length) for a dominant LoRA i as Di . In our configuration, we assume that each LoRA
contributes equally, leading us to allocate the dominant range Di uniformly across all active LoRAs
throughout the inference process.
                                                                                       −1
Consider a scenario with a total of T denoising steps and N LoRAs. We set Di = ⌊ TN       ⌋, ∀i. We
have high-frequency LoRA set H and low-frequency LoRA set L. Inspired by the LoRA switch
mechanism, we implement a cyclic pattern of dominant LoRAs among the candidates in set H
at the beginning of the denoising process, switching the dominant LoRA every step. To ensure
convergence during the denoising process, we designate to use the low-frequency LoRA from the
low-frequency LoRA set L at the end of Di steps. By implementing this approach, we effectively
harness the pronounced dynamics of high-frequency components while simultaneously benefiting
from the stabilizing attributes of low-frequency elements, ultimately leading to visual consistency
of multi-LoRA composition.

Dominant LoRA Scale wdom For the dominant LoRA, we assign a weight denoted as wdom . For
                                                              N
the non-dominant LoRAs, we set their weights as wnon = wdom +N    −1 , where N is the total number
of composed LoRAs. To regulate wdom during the diffusion process, we employ a decaying method.
This decaying strategy not only stabilizes the denoising process but also plays a critical role in
reducing semantic conflicts between different LoRAs. By gradually attenuating the influence of the
dominant LoRAs as the denoising process progresses, it prevents abrupt changes in texture and edge
features that could disrupt with global structures. This ensures smoother transitions between the
contributions of various LoRAs, leading to a more harmonious integration of both high- and low-
frequency components. As a result, the overall semantic coherence is preserved, minimizing the risk
of feature misalignment.
We initially set the dominant weight scale wdom to N − α, where N is the total number of activated
LoRAs and α ∈ R+ . This choice allows us to balance the contribution of the dominant LoRA against
the collective contribution of the non-dominant LoRAs. To optimize this balance, we conduct a grid
search over α in set {0.1, 0.2, · · · , 0.8, 0.9} By adjusting α, we can finetune the influence of the
dominant LoRA, ensuring it does not overpower the others. Then we choose the optimal α = 0.5.
Based on the principle that high-frequency components display more pronounced dynamics dur-
ing the early stage of the denoising process (Si et al., 2024), this weight scale is adjusted using


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a decaying method. For the i-th turn of switching the dominant LoRA, the weight is define as:
  i      i−1
wdom = wdom  − 0.5i .


Caching Interval and Modulation Hyper-parameters c1 , c2 To capture the similarity trend of
feature maps fused by LoRAs, we propose a non-uniform caching interval strategy with two spe-
cialized hyper-parameters: c1 , c2 ∈ Z. These hyper-parameters control the strength of the caching
behavior during inference. Specifically, for a denoising process with T timesteps, the sequence of
timesteps that performs full inference is:

               I = I1 ∪ I2 ∪ I3
              I1 = {c1 · t | 0 ≤ c1 · t < ⌊0.4 · T ⌋ , where t ∈ Z}
                                                                                                   (17)
              I2 = {⌊0.4 · T ⌋ + c2 · t | ⌊0.4 · T ⌋ ≤ c2 · t < ⌊0.9 · T ⌋ , where t ∈ Z}
              I3 = {⌊0.9 · T ⌋ + c1 · t | ⌊0.9 · T ⌋ ≤ c1 · t < T, where t ∈ Z}.


The discrete interval I4 = [⌊0.4 · T ⌋ , ⌊0.9 · T ⌋] = {k ∈ Z | k = 5n, n ∈ Z, ⌊0.4 · T ⌋ ≤ k ≤
⌊0.9 · T ⌋} are established based on the condition that the average similarity st of the cached features
at timestep t in a interval exceeds 20% within a 90% confidence interval. Since we have only finite
discrete samples, we conduct our calculation based on the Monte Carlo method. Formally, ∀t ∈ I4 ,
P (0.2 ∈ [st − std(st ), st + std(st )]) = 0.9, where P is the probability averaged on the similarity
st of the cached features for all discrete timesteps t ∈ I4 and std is the standard deviation of st at
timestep t.
Given that cached LoRA features exhibit greater similarity in I4 compare to I \ I4 , we intuitively
select c1 < c2 . This selection is informed by a grid search over the pairs (c1 , c2 ) in the Cartesian
product of two discrete sets [1, 5] × [1, 5]. When c1 < c2 < 4, we find that there is minimal variation
in the content of the image, accompanied by only slight fluctuations in the CLIP Score. We observe
a performance deterioration if we choose 5 < c1 < c2 . Finally, we obtain the optimal caching
modulation hyperparameters: (2, 3).


F.1   O RDER OF L O RA ACTIVATION

Zhong et al. (2024) propose that The initial choice of LoRA in the activation sequence clearly in-
fluences overall performance, while alterations in the subsequent order have minimal impact, so
we conduct the following ablation study to demonstrate the effectiveness of our LoRA fusion order
based on frequency partition.


Table 8: Comparison of ClipScore with the selected LoRA integration methods under different
number of LoRAs.

                                                       Average ClipScore
                                        Model
                                                        N=4       N=5
                                 CMLoRA (Character)    34.258    33.901
                                 CMLoRA (Clothing)     34.188    33.870
                                  CMLoRA (Style)       34.256    33.954
                                CMLoRA (Background)    34.224    33.807
                                 CMLoRA (Random)       34.166    33.745
                                    CMLoRA             35.528    35.355


F.2   C ACHE I NTERVAL

Additionally, we compare our proposed caching strategy with other uniform caching methods,
demonstrating that our approach outperforms them.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Comparison of ClipScore with the selected LoRA integration methods under different
number of LoRAs.

              Model          ClipScore (N=2)   ClipScore (N=3)   ClipScore (N=4)   ClipScore (N=5)
         CMLoRA (CacheD )        35.422            35.215            35.208            34.341
        CMLoRA (Cachec=2 )       35.241            34.953            34.910            34.141
        CMLoRA (Cachec=3 )       34.825            34.628            34.720            33.885
        CMLoRA (Cachec=5 )       34.499            34.864            34.516            33.174


Figure 19: Results of Computational Cost of Different Cache Methods. MACs refer to Multiple-
Accumulate Operations.


                                                  29
