Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S ELF -E VOLVING M ULTI -AGENT C OLLABORATION N ET-
WORKS FOR S OFTWARE D EVELOPMENT

 Yue Hu1 , Yuzhu Cai2,3 , Yaxin Du1 , Xinyu Zhu1 , Xiangrui Liu1 , Zijie Yu1 ,
 Yuchen Hou1 , Shuo Tang1 , Siheng Chen1,3
 1
   Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Beihang University, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
 1
   {1867112931,sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn, 2 caiyuzhu@buaa.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT

         LLM-driven multi-agent collaboration (MAC) systems have demonstrated impres-
         sive capabilities in automatic software development at the function level. How-
         ever, their heavy reliance on human design limits their adaptability to the diverse
         demands of real-world software development. To address this limitation, we in-
         troduce EvoMAC, a novel self-evolving paradigm for MAC networks. Inspired
         by traditional neural network training, EvoMAC obtains text-based environmen-
         tal feedback by verifying the MAC network’s output against a target proxy and
         leverages a novel textual backpropagation to update the network. To extend cod-
         ing capabilities beyond function-level tasks to more challenging software-level
         development, we further propose rSDE-Bench, a requirement-oriented software de-
         velopment benchmark, which features complex and diverse software requirements
         along with automatic evaluation of requirement correctness. Our experiments
         show that: i) The automatic requirement-aware evaluation in rSDE-Bench closely
         aligns with human evaluations, validating its reliability as a software-level cod-
         ing benchmark. ii) EvoMAC outperforms previous SOTA methods on both the
         software-level rSDE-Bench and the function-level HumanEval benchmarks, re-
         flecting its superior coding capabilities. The benchmark can be downloaded at
         https://yuzhu-cai.github.io/rSDE-Bench/.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Automatic software development focuses on generating code from natural language requirements.
Code is a universal problem-solving tool, and this automation presents significant potential to
provide substantial benefits across all areas of our lives Li et al. (2022a). Recently, the industry
has introduced several large language model (LLM)-driven coding assistants, including Microsoft’s
Copilot Microsoft (2023), Amazon’s CodeWhisperer Amazon (2022), and Google’s Codey Google
(2023). These coding assistants significantly advance human efficiency and yield considerable
commercial benefits. Despite the initial success of LLMs in assisting with line-level coding, they
struggle to tackle more complex coding tasks. This limitation stems from the restricted reasoning
abilities of single LLMs and their lack of capacity for long-context understanding Wang et al. (2024a);
Li et al. (2024a); Wang et al. (2024b).
To handle function-level coding tasks, numerous multiple language agent collaboration (MAC)
systems have been proposed Li et al. (2023); Hong et al. (2023); Chan et al. (2024); Islam et al.
(2024); Yang et al. (2024b); Li et al. (2022b); Osika (2023). These MAC systems function as LLM-
driven agentic workflow. They follow human-designed standardized operating procedures to divide
the complex coding tasks into simpler subtasks within the workflow, allowing each agent to conquer
specific subtasks. These MAC systems significantly advance coding capabilities from line-level to
function-level tasks. However, current MAC systems rely on heuristic designs. These human-crafted
static systems have two inherent limitations: i) their performance is confined to human initialization.
Given the diversity of real-world coding tasks, human design cannot fully address the specific needs
of each task; and ii) they lack the flexibility to adapt to new tasks. This rigidity necessitates that
researchers and developers manually decompose tasks and create prompts. The complexity of this
process inhibits effective human optimization for adapting to new challenges.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To address these limitations, we present EvoMAC, a novel self-evolving paradigm for MAC networks.
EvoMAC’s key feature is its ability to iteratively adapt both agents and their connections during
test time for each task. Inspired from the standard neural network training, the core idea of self-
evolution is to obtain text-based environmental feedback by verifying the MAC network’s generation
against a target proxy, then leverage a novel textual back-propagation to update the MAC network.
Following this general paradigm, we specify EvoMAC for software development, which comprises
three essential components: i) an adaptable MAC network-based coding team that generates code
through feed-forward; ii) a specifically designed testing team that creates unit test cases serving as
the target proxy and verifies the generated code in the compiler to produce objective feedback; and
iii) an updating team that uses the textual back-propagation algorithm to update the coding team. By
cycling these three components, the coding team can iteratively evolve and generate codes that are
better aligned with the unit test cases, eventually fulfilling more requirements of the coding task.
Our self-evolving MAC network has the potential to further advance coding capabilities from function-
level to more complex software-level tasks. As it can iteratively address lengthier task requirements
and cater to realistic software development demands. However, existing benchmarks typically focus
on specific individual functions Chen et al. (2021); Austin et al. (2021); Yang et al. (2024a); Khan
et al. (2023) or bug-fixing Jimenez et al. (2023), leaving a significant gap in providing comprehensive
requirements for software development. This gap makes it difficult to fully assess the potential of our
self-evolving MAC network.
To support the development of software-level coding capabilities, we propose rSDE-Bench, a novel
requirement-oriented software development benchmark. It is the first benchmark that features both
complex and diverse software requirements, as well as the automatic evaluation of requirement
correctness. rSDE-Bench involves 53 coding tasks with 616 requirements, covering two typical
software types, Website, and Game, and two requirement difficulty levels, Basic and Advanced. Each
coding task consists of two components: i) multiple requirements that clearly outline measurable
software functionalities, item by item, and ii) paired black-box test cases that automatically verify
the correctness of each requirement. rSDE-Bench can achieve automatic evaluation with these
synchronized pairs of requirements and test cases. The rSDE-Bench introduces new software-level
challenges, including lengthy requirement analysis and long-context coding, which are essential in
real-world software development but are absent in existing benchmarks.
To validate the effectiveness of our proposed EvoMAC and rSDE-Bench, we conduct three key
evaluations. First, we compare our automatic evaluation in rSDE-Bench with human evaluation,
achieving a coherence score of 99.22%, demonstrating its reliability. Second, we compare EvoMAC
against five multi-agent and three single-agent baselines. EvoMAC significantly outperforms previous
SOTAs by 26.48%, 34.78%, and 6.10% on Website Basic, Game Basic, and HumanEval, respectively,
underscoring its effectiveness. Third, we evaluate EvoMAC with varying evolving times and two
different driving LLMs. The results indicate that EvoMAC consistently improves with more evolving
times and shows convincing enhancements regardless of the driving LLM used, further demonstrating
the effectiveness of our self-evolving design.
To sum up, our contributions are:
• We propose EvoMAC, a novel self-evolving MAC network, and apply it to software development.
EvoMAC can iteratively adapt both agents and their connections during test time for each task.
• We propose rSDE-Bench, a novel requirement-oriented software development benchmark. It is
the first benchmark that features both complex and diverse software requirements, as well as the
automatic evaluation of requirement correctness.
• We conduct comprehensive experiments and validate that: automatic evaluation in rSDE-Bench is
highly aligned with human evaluation; EvoMAC outperforms previous SOTAs, and self-evolving
promises continuous improvement with evolving times.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
LLM-based multi-agent collaboration. LLM-driven multi-agent collaboration (MAC) systems Xu
et al. (2023); Hua et al. (2023); Ziems et al. (2024); Wu et al. (2023); Hong et al. (2023); Chan et al.
(2024); Mandi et al. (2024a) enable multiple agents to share information and collaboratively complete
the overall task. These MAC systems function as agentic workflows. They have demonstrated
enhanced problem-solving capabilities in various domains, such as mathematics Islam et al. (2024),


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


software development Qian et al. (2023); Hong et al. (2023), embodied task Mandi et al. (2024b)
and social simulation Ziems et al. (2024); Pang et al. (2024); Li et al. (2024b). However, these
systems Wu et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023) heavily rely on manually designed workflows, which
lack generalizability and the labor-intensive nature of manual design poses significant limitations. To
address this issue, we propose a novel self-evolving paradigm, which allows agents to update and
improve through external feedback, enabling dynamic adaptation and more advanced performance
across varied tasks.
Software development benchmarks. Software development benchmarks aim to evaluate models in
the task of generating code from natural language descriptions Zheng et al. (2023). These benchmarks
typically include task definitions and evaluation criteria. Existing benchmarks can be categorized
into three types: i) function completion (HumanEval Chen et al. (2021), MBPP Austin et al. (2021),
EvalPlus Liu et al. (2023), xCodeEval Khan et al. (2023)); ii) bug repair (SWE-bench Jimenez et al.
(2023)); and iii) software generation (SRDD Qian et al. (2023), SoftwareDev Hong et al. (2023)).
Function completion and bug repair benchmarks are confined to function-level task definitions,
missing the diverse realistic software requirements. Software generation benchmarks often depend
on expensive human evaluations or indirect similarity-based measurements, unable to automatically
and accurately verify the requirement correctness. To address these limitations, we introduce rSDE-
Bench, the first benchmark contains both diverse software requirements and automatic evaluation
of requirement correctness. It can support the development of more realistic software-level coding
capabilities.

3     E VO MAC: S ELF -E VOLVING M ULTI -AGENT C OLLABORATION N ETWORK
This section presents EvoMAC, a novel self-evolving multi-agent collaboration network and its
application to software development. The key feature of EvoMAC is its ability to iteratively adapt
both agents and their connections during test-time for each task, mimicking the back-propagation
process, a core algorithm in neural network training. We first formulate a general self-evolving
paradigm in Sec. 3.1 and then describe its application to software development in Sec. 3.2.

3.1   A GENERAL SELF - EVOLVING PARADIGM VIA TEXTUAL BACKPROPAGATION
Multi-agent collaboration network. A multi-agent collaboration (MAC) network is a computational
graph representing agentic workflows, where multiple agents empowered by LLMs interact as
interconnected nodes to coordinate and share information for complex task-solving. The intuition
behind to divide the complex task into more specific and manageable subtasks for each agent,
allowing the overall task to be gradually conquered through the agentic workflow. Mathematically, we
represent a MAC network with N autonomous agents as a directed acyclic graph A = (V, E), where
V = {vi }Ni=1 is the set of N nodes, and E = {ei,j }i,j∈[1,...,N ],i̸=j is the set of directed edges with no
circles. The i-th node vi represents the i-th autonomous agent with the prompt pi , which specifies
its subtask. The edge ei,j represents the task dependency between the i-th agent and the j-th agent,
indicating that the j-th agent’s subtask should be executed after the i-th agent’s subtask in the agentic
workflow. The overall graph topology specifies the agentic workflow. Analogy to traditional neural
networks, agents function similarly to neurons, with agent prompts serving as neurons’ weights and
the agentic workflow as the layers and connections.
The feed-forward pass of MAC network is the execution of the agentic workflow. In this process,
each agent is given two inputs: the initial task requirement and the output from the previous agent.
Using these, each agent produces an output that fulfills its specific subtask. Eventually, the last
agent’s generation constitutes the final output, integrating all completed subtasks. Note that the initial
task requirement is input to each agent as context, providing supplementary details to aid in the
implementation of each subtask.
Recently, various MAC networks have been designed using human expertise to assign fixed agent
prompts and workflows Hong et al. (2023); Chan et al. (2024), resembling untrained neural networks.
However, these designs solely rely on human priors and lack adaptability, causing limited performance
improvement over a single agent. To overcome this, inspired by neural network training, we propose
a self-evolving paradigm for multi-agent collaboration networks, enabling both agents and their
connections to dynamically evolve during test-time for each given task.
Optimization problem. Here we consider a general generation task. During test-time, given a task,
the MAC network performs a feed-forward pass to generate the final output without knowing its


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Figure 1: The general self-evolving paradigm.

quality. The key to evolution during test-time is to set up a target proxy for the MAC network to
guide its improvements in the generated output. Here we consider this target proxy as the conditions
for task completion, such as unit tests in coding, and we can produce such a target proxy by another
group of autonomous agents based on the same task description. Then, the quality of each generated
output can be verified according to the target proxy. This approach relies on two key assumptions:
(i) generating a target proxy is significantly simpler than completing the original generation task,
and (ii) the generated output can be correctly verified against the target proxy through an objective
environment. These assumptions are practical in many applications. For example, in code generation,
producing unit tests, the expected input-output pairs, is much easier than generating the entire code;
meanwhile, a code compiler naturally acts as the objective environment to check the correctness of
the generated code against the unit test, providing objective and informative feedback.
Mathematically, let X be the textual description of a task. Given the MAC network Ag , the generated
output is G = Φ(X, Ag ), where Φ(·, ·) is the general feed-forward operator that executes the
agentic workflow, processing the input text through the MAC network. Similarly, the target proxy is
T = Φ(X, At ), where At is another MAC network designed for producing the target proxy. Note
that we aim to evolve and optimize Ag , while keep At predefined and fixed. The optimization of our
self-evolution is formulated as,

                     A∗g = min ⟨Φ(X, Ag ), T⟩E , subject to: T = Φ (X, At ) ,                        (1)
                            Ag


where ⟨·, ·⟩E is an objective environment executor that receives the generated output and the target
proxy as inputs and outputs a text-based environmental feedback. Akin to the loss function in
traditional neural network training, which quantifies the difference between the generated output and
the ground-truth, the objective in (1) evaluates whether the generated output meets the conditions
of the task completion using the environment, subsequently producing execution reports as the
text-based environmental feedback. Here the minimization operation min is defined to reduce the
failures during execution. With the guidance of the target proxy and the objective feedback given by
the environment, the MAC network can improve its success rate of task completion during test time.
Note that, another straightforward way to enable the MAC network’s evolution is through the self-
critique strategy Zhou et al. (2024); Valmeekam et al. (2023); Xu et al. (2024); Asai et al. (2023),
which employs a critique agent to assess the generated output directly. This approach has two
inherent limitations: i) the critique may be subjective and biased, and ii) the critique agent can have
hallucinations, causing inconsistencies and errors. These limitations can cause the MAC network
to become entrenched in its own preferences or evolve in the wrong direction, especially iterating
multiple times; see our experimental validations in Tab. 2. In comparison, our approach leverages an
environment executor to provide objective feedback, preventing bias and hallucinations.
While we use the analogy between our self-evolution process and neural network training for
motivating, they are significantly different in three key aspects: (i) our self-evolution occurs at test
time without a dedicated training phase; (ii) it evolves for each specific task individually rather than
over a batch of samples; and (iii) the environmental feedback are usually texts, not be numerical
values, which cannot be optimized by the standard backpropagation. This motivates us to propose
our textual backpropagation.
Solution based on textual backpropagation. The self-evolution solution iteratively updates the
MAC network using a textual backpropagation algorithm, guided by the environmental feedback. The
core idea is to analyze the influence of each agent in the MAC network Ag to the final environmental
feedback and use these analyses to update the agent prompts and the agentic workflow in Ag . This


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: EvoMAC takes task requirements as input and iteratively updates the coding team to
generate code that better fulfills the requirements.
is achieved by two collaborative agents, each responsible for one of the two key steps: (i) textual
gradient analysis and (ii) network update. The overall algorithm can refer to Alg. 1 in the appendix.
First, the gradient agent takes the environmental feedback as the input and outputs textual gradients
                                                                          (k)
that describe the impact of each agent in the MAC network. Let Ag and L(k) be the MAC
network and the environment feedback at the k-th iteration. The textual gradient is then ∇L(k) =
     (k)
G(Ag , L(k) ), where G(·, ·) is the gradient analysis operator managed by the gradient agent; see its
                                                                                                  (k)
prompt in Appendix. The textual gradient details three-fold information for each agent inside Ag :
1) whether this agent’s subtask is fulfilled; 2) whether this agent introduces errors; and 3) whether
any subtask is missed in the current MAC network.
                                                                                                 (k+1)
Second, based on the textual gradients, the updating agent iterates the MAC network as Ag           =
     (k)
U(Ag , ∇L(k) ), where U(·, ·) is the updating operator managed by the updating agent. This operator
guides the updates from three-folds: 1) removing the agents whose subtasks have been completed; 2)
revising the erroneous agent’s prompts by adding potential solutions provided in the gradient analysis;
and 3) adding new agents for missing subtasks and restructuring the workflows based on the subtask
dependencies noted in the gradient analysis; see the prompt details in Appendix. These adjustments
address existing issues and fulfill unmet requirements in the current generation of the MAC network,
promising improvements in the updated version.
Note that, the key of the textual backpropagation is the prompt designs for both gradient analysis
and network updates. The design must i) thoroughly evaluate the subtask of each agent in the MAC
network according to the objective environment feedback and determine necessary adjustments to
the MAC network to address existing issues, fulfilling the unmet requirements; and ii) maintain
coherence, ensuring that issues identified by the gradient agent can be effectively resolved by the
updating agent’s modifications to the MAC network.

3.2   S ELF - EVOLUTION FOR SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
In this section, we apply the self-evolving paradigm to the task of software development. The
overall architecture of the proposed self-evolving multi-agent collaboration network for software
development is illustrated in Fig. 1. Given a coding task, the coding team, corresponding to the MAC
network Ag , generates all the codes through its forward-pass; the testing team, associated with the
MAC network At , is responsible for creating the target proxy; that is, unit tests of the coding task; and
the objective environment tool is realized through the compiler. The identified bugs during execution
form the textual environmental feedback. The updating team, consisting of two collaborative agents,
manages the textual backpropagation. By continuously cycling through feed-forward, feedback
collection, and textual backpropagation processes, the coding team is iteratively refined to align more
closely with the test cases.
Since unit test generation is much easier than the original logical code generation, the testing team
usually can produce high-quality test cases, which are closely aligned with the task requirements.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Software Instruction              Software Requirement                      Generated Codes (Additional code omitted)
                                                                                 templates/login.html                               app.py
                                         Objective
                                                                                 <form action="{{ url_for('login') }}"              @app.route('/login', methods=['POST’])
    A website called                  Develop a website (DailyHeealthTips)          method="post">                                  def login_page():
    DailyHeealthTips where               Language                                  <div class="form-group">
                                                                                   ···
                                                                                                                                        # Implement the login logic here.
                                                                                                                                        return render_template('login.html')
    users receive daily health           Page Design                               </div>

    tips, log in to their accounts,         Login Page
                                      • Elements:
                                                                                Evaluation Metrics
    view tips, and submit
                                        • Username Filed’s ID: username_field
    feedback, with all data             • Password Filed’s ID: password_filed    Test Reports (RSD-Bench)                    Software
                                                                                                                                        Codes      Do not find (`pass`/`TODO`)
    stored in local text files. The                                              PASSED test_login_elements                 Requirement
                                            Daily Tips Page                      FAILED test_login_functionality
                                                                                                                                                    1 Completeness: 11
    website also offers                     Tips Archive Page                    Additional Pass to Test cases omitted...
                                                                                 ----------------------------
    personalized health advice                                                   {'advanced’: 0,                              Cosine Similarity      Check for executability
                                         Data Storage                             'basic’: 2,
    based on user profiles.                User Data: Stored in users.txt         'total’: 13}                                                      1 Executability : 11
                                                                                                                                                  ---------------------
                                         • Example: john_doe,securepassword
                                                                                    Accuracy (Ours): 2 / 13                 Consistency: 0.89     Quality = 0.89*1*1= 0.89


Figure 3: Comparison between instruction-oriented and requirement-oriented evaluations. rSDE-
Bench accurately reflects requirement fulfillment with the proposed accuracy score of 2/13, while
the indrection evaluation misjudges with high scores (0.89), failing to detect missing functionality.

Then, improving alignment with the unit tests through MAC network updates ensures better adherence
to the actual task requirements.
Coding team for feed-forward. In the feed-forward process, the coding team synthesizes code
according to the given coding task. To handle the extensive software requirements, the coding team
is implemented as a MAC network. It divides the comprehensive requirements into a sequence of
smaller, more specific function implementation subtasks, and progressively conquers them through
the agentic workflow. Unlike existing MAC systems that heuristically decompose coding tasks and
define the agentic workflow, we initialize the MAC network using a novel self-organizing approach.
A coding organizer agent automatically and flexibly decomposes the task requirements into subtasks
and assembles the coding agent team accordingly. The number of coding agents is dynamic, adjusting
in response to the task requirements. Note that, the quality of the generated code is unknown during
the forward pass, which necessitates the self-evolving paradigm to iteratively refine the generation.
Testing team and compiler for feedback collection. To verify whether the generated code meets
the requirements of the coding task, we employ unit tests as the target proxy. These test cases consist
of input-output pairs tailored to specific requirements. For example, a test case for a keyboard control
requirement would detail the type of control as the input and describe the expected behavior as the
output. To create flexible and comprehensive unit tests, we set up the testing team as a MAC network
and also initialize it in a self-organized way. A testing organizer agent automatically decomposes our
specified key testing criteria into subtasks and accordingly forms the testing agent team .
Once the test cases and generated code are ready, they are executed in the compiler, which functions
as the environmental tool, producing execution logs. These logs clearly point out the gap between the
generated code and the test cases. It shows satisfied testing requirements, existing function errors, and
unmet testing requirements. This feedback information can be used to verify whether each agent’s
subtask is accomplished and guide the MAC network update.
Updating team for textual back-propagation. The updating team consists of two collaborative
agents: the gradient agent and the updating agent, adjusting the MAC network based on the execution
logs, including the agent prompts and workflows. This process consists of two steps. First, the
gradient agent summarizes the textual gradient by identifying accomplished subtasks for satisfied
requirements, appending new subtasks for unmet requirements, and analyzing errors to detail their
originating agents and revising suggestions. Second, the updating agent modifies the coding agent
team by removing agents that have completed their subtasks, adding new agents for the new subtasks,
and revising agent prompts to address issues identified in the previous generation. The agent workflow
is updated once the agent team is revised, based on the dependencies among the subtasks.
4        R SDE-B ENCH : REQUIREMENT-O RIENTED S OFTWARE D EVELOPMENT
         E NGINEERING B ENCHMARK
This section introduces rSDE-Bench, a requirement-oriented benchmark designed to assess the
ability of models to handle software-level coding tasks. Each coding task involves multiple detailed
software requirements. These requirements specify each functionality and constraint of the software,
item by item, serving as measurable benchmarks for assessing the software’s effectiveness. As shown
in Fig. 3, unlike previous instruction-oriented approaches Qian et al. (2023); Hong et al. (2023) which


                                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rely on brief instructions as input, rSDE-Bench uses comprehensive software requirements as input,
complemented by unit test cases to automatically evaluate the correctness. This benchmark provides
software-level coding tasks and automatic evaluation, aligning more closely with real-world software
development practices.
4.1 B ENCHMARK CONSTRUCTION
rSDE-Bench involves two typical real-world software types: game and website. They can reflect
different coding capacities demanded in realistic software development. Game often requires handling
dynamic interactions, real-time state changes, and user-driven operations, focusing on elements like
logic execution, initialization, and game state transitions. Website emphasizes static and dynamic
content management, user interaction through forms and buttons, and ensuring page elements are
displayed and functional.
rSDE-Bench involves diverse requirements, each paired with a test case. Specifically, rSDE-Bench
provides 53 unique coding tasks and 616 test cases. rSDE-Bench introduces two requirement
difficulty levels, including basic and advanced, to reflect the varying complexity of real-world
software development tasks. For details on the benchmark construction, software statistics, software
requirements, and test case examples, see Sec. 7 in the Appendix.
4.2 AUTOMATIC E VALUATION
rSDE-Bench supports automatic evaluation of requirement correctness. It achieves this by pairing a
specifically designed black-box test case with each requirement. The test case can directly verify
whether the generated code achieved the requirement. Its evaluation metric is the accuracy, which
quantifies the proportion of correctly passed test cases. It is similar to the pass@1 metric in
HumanEval Chen et al. (2021), which evaluates the pass ratio of correctly achieved functions against
the total functions via unit test verification. It is a fully automated evaluation process, eliminating the
need for human involvement while still providing accurate and reliable assessments.
Previous benchmarks for software code generation mainly rely on two evaluation methods. One
method is human evaluation Hong et al. (2023), which is time-consuming and not scalable for large
datasets. The other method is indirect evaluations Qian et al. (2023), which defines metrics like
consistency, completeness, and quality. Consistency measures how closely the generated software
aligns with the original requirement description by comparing the cosine similarity between the
two. Completeness is determined by detecting the presence of placeholder (such as pass or TODO),
which results in a binary value of 0 or 1. Quality is then calculated as the product of several factors:
consistency, completeness, and executability. As illustrated in Fig. 3, they could not measure the
correctness of the generated code in fulfilling requirements. In contrast, rSDE-Bench’s test cases-
based evaluation is more rigorous and precise. These test cases can accurately verify the correctness of
generated code in fulfilling the requirements. rSDE-Bench promises reliable and scalable automatic
evaluation. We have validated the significant advantages of the proposed automatic evaluation over
the previous metrics, including consistency and quality; see Fig. 4.
5    E XPERIMENTS
5.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Baselines. To validate the effectiveness of our EvoMAC, we conducted comparisons against both
single-agent and multi-agent baselines. The single-agent baselines involve three prominent large
models: GPT-4o-Mini (gpt-4o-mini), Claude-3.5-Sonnet (claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620), and Gemini
(gemini-1.5-flash). For multi-agent baselines, we included five state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods:
MetaGPT Hong et al. (2023), Autogen Wu et al. (2023), Mapcoder Islam et al. (2024), Agent-
verse Chen et al. (2023), and ChatDev Qian et al. (2023). To ensure a fair comparison, all multi-agent
baselines, including our EvoMAC, are powered by the efficient and powerful GPT-4o-Mini model.
Additionally, to demonstrate the adaptability and robustness of our EvoMAC, we developed two
EvoMAC variants using GPT-4o-Mini and Claude-3.5-Sonnet.
Datasets. Our experiments cover both the proposed rSDE-Bench and the standard coding benchmark
HumanEval Chen et al. (2021). HumanEval comprises 164 Python function completion problems,
where the task is to generate code from a single function description.
5.2 E FFECTIVENESS OF R SDE-B ENCH ’ S EVALUATION AND E VO MAC
rSDE-Bench’s automatic evaluation metric (accuracy) is highly aligned with human evaluation.
Our primary goal is to validate the effectiveness of the proposed automatic evaluation in rSDE-Bench


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Performance of four methods in terms of four evaluation metrics, including human
evaluation, our automatic evaluation (accuracy), consistency, and quality. WB/GB and WA/GA
represent Web/Game Basic and Web/Game Advanced respectively. Our accuracy metric is highly
aligned with human evaluation across four dataset settings.

Table 1: Comparison of EvoMAC with five multi-agent and three single-agent SOTA baselines, all
powered by GPT-4o-Mini. Red values represent the percentage improvement of EvoMAC, shade in
pink, over the single-agent baselines, shade in grey.
                                                       rSDE-Bench                        HumanEval
      Method         Model                Website(%)                 Game(%)                (%)
                                       Basic     Advanced       Basic      Advanced       Pass@1
                Gemini-1.5-Flash    29.79±1.00 11.61±2.34 21.74±6.39       6.45±6.97       73.17
 Single-Agent   Claude-3.5-Sonnet   58.90±1.48 37.11±1.06 44.20±5.41 18.29±13.26           89.02
                   GPT-4o-Mini      62.90±2.52 44.40±4.21 42.76±15.50 30.10±11.87          88.41
                    MetaGPT         15.41±0.00   0.00±0.00   16.67±2.71    0.00±0.00       88.41
                    Autogen         25.68±4.14   5.40±3.34   17.39±1.78    0.00±0.00       85.36
                    MapCoder        34.70±1.59 14.57±0.66 29.71±6.72       7.52±6.10       90.85
  Multi-Agent      Agentverse       15.41±0.00   0.00±0.00   37.67±8.20   16.13±4.55       90.85
                    ChatDev         62.67±0.28 43.45±0.77 53.63±5.70      32.26±4.55       70.73
                                    89.38±1.01 65.05±1.56 77.54±2.04      51.60±4.54       94.51
                    EvoMAC
                                      +26.48      +20.65       +34.78        +21.50        +6.10

by comparing it with two existing evaluation metrics: consistency and quality, both from SRDD Qian
et al. (2023). For a fair comparison, our golden standard is human evaluation, conducted by two
expert code engineers who manually verify the fulfillment of requirements by interacting with the
developed software. This process is tedious, taking around four hours per expert to evaluate the entire
benchmark. The effectiveness of an evaluation metric depends on how closely it aligns with human
evaluation.
Fig. 4 presents the performance of four methods in terms of four evaluation metrics, including human
evaluation, our automatic evaluation, consistency, and quality. We see that: i) our automatic evaluation
is highly aligned with human evaluation across two software types (Website and Game), four methods,
(GPT-4o-Mini, MetaGPT, ChatDev, and our EvoMAC), and two requirement difficulties (Basic and
Advanced). The correlation coefficient between human evaluation and our accuracy metric is 0.9922,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed automatic evaluation in rSDE-Bench; ii) Consistency
and quality metrics differ significantly from human evaluation, with correlation coefficients of 0.2583
and 0.3041, respectively. This discrepancy occurs because consistency in SRDD measures similarity,
and quality in SRDD focuses on executability, which does not guarantee that all requirements
are met. This highlights the need for rSDE-Bench, as the SRDD benchmark does not support
requirement-oriented software development.
EvoMAC outperforms previous SOTAs on both software-level and function-level coding bench-
marks: rSDE-Bench and HumanEval. Tab. 1 compares EvoMAC with five multi-agent and
three single-agent SOTA baselines, all powered by GPT-4o-Mini for a fair comparison. We see
that EvoMAC significantly outperforms previous SOTAs across all datasets. EvoMAC outperforms
single-agent methods by 26.48% on the rSDE-Bench Website Basic and 34.78% on the rSDE-Bench
Game Basic, as well as surpassing existing multi-agent methods by over 20%. This highlights the
effectiveness of multi-agent collaboration and the power of EvoMAC.

5.3    E FFECTIVENESS OF EVOLVING
Fig. 6 shows the accuracy of EvoMAC over multiple evolving iterations on the rSDE-Bench and
HumanEval. Each figure presents two curves: one for EvoMAC powered by GPT-4o-Mini (red) and
the other by Claude-3.5 (blue). We have the following findings:


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) Website                                        (b) Game                               (c) HumanEval
Figure 6: Effect of EvoMAC performance across evolving times empowered by GPT-4o-Mini
and Claude-3.5-Sonnet on Website, Game, and HumanEval datasets. The figure shows EvoMAC
continuously improves with the evolving times on both LLM drives.
                                                                                     Website                          Game
Table 2: Ablation study about coding/testing team with 250                             Page Display
                                                                                       Browsing             80
single/multi-agent, with/without evolving, and with/without                            Content Manage
                                                            200                        Community
environment tool. Best performances are bolded.                                        User Manage          60
                                                                          150


                                                                      Count


                                                                                                        Count
                                  Website(%)      Game(%)
      Coding Testing Evol. Env.
                                Basic Advanced Basic Advanced                                               40
                                                                          100
 a)   Single    -     -    -   63.70   41.70   42.76       30.10                                                      Logic
                                                                                                                      Operation
 b)   Multi     -     -    -   67.47   39.27   68.10       41.93              50                            20        Initialization
 c)   Single Single   ✓    ✓   80.82   60.32   71.73       41.93                                                      Log
 d)   Multi Single    ✓    ✓   83.90   60.72   76.08       41.93                                                      Syntax
 e)   Single Multi    ✓    ✓   83.56   61.94   73.91       45.16               0 0 1 2 3 4 5                    0 0   1      2         3
                                                                                   Evolving Times                 Evolving Times
 f)   Multi Multi     ✓    -   78.08   52.23   55.80       33.32
 g)   Multi Multi     ✓    ✓   90.75   67.20   77.54       51.60       Figure 5: Failure case distribution across
                                                                       evolving times on Website and Game.
EvoMAC continuously improves with the evolving times. Fig. 6 shows that as evolving iterations
increase, performance consistently improves across all five dataset settings, covering two difficulty
levels, two software types, and both requirement-oriented and function complement benchmarks.
This highlights the effectiveness, generalizability, and robustness of the self-evolving approach,
encouraging EvoMAC to evolve whenever possible.
EvoMAC indistinguishably improves with different driving LLM. From Fig. 6, we see that: i)
both EvoMAC variants continuously improve with evolving iterations, demonstrating the robustness
of the self-evolving design; ii) the two curves do not intersect, indicating that the EvoMAC variant
powered by a more powerful single model consistently outperforms the other, highlighting the
advantage of using a stronger model. Success builds on success.
Failure case analysis. Fig. 5 shows the failure case statistics across iterations for Website and Game,
showing a general decrease in errors as iterations progress. We see that: i) the most common errors
are page display issues in Website and logic errors in Game; ii) page errors are resolved more quickly,
while logic errors persist, suggesting that more isolated issues are easier to fix during the evolution
process. This results in a sharp initial performance improvement as sipler problems are addressed
early, followed by a plateau as more complex issues remain unresolved, shown in Fig. 6.
5.4    A BLATION STUDY
To assess the effectiveness of each component, Tab. 2 details an ablation study featuring seven
EvoMAC variants.
Effectiveness of objective environment feedback. Environment feedback, such as code execution
logs, is essential for software development. Variant f) omits this tool, instead using an LLM-driven
agent to critique the code. Comparing Variant g) with Variant f) shows a notable performance drop:
Website tasks decrease by 12.67% and 14.97%, and Game tasks by 21.74% and 18.28% for Basic and
Advanced levels, respectively. This underscores the importance of objective environmental feedback,
as agent-driven critiques may introduce bias and fail to guide the evolution effectively.
Effectiveness of multi-agent collaboration in coding team and testing team. Comparing Variant
g) to Variant e), we observe a performance decrease of 7.19% and 5.26% on Website Basic and
Advanced respectively, when the coding team is reduced to a single agent. Similarly, comparing
Variant g) to Variant d), there is a performance drop of 6.85% and 6.48% on Website Basic and
Advanced respectively, also when the team is reduced to a single agent. These results demonstrate


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: EvoMAC outperforms previous multi-agent and single-agent systems across all the context
lengths across the four dataset settings on rSDE-Bench.


Figure 8: We show the generated code of single-agent, GPT-4o-Mini, and multi-agent systems,
ChatDev, and our EvoMAC (iteration =0/1) given the Website task (RecipeHub). After evolving,
EvoMAC can revise previous issues and fulfill the task requirement.
the necessary for involving multi-agent collaboration, highlighting that multi-agent setups offer more
flexible adjustments and enhanced capabilities for evolution.
Effectiveness in handling varied task token lengths. Fig. 7 shows a comparison of task token
lengths and performance across GPT-4o-Mini, ChatDev, and EvoMAC. We see that: i) EvoMAC
consistently outperforms ChatDev and GPT-4o-Mini across all context lengths, with its self-evolving
mechanism enabling the identification and correction of missed contexts and errors during iterations;
ii) EvoMAC experiences less performance degradation on the rSDE-Bench Website than on the
Game, as Website tasks are more modular and can be broken into subtasks, whereas Game tasks
require more coordinated management, making them more challenging.
5.5 C ASE STUDY
Fig. 8 presents the generated code by a single agent, GPT-4o-Mini, multi-agent systems, ChatDev, and
our EvoMAC before and after evolving (iteration=0/1). We see that: i) EvoMAC after evolving can
correct issues from previous iterations and successfully fulfill the task requirements; ii) multi-agent
systems tend to better comprehend the task requirements and produce more well-structured code.
More generated software can refer to Sec. 10 in the Appendix.
6    C ONCLUSION
We propose EvoMAC, a novel self-evolving paradigm for MAC networks. EvoMAC iteratively
adapts agents and their connections during the testing phase of each task. It achieves this with a novel
textual back-propagation algorithm. EvoMAC can push coding capabilities beyond function-level
tasks and into more complex, software-level development. Furthermore, we propose rSDE-Bench, a
novel requirement-oriented software development benchmark. rSDE-Bench features both complex
and diverse software requirements, as well as the automatic evaluation of requirement correctness.
Comprehensive experiments validate that the automatic requirement-aware evaluation in rSDE-Bench
aligns closely with human evaluation. EvoMAC outperforms previous SOTAs in both software-level
rSDE-Bench and function-level HumanEval benchmarks.
Future works. In the future, we plan to introduce a reward model to enhance the self-evolving
paradigm’s ability to learn from feedback and extend the rSDE-Bench to more software types.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Amazon.     CodeWhisperer.    In https://platform.qa.com/course/amazon-codewhisperer-generating-
 code-ai-4679/introduction, 2022.             URL      https://platform.qa.com/course/
 amazon-codewhisperer-generating-code-ai-4679/introduction.

Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to retrieve,
  generate, and critique through self-reflection. ArXiv, abs/2310.11511, 2023.

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang,
   Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.

Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and Zhiyuan Liu.
  Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
 Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael
 Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov,
 Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such,
 Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen
 Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain,
 William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan
 Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language
 models trained on code. 2021.

Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chen Qian, Chi-Min Chan, Yujia Qin, Yaxi
  Lu, Ruobing Xie, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent behaviors
  in agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10848, 2(4):6, 2023.

Google. Codey. In https://console.cloud.google.com/vertex-ai/publishers/google/model-garden/codechat-bison,
  2023.    URL https://console.cloud.google.com/vertex-ai/publishers/google/
  model-garden/codechat-bison.

Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven
   Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-agent collaborative
   framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.

Wenyue Hua, Lizhou Fan, Lingyao Li, Kai Mei, Jianchao Ji, Yingqiang Ge, Libby Hemphill, and Yongfeng
  Zhang. War and peace (waragent): Large language model-based multi-agent simulation of world wars. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.17227, 2023.

Md. Ashraful Islam, Mohammed Eunus Ali, and Md Rizwan Parvez. Mapcoder: Multi-agent code generation
 for competitive problem solving, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.11403.

Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan.
  Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.

Mohammad Abdullah Matin Khan, M Saiful Bari, Xuan Long Do, Weishi Wang, Md Rizwan Parvez, and
 Shafiq Joty. xcodeeval: A large scale multilingual multitask benchmark for code understanding, generation,
 translation and retrieval, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.03004.

Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel:
  Communicative agents for "mind" exploration of large language model society. In Thirty-seventh Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Jiaqi Li, Mengmeng Wang, Zilong Zheng, and Muhan Zhang. Loogle: Can long-context language models
   understand long contexts?, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04939.

Junkai Li, Siyu Wang, Meng Zhang, Weitao Li, Yunghwei Lai, Xinhui Kang, Weizhi Ma, and Yang Liu. Agent
  hospital: A simulacrum of hospital with evolvable medical agents, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2405.02957.


                                                     11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom, Eccles, James
  Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de, Masson d’Autume,
  Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey, Cherepanov, James
  Molloy, Daniel Jaymin Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de, Freitas, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science, 378:1092 –
  1097, 2022a.

Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James
  Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor
  Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy,
  Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097,
  December 2022b. ISSN 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.abq1158. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
  1126/science.abq1158.

Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and LINGMING ZHANG. Is your code generated by chatGPT
   really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. In Thirty-seventh Conference
   on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   1qvx610Cu7.

Zhao Mandi, Shreeya Jain, and Shuran Song. Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large language
  models. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 286–299. IEEE,
  2024a.

Zhao Mandi, Shreeya Jain, and Shuran Song. Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large language
  models. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 286–299. IEEE,
  2024b.

Microsoft. Copilot. In https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-copilot/meet-copilot, 2023. URL https:
  //www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-copilot/meet-copilot.

Anton Osika. GPT-Engineer. In https://github.com/AntonOsika/gpt-engineer, 2023. URL https://github.
  com/AntonOsika/gpt-engineer.

Xianghe Pang, Shuo Tang, Rui Ye, Yuxin Xiong, Bolun Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Siheng Chen. Self-alignment
  of large language models via monopolylogue-based social scene simulation. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su,
  Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software
  development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.07924.

Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Can large language models really improve
  by self-critiquing their own plans? ArXiv, abs/2310.08118, 2023.

Chonghua Wang, Haodong Duan, Songyang Zhang, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen. Ada-leval: Evaluating long-
  context llms with length-adaptable benchmarks, 2024a.

Xindi Wang, Mahsa Salmani, Parsa Omidi, Xiangyu Ren, Mehdi Rezagholizadeh, and Armaghan Eshaghi.
  Beyond the limits: A survey of techniques to extend the context length in large language models, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02244.

Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun
  Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling
  next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.
  08155.

Yifan Xu, Xiao Liu, Xinghan Liu, Zhenyu Hou, Yueyan Li, Xiaohan Zhang, Zihan Wang, Aohan Zeng,
  Zhengxiao Du, Wenyi Zhao, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. Chatglm-math: Improving math problem-solving in
  large language models with a self-critique pipeline. ArXiv, 2024.

Yuzhuang Xu, Shuo Wang, Peng Li, Fuwen Luo, Xiaolong Wang, Weidong Liu, and Yang Liu. Explor-
  ing large language models for communication games: An empirical study on werewolf. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.04658, 2023.

Guang Yang, Yu Zhou, Xiang Chen, and Xiangyu Zhang. Codescore-r: An automated robustness metric for
  assessing the functionalcorrectness of code synthesis, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
  06902.


                                                      12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir
  Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. ArXiv, abs/2405.15793,
  2024b.
Zibin Zheng, Kai-Chun Ning, Jiachi Chen, Yanlin Wang, Wenqing Chen, Lianghong Guo, and Weicheng Wang.
  Towards an understanding of large language models in software engineering tasks. ArXiv, abs/2308.11396,
  2023.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yixin Ou, Shengwei Ding, Long Li, Jialong Wu, Tiannan Wang, Jiamin Chen, Shuai
 Wang, Xiaohua Xu, Ningyu Zhang, et al. Symbolic learning enables self-evolving agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.18532, 2024.

Caleb Ziems, William Held, Omar Shaikh, Jiaao Chen, Zhehao Zhang, and Diyi Yang. Can large language
  models transform computational social science? Computational Linguistics, 50(1):237–291, 2024.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

7      B ENCHMARK DETAILS

Table 3: Basic statistics for website and game do- Game Category (%)                 Website Category (%)
mains, including the amount of samples, prompt Initialization Executability
                                                                         Log
                                                                               Content Manage            Browsing
                                                                                   Set Up
length (mean/max), and number of test cases at               6.5 7.8
                                                                     7.8                        8.0 14.9
                                                                             Community      8.4
both Basic and Advanced levels.                                                           4.9                   User
                                                                                                         17.5    Manage
                                                           Logic   42.9
                                                                            35.1
                    Software               Test Case                               Operation              46.3
    Benchmark
                Amount    Length       Basic Advanced
                                                                                               Page Display
    Website       45      1011/1553     292       247
    Game           8       507/788       46        31         Figure 9: Statistics of Game and Website tasks.

7.1     F EATURES
Challenging and diverse software requirements. rSDE-Bench features long-context software
requirements (averaging 507/1011 words for game and website tasks, respectively), unlike instruction-
oriented benchmarks Chen et al. (2021); Austin et al. (2021); Jimenez et al. (2023) that rely on
brief prompts. These detailed requirements better reflect real-world lengthy and complex software
development challenges.
Requirement-aware precise and efficient evaluation. rSDE-Bench employs detailed software
requirements and automated unit tests to precisely measure how well generated software meets
its objectives. Generated codes are evaluated based on pass rates from running specific test cases,
offering an accurate and efficient process. In contrast, instruction-oriented benchmarks rely on brief
prompts, which lack constraints and make evaluation less reliable, often requiring labor-intensive or
indirect evaluation.

7.2     C ONSTRUCTION PROCESS
Step 1: Software requirement generation. Each task instance begins with the generation of
clear, measurable software requirements. Given the inherent differences across various types of
software, we adopt distinct approaches for their formulation. For game-related software, we focuses
on common real-world games, capturing detailed task requirements such as GUI layout initialization,
interaction methods, and game rules. To align more closely with actual game development practices,
we also include game state logging as part of the software requirements. Due to the complexity
of logic in game software, these requirements are manually crafted by human. In contrast, for
website-related software, we begin with a concise website name, and then leverage the large language
model (gpt-4o-mini) to enrich the requirements according to predefined patterns. This approach
ensures both efficiency and scalability in the creation of benchmarks for websites. By tailoring the
process to the distinct characteristics of each software domain, we maintain precision in requirement
formulation while addressing the unique challenges posed by each context.
Step 2: Requirement-based test cases generation.
As illustrated in Fig 10 and Fig 11, unit tests offer a precise evaluation of software completion. Each
task instance includes black-box unit test cases that correspond directly to the software requirements,
allowing for a quantitative assessment of requirement fulfillment. To further assess the model’s code
generation capabilities, we categorize test cases into two levels of difficulty—basic and advanced,
as outlined in Tab. 3. We also provide an overview of all websites and games in Tab. 4 and
Tab. 5 respectively. As shown in Fig. 9, test cases for website and game software exhibit structural
differences, reflecting the distinct nature of each software type. They enable more targeted evaluation
of code generation capabilities. Thus, similar to software requirements, the test cases are constructed
differently based on the software type. For game-related tests, we manually create test cases,
akin to the HumanEval Chen et al. (2021) benchmark, which tracks state changes in response to
specific inputs. In the game environment, we assess how game states evolve in response to GUI
interactions. For website-related tests, large language model (gpt-4o-mini) generates Selenium-
based test cases aligned with the software requirements, followed by manual corrections to resolve any
ambiguities. This structured approach ensures rigorous evaluation across diverse software domains.


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Table 4: Overview of Websites in rSDE-Bench.

                                             Websites
 CharitableGivingPlatform              DailyHealthTips                   DailyJournalApp
 EcoFriendlyLivingTips                 ElderCareResources                EventPlanner
 FitnessEquipmentRental                FitnessTracker                    FreelancerMarketplace
 GreenLivingGuide                      HealthConsultationPlatform        MotivationalQuotesApp
 MusicFestivalDirectory                NoteTakingApp                     NutritionInformationHub
 OnlineLibraryManagementSystem         OnlineTherapeuticJournaling       OnlineThriftStore
 PeerTutoringNetwork                   PersonalBlog                      PersonalFinanceBlog
 RecipeHub                             RemoteInternshipMarketplace       RemoteJobBoard
 TravelDiary                           VirtualBookPublishing             VirtualWellnessRetreats
 DigitalArtworkGallery                 DigitalStorytellingPlatform       ExpenseTracker
 FitnessChallenges                     GardeningForBeginners             GourmetFoodSubscription
 MovieRecommendationSystem             MusicCollaborator                 OnlineCulturalExchange
 OnlineCulturalFestivals               OnlineVintageMarket               ParentingAdviceForum
 PetCareCommunity                      PortfolioSite                     SkillShare
 TaskManager                           VolunteerMatch                    OnlineShoppingCenter


                          Table 5: Overview of Games in rSDE-Bench.

                                           Games
                           Balls    Tank       Racing          Ghostly
                           Mario    Bomberman Sokoban          Brick



Basic and advanced requirements definition. The basics reflect the fundamental and more achiev-
able requirements, such as interaction, control, and logging. The advanced reflects more complex
software functionalities, such as game logical rules, and dynamic web content management. For
the games, basic requirements involve straightforward user interactions that do not require complex
logic, such as character movement or interacting with simple GUI elements. Advanced requirements
incorporate more intricate logic, such as managing game state transitions based on user actions or
handling conditional game events. These cases focus on ensuring the correct execution of basic
actions. In contrast, advanced cases incorporate more intricate logic, such as managing game state
transitions based on user actions or handling conditional game events. These cases challenge the
model’s ability to generate code that integrates dynamic decision-making and interaction within
the game environment. For websites, basic cases focus on ensuring that the necessary page ele-
ments—such as input fields, buttons, and layouts—are present correctly. These cases assess the
completeness of the webpage’s structure. On the other hand, advanced cases evaluate more complex
functionality, such as handling user authentication, managing dynamic content, or executing specific
operations within a content management system. These cases require the model to generate code that
performs backend logic and manages user interactions at a deeper level.


8     A LGORITHM

In this section, we present the algorithm of EvoMAC in Alg. 1. For more details, please refer to
Section 3.


9     C ASE S TUDY

9.1   C OMPLETE E VO MAC PROCESS

In this section, we show a complete process of EvoMAC on RSD-Bench. Please refer to Tab. 6.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Software description
 Task: Develop a simple Sokoban game. You must design a GUI.
 Requirements:
 1. The game board should be divided into grid squares.
 2. Players will control the game using the arrow keys on the keyboard.
 3. As the game starts, a log file named 'game.log' should be created to record the game's progress. The content of the
 game.log file should be appended with a new entry after each player action.The content of the game.log file should be
 cleared (if any) at the start of each game session.
 Each log entry should follow this format:
 {
 "timestamp": timestamp,
 "EVENT_TYPE": "MOVE_RIGHT" | "MOVE_LEFT" | "MOVE_UP" | "MOVE_DOWN" | "INVALID_MOVE",
 "player_position": [x, y],
 "box_positions": [[x1, y1], [x2, y2], ...],
 "game_status": "ONGOING" | "COMPLETE"
 }
 4. The victory conditions for the game is: All boxes are pushed onto their corresponding coordinate point.
 5. The initial positions of each element are required as follows:
 player_position = [1, 1]
 box_positions = [[3, 3], [4, 2]]
 goal_positions = [[5, 5], [6, 3]]
 ([3, 3] is the initial position of the first box whose target position is [5, 5]. [4, 2] is the initial position of
 the second box whose target position is [6, 3].)
 wall_positions = [[0, 4], [1, 4], [2, 4],[3, 4],[4, 4]]
 (the first numnber in each pair is the x-coordinate and the second number is the y-coordinate)

 Evaluation functions
 check_Excutablity check_log check_move_right check_move_left     check_move_box
 check_move_wall check_seqbox check_end check_wrong_end



                               Figure 10: Test cases of Game in rSDE-Bench.


 Software description
 # Requirement Document for DailyHealthTips Web Application

 ## 1. Objective
 Develop a web application named 'DailyHealthTips' that provides users with daily health tips, allowing them to receive
 advice and information about maintaining a healthy lifestyle, using Python as the development language. Note that the
 website should start from the login page.

 ## 2. Language
 The required development language for the DailyHealthTips web application is Python.

 ## 3. Page Design

 ### Page 1: Login Page
 - **Page Title**: User Login
 - **Overview**: This page allows users to log in to their accounts.
 - **Elements**:
   - **Username Field**:
      - **ID**: `username_field`
   - **Password Field**:
      - **ID**: `password_field`
   - **Login Button**:
      - **ID**: `login_button`
 …………


 Evaluation functions
 test_login_page_elements test_login_page_functionality test_daily_tips_page_elements
 test_daily_tips_page_functionality test_tips_archive_page_elements test_tips_archive_page_functionality



                              Figure 11: Test cases of Website in rSDE-Bench.


9.2   U NIT TEST CASE

In this section, we show more unit test cases written by coder on RSD-Bench, please refer to Tab. 13
and Tab. 16.

9.3   U PDATING PROCESS

In this section, we show additional examples of the updating process on RSD-Bench and HumanEval
dataset. Please refer to Tab. 19 and Tab. 22 respectively. For RSD-Bench, due to the code length, we
only show the texture updating process(codes are available at Sec. 9.1). We can see that the updating
agent will adjust the job of each coder dynamically according to the result of test team.


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Self-Evolving Paradigm
Require: X                                                                            ▷ Task input
            (0)
Require: Ag                               ▷ Initialized MAC network: agent prompts and pipeline
Require: At                                     ▷ Designed MAC network to generate target proxy
Require: G                                                        ▷ Agent-based gradient function
Require: U                                                          ▷ Agent-based update function
Require: E                                                     ▷ Environment tool to generate loss
 1: Define K as the number of self-evolving iterations, Φ as MACN generation process
 2: # Target Proxy
 3: T = Φ(X, At )
 4: # Self-Evolving Procedure
 5: for k = 0, 1, . . . , K − 1 do
 6:     # Forward Pass
                            (k)
 7:     G(k) = Φ(X, Ag )
 8:     # Loss Computation
 9:     L(k) = ⟨G(k) , T⟩E                              ▷ Use environment feedback as textual loss
10:     # Textual Backpropagation
                                (k)
11:     ∇L(k) = G(L(k) , Ag )                                        ▷ Summarize textual gradient
          (k+1)            (k)
12:     Ag      = U(Ag , ∇L(k) )                              ▷ Update agent prompts and pipeline
13: end for
              (K)
14: return Ag , G(K)



10    S OFTWARE P RESENTATION
In this section, we show some games and websites written by EvoMAC. Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 present
the games and websites respectively. We see that: i) EvoMAC outputs games with well-written GUI
and game rules. It can handle different kinds of GUI and game rule requirements from diverse games.
ii) EvoMAC outputs websites with beautified, user-friendly web pages and correct transition logic. It
can handle the requirements of different websites.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Table 6: A complete iteration process of EvoMAC on RSD-Bench

 Notation            Meaning                        Example                         Real example
 X                   Textual description of the     A coding task such as: "Im-     See Tab. 7
                     task to be completed.          plement a code that sim-
                                                    ulates keyboard input pro-
                                                    cessing via Python."
 Ag                  MAC network representing       The coding team consists        See Tab. 8
                     the team responsible for       of coding agents completing
                     generating the code.           subtasks in sequence.
 G = Φ(X, Ag )       Generated output produced      The                 generated   See Tab. 9
                     by the coding team as a        code:          ‘...def   pro-
                     result of the feed-forward     cess_input(keyboard_input):
                     pass.                          ...‘
 At                  MAC network representing       The testing team generates      See Tab. 10
                     the team responsible for       unit tests for the task.
                     generating the target proxy
                     (unit tests).
 T = Φ(X, At )       Target proxy (unit tests) Unit tests like: ‘...def             See Tab. 11
                     generated by the testing test_press_input(): assert
                     team based on the task de- process_input(’Enter’) ==
                     scription.                  ’Processed Enter’‘
 < G, T >E           Environmental feedback The environment executes            The execution
                     comparing the generated the generated code against         outcome of
                     output G with the target the unit tests, providing         the unit test
                     proxy T using an objective feedback like: ‘Failure:        from       the
                     environment (e.g., compiler test_press_input‘              terminal. If
                     or test results).                                          the execution
                                                                                is successful,
                                                                                the outcome is
                                                                                ’The software
                                                                                run success-
                                                                                fully without
                                                                                errors.’
 min < G, T >E       The optimization objective     Based on feedback, the sys- See Tab. 12
                     aiming to minimize the dif-    tem iteratively refines the
                     ference between the gen-       coding team to generate
                     erated output and the tar-     code that better meets the
                     get proxy using the environ-   task.
                     mental feedback.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Table 7: Textual description of the task to be completed.


   Task: Design a Single-Player Tank Battle Game
   Requirements:
   1. The interface should be divided into a 20x20 grid, though grid lines are not necessary. Each tank
   occupies one grid space, while obstacles may occupy multiple grid spaces. The background should be
   black, obstacles should be brown, enemy tanks should be silver, and the player’s tank should be yellow.
   2. The player can control the tank’s movement using the arrow keys on the keyboard, allowing for
   movement one grid space at a time. The ’enter’ key is used to fire bullets.
   3. In the game, there are two enemies fixed at a certain position on the game interface, constantly firing
   bullets in four directions: up, down, left, and right. Two enemies and players cannot be initialized in the
   same row.
   4. Both the player and the enemies have their own health points, which are initialized to 200. When hit
   by a bullet, the player’s health decreases by 10 and the enemy’s health decreases by 100. When health
   points drop to zero, the corresponding tank is destroyed. But the log still records information about the
   destroyed tank, with health points of 0.
   5. Destroying an enemy tank earns the player 200 points. The game ends when the player’s tank is
   destroyed or all enemy tanks are destroyed, at which point the player’s score will be displayed on the
   screen.
   6. As the game start, a new log file named ’game.log’ should be created to record the game’s progress.
   The first log entry should capture the initial state of the game. Each time a new event occurs to the
   player, a new log entry should be written in real-time. The logs should follow the format below.
   The EVENT_TYPE can only be one of the following: "INIT", "MOVE_LEFT", "MOVE_RIGHT",
   "MOVE_UP", "MOVE_DOWN", "FIRE" or "INJURED". The game_state should capture the current
   state of the game. In this setup, the position coordinates are defined with the top-left grid as [0, 0], where
   the x-coordinate increases by one unit for each grid space moved to the right, and the y-coordinate
   increases by one unit for each grid space moved downward. The player is initialized at position [0,0].
   {
         "timestamp": timestamp,
         "EVENT_TYPE": "INIT" | "MOVE_LEFT" | "MOVE_RIGHT" | "MOVE_UP"
         | "MOVE_DOWN" | "FIRE" | "INJURED",
         "game_state": {
             "player": {
                 "position": [xp, yp],
                 "health": health_player,
                 "score": score
             },
             "enemies": [
                 {
                     "position": [xe1, ye1],
                     "health": health_enemy1
                 },
                 {
                     "position": [xe2, ye2],
                     "health": health_enemy2
                 }
             ],
             "obstacle_position": [(xo1, yo1), ..., (xon, yon)]
         },
   }


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Table 8: MAC network representing the team responsible for generating the code.


   {
         "composition": {
             "Programmer 1": "Implement bullet firing logic that decreases
             health points for both the player and enemies when hit. This
             includes creating a function to handle bullet movement and
             collision detection, updating health points accordingly, and
             logging the events in the game.log file.",
             "Programmer 2": "Implement health management to check for
             health points dropping to zero and handle tank destruction.
             This includes creating a function to check health status
             after each hit, updating the game state, and logging the
             destruction event in the game.log file.",
             "Programmer 3": "Implement scoring logic to update the player's
             score when an enemy tank is destroyed and display the final
             score when the game ends. This includes creating a function
             to manage scoring and game-over conditions, and logging the
             final score in the game.log file."
         },
         "workflow": {
             "Programmer 1": [],
             "Programmer 2": [
                 "Programmer 1"
             ],
             "Programmer 3": [
                 "Programmer 2"
             ]
         }
   }


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Generated output produced by the coding team as a result of the feed-forward pass.
Due to the limit of page length, we only show partial of the codes.


   '''
   This is the main file for the Single-Player Tank Battle Game.
   It initializes the game, sets up the GUI, and manages the game
   loop, including player movement, enemy behavior, and logging
   events.
   '''
   import pygame
   import json
   import time
   # Constants
   GRID_SIZE = 20
   CELL_SIZE = 30
   WINDOW_SIZE = GRID_SIZE * CELL_SIZE
   PLAYER_COLOR = (255, 255, 0) # Yellow
   ENEMY_COLOR = (192, 192, 192) # Silver
   OBSTACLE_COLOR = (139, 69, 19) # Brown
   BACKGROUND_COLOR = (0, 0, 0) # Black
   FPS = 60
   # Game state
   player_position = [0, 0]
   player_health = 200
   player_score = 0
   enemies = [
       {"position": [5, 5], "health": 200},
       {"position": [10, 10], "health": 200}
   ]
   obstacles = [(3, 3), (7, 7), (12, 12)]
   # Log file
   log_file = open('game.log', 'w')
   initial_state = {
       "timestamp": time.time(),
       "EVENT_TYPE": "INIT",
       "game_state": {
            "player": {
                "position": player_position,
                "health": player_health,
                "score": player_score
            },
            "enemies": enemies,
            "obstacle_position": obstacles
       }
   }
   log_file.write(json.dumps(initial_state) + '\n')
   # Initialize Pygame
   pygame.init()
   screen = pygame.display.set_mode((WINDOW_SIZE, WINDOW_SIZE))
   pygame.display.set_caption("Tank Battle Game")
   clock = pygame.time.Clock()
   class Bullet:
       '''
       This class represents a bullet fired by the player.
       '''
       def __init__(self, position, direction):
            self.position = position
            self.direction = direction
       def move(self):
            if self.direction == 'UP':
                self.position[1] -= 1
            elif self.direction == 'DOWN':
                self.position[1] += 1
            elif self.direction == 'LEFT':
                self.position[0] -= 1
            elif self.direction == 'RIGHT':
                self.position[0] += 121
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: MAC network representing the team responsible for generating the target proxy (unit
tests).


   {
        "composition": {
            "Programmer 1": "Carefully test the logging mechanism
            according to the task requirements. Ensure that logs
            happen immediately after an action is taken, recording
            the most recent state. Verify the logging order, ensuring
            basic operations are recorded first, followed by subsequent
            events. Check that the data format, keys, and values are
            accurate, paying attention to the nested data types and
            carefully checking each element.",
            "Programmer 2": "Test the logging mechanism for special
            triggered conditions, such as when the player's health drops
            to zero or when an enemy tank is destroyed. Ensure that these
            events are logged correctly and that the game state reflects
            the changes accurately.",
            "Programmer 3": "Test the value initialization required by
            the task to ensure they are correctly achieved. Pay attention
            to the coordinates of the player and enemies, ensuring they
            are initialized in the correct positions and that no two tanks
            occupy the same row.",
            "Programmer 4": "Test the function inputs and the global
            variables imported in each function. Ensure that the input
            values and global variables used in the functions are valid
            and involved when the function is called.",
            "Programmer 5": "Test that each event in the task is
            implemented correctly and that the logic triggered matches
            the conditions described in the task. This includes movement,
            firing bullets, and health reduction for both the player
            and enemy tanks."
        },
        "workflow": {
            "Programmer 1": [],
            "Programmer 2": [
                "Programmer 1"
            ],
            "Programmer 3": [
                "Programmer 1",
                "Programmer 2"
            ],
            "Programmer 4": [
                "Programmer 1",
                "Programmer 2",
                "Programmer 3"
            ],
            "Programmer 5": [
                "Programmer 1",
                "Programmer 2",
                "Programmer 3",
                "Programmer 4"
            ]
        }
   }


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Target proxy (unit tests) generated by the testing team based on the task description.
Due to the limit of page length, we only show one test case written by one of the five test coders.


   import unittest
   import json
   import time
   from main import player_position, player_health, player_score,
   enemies, log_file, log_event, fire_bullet, check_health
   class TestTankBattleGame(unittest.TestCase):
       def setUp(self):
           global player_position, player_health, player_score, enemies
           player_position = [0, 0]
           player_health = 200
           player_score = 0
           enemies = [
               {"position": [5, 5], "health": 200},
               {"position": [10, 10], "health": 200}
           ]
           log_file = open('game.log', 'w')
       def tearDown(self):
           log_file.close()
       def test_move_left(self):
           global player_position
           player_position[0] = 1 # Move to the right first
           log_event("MOVE_LEFT")
           player_position[0] -= 1
           self.assertEqual(player_position, [0, 0])
       def test_move_right(self):
           global player_position
           log_event("MOVE_RIGHT")
           player_position[0] += 1
           self.assertEqual(player_position, [1, 0])
       def test_move_up(self):
           global player_position
           player_position[1] = 1 # Move down first
           log_event("MOVE_UP")
           player_position[1] -= 1
           self.assertEqual(player_position, [0, 0])
       def test_move_down(self):
           global player_position
           log_event("MOVE_DOWN")
           player_position[1] += 1
           self.assertEqual(player_position, [0, 1])
       def test_fire_bullet_hit_enemy(self):
           global player_score
           initial_health = enemies[0]["health"]
           fire_bullet()
           self.assertEqual(enemies[0]["health"], initial_health - 100)
           self.assertEqual(player_score, 200)
       def test_fire_bullet_miss_enemy(self):
           global player_position
           player_position = [0, 0]
           fire_bullet()
           self.assertEqual(enemies[0]["health"], 200)
       def test_player_injury(self):
           global player_health
           player_health -= 10
           log_event("INJURED")
           check_health()
           self.assertEqual(player_health, 190)
       def test_enemy_destruction(self):
           global enemies
           enemies[0]["health"] = 0
           check_health()
           self.assertEqual(enemies[0]["health"], 0)
   if __name__ == '__main__':
       unittest.main()              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: The optimization objective aiming to minimize the difference between the generated
output and the target proxy using the environmental feedback. According to the unit test
results, Updating agent add more notes for the sub-task for Programmer 2 and Programmer 3.
To see a complete updating process, please refer to Sec. 9.3


   {
         "composition": {
             "Programmer 1": "Implement bullet firing logic that decreases
             health points for both the player and enemies when hit. This
             includes creating a function to handle bullet movement and
             collision detection, updating health points accordingly, and
             logging the events in the game.log file.",
             "Programmer 2": "Implement health management to check for
             health points dropping to zero and handle tank destruction.
             This includes creating a function to check health status after
             each hit, updating the game state, and logging the destruction
             event in the game.log file. Additionally, ensure the game loop
             terminates properly when the player's tank is destroyed.",
             "Programmer 3": "Implement scoring logic to update the player's
             score when an enemy tank is destroyed and display the final
             score when the game ends. This includes creating a function to
             manage scoring and game-over conditions, and logging the final
             score in the game.log file. Ensure the final score is
             displayed correctly when the game ends."
         },
         "workflow": {
             "Programmer 1": [],
             "Programmer 2": [
                 "Programmer 1"
             ],
             "Programmer 3": [
                 "Programmer 2"
             ]
         }
   }


                                 Table 13: Unit test case: Game

 Example 1                                          Game Ghostly
 Requirement(partial)                               3. If the ghost controlled by the player eats a
                                                    superpellet (the big pellets), it gains the ability
                                                    to eat other ghosts.
 Subtask given by Test Organizer(partial)           "Programmer 5": "Test that each event in the
                                                    task is implemented and that the logic triggered
                                                    matches the conditions in the task description."
 Generated test case(partial)                       please see Tab. 14
 Evaluation test case(partial)                      please see Tab. 15


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Table 14: The partial generated test case for Game Ghostly.


   def test_eat_other_ghost(self):
       main.superpellet_active = True # Activate superpellet
       main.move_ghost("up")           # Move to [1, 0]
       # more move_ghost function call omitted here
       with open('game.log', 'r') as log_file:
           logs = log_file.readlines()
           last_log = json.loads(logs[-1])
           self.assertEqual(last_log["event_type"], "eat_other_ghost")
           self.assertEqual(last_log["ghost_position"], [6, 5])
           self.assertNotIn([0, 5], main.other_ghost_positions)


                  Table 15: The partial evaluation test case for Game Ghostly.


   def check_eat_other(self): # Check if Character can eat others
   with superpellet
       try:
           print("==============Test eat other=============")
           process = self.start_game()
           time.sleep(0.1)
           pg.press('right',presses=1,interval=0)
           time.sleep(0.1)
           # more press omitted here
           process.terminate()
           print("terminated")
           # Read the log
           logs = self.read_log()
           print(logs)
           cnt=0
           for log in logs:
               if log["event_type"]=="eat_other_ghost":
                    cnt+=1
           if cnt==2:
               print("Character can eat other with superpellet\n\n")
               return 1
           print("Character can eat other with superpellet\n\n")
           return 0
       except:
           print("eat_other error")
           return 0


                                 Table 16: Unit test case: Website

 Example 2                                           Website DailyHealthTips
 Requirement(partial)                                please see Fig. 11
 Subtask given by Test Organizer(partial)            "Programmer 2": "Test whether the first page
                                                     of the website is the login page and whether it
                                                     can log in correctly based on the example data
                                                     provided in the Task."
 Generated test case(partial)                        please see Tab. 17
 Evaluation test case(partial)                       please see Tab. 18



                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Table 17: The partial generated test case for Website DailyHealthTips.


   '''
   Test whether the first page of the website is the login page and
   whether it can log in correctly based on the example data
   provided in the Task.
   '''
   import unittest
   from selenium import webdriver
   from selenium.webdriver.common.by import By
   from selenium.webdriver.common.keys import Keys
   import time
   class TestDailyHealthTipsLogin(unittest.TestCase):
       def setUp(self):
           self.driver = webdriver.Chrome()
           self.driver.get("http://localhost:5000")
       def test_login_page(self):
           driver = self.driver
           # Check if the current page is the login page
           self.assertIn("User Login", driver.title)
           print("Login page title is correct.")
           # Locate username and password fields
           username_field = driver.find_element(By.ID, "username_field")
           password_field = driver.find_element(By.ID, "password_field")
           login_button = driver.find_element(By.ID, "login_button")
           # Input example data
           username_field.send_keys("john_doe")
           password_field.send_keys("securepassword")
           login_button.click()
           # Wait for the page to load
           time.sleep(2)
           # Check if redirected to Daily Health Tips page
           self.assertIn("Daily Health Tips", driver.title)
           print("Successfully logged in and redirected to
           Daily Health Tips page.")
       def tearDown(self):
           self.driver.quit()
   if __name__ == "__main__":
       unittest.main()


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Table 18: The partial evaluation test case for Website DailyHealthTips.


   class TestCase(unittest.TestCase):
       def setUp(self):
           """Set up the Selenium WebDriver before each test."""
           self.driver = webdriver.Chrome()
           self.driver.get("http://localhost:5000")

        def tearDown(self):
            """Tear down the WebDriver after each test."""
            self.driver.quit()

        def login(self):
            self.driver.delete_all_cookies()
            username = "john_doe"
            password = "securepassword"
            # Performing login
            self.driver.get("http://localhost:5000")
            self.driver.find_element(By.ID, "username_field")
            .send_keys(username)
            self.driver.find_element(By.ID, "password_field")
            .send_keys(password)
            self.driver.find_element(By.ID, "login_button").click()

        # ===== Login Page Tests =====
        def test_login_page_elements(self):
            # Go back to the login page and check elements
            self.assertTrue(self.driver.find_element
            (By.ID, 'username_field').is_displayed())
            self.assertTrue(self.driver.find_element
            (By.ID, 'password_field').is_displayed())
            self.assertTrue(self.driver.find_element
            (By.ID, 'login_button').is_displayed())

        def test_login_page_functionality(self):
            # Assume user login is verified by the presence
            of daily tips page elements
            self.assertIn("User Login", self.driver.title)
            username = "john_doe"
            password = "securepassword"
            self.driver.find_element(By.ID, 'username_field')
            .send_keys(username)
            self.driver.find_element(By.ID, 'password_field')
            .send_keys(password)
            self.driver.find_element(By.ID, 'login_button').click()

            # Check if we are redirected to the daily tips page
            self.assertIn("Daily Health Tips", self.driver.title)
        # more test case omitted


                           Table 19: Updating process on RSD-Bench

 RSD-Bench Game Tank                                Example
 Requirement(partial)                               please see Tab. 7
 Initial Code Organizer(iteration 0)                please see Tab. 8
 Updating agent(iteration 1)                        please see Tab. 12
 Updating agent(iteration 2)                        please see Tab. 20
 Updating agent(iteration 3)                        please see Tab. 21



                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 20: Updating process on RSD-Bench Game Tank, iteration 2


   {
        "composition": {
            "Programmer 1": "Fix the health management logic to ensure
            that when the player's health drops to zero, the destruction
            event is logged correctly, and the game loop terminates
            properly. This includes modifying the `check_health` function
            to accurately log destruction events for both the player and
            enemies.",
            "Programmer 2": "Implement the game-over conditions to ensure
            that the game ends when the player's tank is destroyed or all
            enemy tanks are destroyed. This includes creating a function
            to manage the game-over state and logging the final score
            in the game.log file."
        },
        "workflow": {
            "Programmer 1": [],
            "Programmer 2": [
                "Programmer 1"
            ]
        }
   }


             Table 21: Updating process on RSD-Bench Game Tank, iteration 3


   {
        "composition": {
            "Programmer 1": "Implement constant firing behavior for enemy
            tanks in four directions. This includes creating a mechanism
            for enemies to fire bullets at the player and logging the
            corresponding events.",
            "Programmer 2": "Implement the display of the player's score
            at the end of the game when the game is over. This includes
            modifying the game-over logic to ensure the final score is
            logged and displayed correctly.",
            "Programmer 3": "Fix the logging mechanism to ensure that
            the log file remains open during gameplay and logs events
            in real-time without closing prematurely. This includes
            reviewing the log_event function and ensuring it is called
            correctly throughout the game loop."
        },
        "workflow": {
            "Programmer 1": [],
            "Programmer 2": [
                "Programmer 1"
            ],
            "Programmer 3": [
                "Programmer 1",
                "Programmer 2"
            ]
        }
   }


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Table 22: Updating process on HumanEval

 HumanEval                                          Example
 Requirement                                        Write a function that takes a message, and en-
                                                    codes in such a way that it swaps case of all
                                                    letters, replaces all vowels in the message with
                                                    the letter that appears 2 places ahead of that
                                                    vowel in the english alphabet. Assume only
                                                    letters.
 Initial Code Organizer(iteration 0)                "Programmer 1": "Identify and implement the
                                                    logic to swap the case of all letters in the mes-
                                                    sage.", "Programmer 2": "Implement the logic
                                                    to replace all vowels with the letter that appears
                                                    2 places ahead in the English alphabet."
 Generated test case(iteration 0)                   please see Tab. 23
 Main code(iteration 0)                             please see Tab. 24
 Updating agent(iteration 1)                        "Programmer 1":          AssertionError:       en-
                                                    code(’test’) != ’TGST’. The actual output is:
                                                    ’TgST’., "Programmer 2": AssertionError:
                                                    encode(’This is a message’) != ’tHKS KS C
                                                    MGSSCGG’. The actual output is: ’tHkS kS c
                                                    MgSScGg’.
 Final code(iteration 1)                            please see Tab. 25


         Table 23: Updating process on HumanEval, Generated test case. iteration 0


   '''
   Write a simple test case to verify the logic of the encode function.
   '''
   import unittest
   from encode_function import encode
   class TestEncodeFunction(unittest.TestCase):
       def test_example_case_1(self):
           self.assertEqual(encode('test'), 'TGST')
       def test_example_case_2(self):
           self.assertEqual(encode('This is a message'),
           'tHKS KS C MGSSCGG')
   if __name__ == '__main__':
       unittest.main()


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 24: Updating process on HumanEval, Main code, iteration 0


   '''
   def encode(message):
       vowels = 'aeiouAEIOU'
       encoded_message = []
       for char in message:
           if char.isalpha():
               # Swap case
               if char in vowels:
                   # Replace vowel with the letter 2 places ahead
                   if char.islower():
                        new_char = chr(((ord(char) - ord('a') + 2) % 26)
                        + ord('a'))
                   else:
                        new_char = chr(((ord(char) - ord('A') + 2) % 26)
                        + ord('A'))
                   encoded_message.append(new_char)
               else:
                   # Just swap case for consonants
                   encoded_message.append(char.swapcase())
           else:
               # If it's not a letter, we can just append it as is
               encoded_message.append(char)
       return ''.join(encoded_message)


             Table 25: Updating process on HumanEval, Final code, iteration 1


   '''
   def encode(message):
       vowels = 'aeiouAEIOU'
       encoded_message = []
       for char in message:
           if char.isalpha():
               # Swap case
               if char in vowels:
                   # Replace vowel with the letter 2 places ahead
                   and swap case
                   if char.islower():
                        new_char = chr(((ord(char) - ord('a') + 2) % 26)
                        + ord('a')).upper()
                   else:
                        new_char = chr(((ord(char) - ord('A') + 2) % 26)
                        + ord('A')).lower()
                   encoded_message.append(new_char)
               else:
                   # Just swap case for consonants
                   encoded_message.append(char.swapcase())
           else:
               # Preserve spaces
               encoded_message.append(char)
       return ''.join(encoded_message)


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       (a) Balls                    (b) Bomberman


                       (c) Mario                      (d) Tank


                       (e) Brick                     (f) Ghostly


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (g) Racing                                      (h) Sokoban

                            Figure 12: Games generated by EvoMAC.


              (a) CharitableGivingPlatform                      (b) GardeningForBeginners


                                             (c) PersonalBlog


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (d) GourmetFoodSubscription                     (e) OnlineTherapeuticJournaling


                                    (f) MusicFestivalDirectory

                          Figure 13: Websites generated by EvoMAC.


                                               33
