Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ATH GAP: O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION E VALUATION ON
P ROBLEMS WITH A RBITRARILY C OMPLEX P ROOFS
 Andreas Opedal1,2,∗ Haruki Shirakami1,3,∗
 Bernhard Schölkopf1,2 Abulhair Saparov4 Mrinmaya Sachan1
 1
   ETH Zürich 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
 3
   Idiap Research Institute 4 Purdue University
 andreas.opedal@inf.ethz.ch haruki.shirakami@idiap.ch


                                                A BSTRACT

             Large language models (LLMs) can solve arithmetic word problems with high accu-
             racy, but little is known about how well they generalize to more complex problems.
             This is difficult to study, as (i) much of the available evaluation data has already
             been seen by the most capable models during training, and (ii) existing benchmarks
             do not capture how problem proofs may be arbitrarily complex in various ways.
             In this paper, we present a data-generation framework for evaluating LLMs on
             problems with arbitrarily complex arithmetic proofs, called MathGAP. MathGAP
             generates problem statements and chain-of-thought reasoning traces according to
             specifications about their arithmetic proof structure, enabling systematic studies on
             easy-to-hard generalization with respect to complexity of proof trees. Using Math-
             GAP, we find that LLMs show a significant decrease in performance as proofs get
             deeper and wider. This effect is more pronounced in complex, nonlinear proof struc-
             tures, which are challenging even for the most capable models. The models are also
             sensitive to simple changes in sentence ordering. However, they remain capable of
             solving some complex problems, suggesting that reasoning generalization is noisy.
                  https://github.com/eth-lre/mathgap-experiments

1       I NTRODUCTION
High performance on reasoning benchmarks is often taken as evidence that transformer-based large
language models (LLMs) can “reason”. However, many current benchmarks are unreliable, as it is
likely that the problems they contain are present in the model training data (Sainz et al., 2023; Deng
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). Moreover, most evaluations fail to capture that reasoning problems
can be arbitrarily complex through composition of subproofs and use of multiple rules of inference.
High accuracy on a specific set of problems in a benchmark dataset is therefore not sufficient to
conclude that LLMs can generalize to more complex, unseen problems. To obtain a more appropriate
empirical measure of reasoning ability, one must evaluate on data that is not present in any benchmark
dataset, containing proofs that are more complex than the ones the model has already seen.
In this paper, we aim to satisfy these desiderata. We consider math word problems (MWPs), which
are one of the most frequently used testbeds for LLM reasoning, and propose a framework for
evaluating Mathematical Generalization on Arithmetic Proofs—MathGAP. We start by discussing
how solutions to MWPs can be characterized in terms of proof trees, in which nodes are labeled
with logical statements about the problem under a world-model framework (Opedal et al., 2023),
and the edges are induced by proof steps on such logical statements. Doing so reveals several ways
of characterizing a problem’s complexity based on its proof tree, e.g., depth, width, shape, and
the ordering of nodes (all defined in §3.2). With this formalism, we develop a method to generate
problems with specified proof tree characteristics. Because this method is based on proof trees, it also
enables rich annotations in the form of ground-truth reasoning traces. More specifically, traversing
the proof trees in post order, we obtain chain-of-thought (CoT; Wei et al., 2022) reasoning traces in
an automated manner. Fig. 1 illustrates the generation method, showing a proof tree having depth 2,
width 5, what we call nonlinear shape, and where the ordering of the sentences is given by traversing
the leaf nodes in left-to-right order.
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Step 1: Given a root logical form, sample a proof tree by iteratively applying inference rules until a stopping criterion has been reached.
       Problem speciﬁcation:            Available logical form templates:                                 Available inference rules:
         Nonlinear                       1. cont([agent],[quantity],[entity])                              1. cont(...) comp(...) ⊢ cont(...)
         Depth: 2                        2. comp([agent1],[agent2],[quantity],[entity])                    2. cont(...) cont(...) ⊢ comp(...)
         Width: 5                        3. comp-eq([agent1],[agent2],[agent3],[agent4],[entity])          3. cont(...) comp(...) comp-eq(...) ⊢ cont(...)
         Canonical ordering              [...]                                                             [...]



   1   cont(I,17,apple)             2   comp(L,I,10,apple)            4   cont(J,11,apple)        5   cont(E,19,apple)
                    3   cont(L,27,apple)                                          6   comp(E,J,8,apple)                       7   comp-eq(L,S,E,J,apple)
                                                                  8   cont(S,19,apple)



   Step 2: Create a word problem by mapping leaf nodes to                      Step 3: Generate a solution by mapping the nodes of the tree to proof
             text body and root node to a question using templates.                   steps. Internal nodes map to CoT explanations and root node to answer.


       1 Isabella has 17 apples. 2 Lucy has 10 more apples than                   1 Isabella has 17 apples. 2 Lucy has 10 more apples than Isabella.
       Isabella. 4 John has 11 apples. 5 Emily has 19 apples.                    3 So Lucy has 17 + 10 = 27 apples. 4 John has 11 apples. 5 Emily has 19
       7 The number of apples that Lucy has more than Sam is the                 apples. 6 So the diﬀerence between the number of apples John and Emily
       same as the diﬀerence between the number of apples that                   have is 8. 7 The number of apples that Lucy has more than Sam is the
       John has compared to Emily.                                               same as the diﬀerence between the number of apples that John has
                                                                                 compared to Emily. 8 So Sam has 27 - 8 = 19 apples.
       8   How many apples does Sam have?



Figure 1: We propose MathGAP, an evaluation framework for arithmetic reasoning in which LLMs
are tested on problems with proofs of arbitrary complexity. This diagram shows how problems and
CoT solution annotations are generated under our formalism. The complete list of logical forms
and inference rules that we consider in our experiments are given in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

This generation method forms the backbone of MathGAP, our framework for studying out-of-
distribution (OOD) generalization gaps on arithmetic proofs. MathGAP avoids data contamination
since the distribution of generated test problems can always be different from those in training or in
context, by design. When the performance on problems at one level of complexity hits saturation, we
can flexibly generate a new set of problems that are even more complex. This is in spirit similar to
Dynabench (Kiela et al., 2021) but, importantly, does not require human annotators.
MathGAP enables many new empirical investigations. In this paper, we perform a systematic analysis
on whether LLMs can use simple examples in context to solve more complex ones at inference. To
this end, we consider two different distributions of in-context CoT demonstrations: examples with
only the simplest possible proof trees, and a range of examples with varying complexity, akin to
curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009). We then evaluate on test sets containing problems that are
increasingly more complex than the in-context examples. The performance is further compared to
in-distribution and zero-shot baselines. Our study includes Mixtral-8x7B (Jiang et al., 2024a), Llama3-
8B, Llama3-70B (Llama Team, 2024), GPT-3.5-Turbo, GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024), and a few additional
evaluations on o1-preview and DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI, 2025). We present several findings:
   i) Generalization to proof width is harder than to proof depth, but there is a steady decrease in per-
      formance as proofs get both deeper and wider. The performance decrease is particularly notable
      for the so-called nonlinear problems; solving them requires keeping intermediate steps longer
      in memory than for linear problems, for which intermediate steps can be consumed immediately
      (under post-order traversal). Even GPT-4o fails to solve the most complex nonlinear problems.
  ii) However, the performance decrease is moderate in most cases. This suggests that the models are
      able to generalize to some extent, albeit with a noisy form of reasoning (Prabhakar et al., 2024).
 iii) All models are sensitive to a simple change in sentence ordering, in which one sentence is
      moved to the front of the problem. Moreover, we find that the problem is easiest for LLMs
      if the sentence is moved from the beginning or the end rather than from the middle of the
      problem. This is surprising since one would expect a monotonically decreasing relationship
      between accuracy and the distance of movement.
 iv) We do not see a consistent advantage to using in-context examples. Contrary to our expectations,
      in-distribution examples are not always beneficial for performance, as compared to zero-shot.
      This suggests that some problems are hard to learn even when the LLM is given demonstrations
      of similar problems, independently of its generalization ability. Demonstrating a range of
      examples with varying complexity is usually preferable to demonstrating simple examples,
      suggesting that LLMs benefit from a diverse prompt.
  v) o1 and R1 outperform the others on nonlinear problems. However, we are able to create a test set
      on which they solve only 5% and 11% respectively—indicating that MathGAP is future-proof.


                                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORK
Data contamination. Machine learning, broadly, is the study of algorithms that can learn from data
and generalize to unseen data. Machine learning models must therefore be evaluated on unseen test
sets. As it turns out, modern-day LLMs are not being properly evaluated in this regard. Much of the
data they are evaluated on has already been used during model training, both labeled (Dodge et al.,
2021; Deng et al., 2024) and unlabeled (Elazar et al., 2024). Researchers have raised serious concerns
about such data contamination issues (Jacovi et al., 2023; Sainz et al., 2023). For arithmetic reasoning
specifically, Zhang et al. (2024) recently found evidence that the widely used GSM8k benchmark
(Cobbe et al., 2021) is contaminated and presented evaluations on a new dataset that is not publicly
released. MathGAP mitigates data contamination by creating new, more complex synthetic test sets.

Generalization on reasoning tasks. Generalization to data from a different distribution (i.e., OOD
data) is a core problem in machine learning and has also been studied extensively in the context
of LLM reasoning (Schwarzschild et al., 2021; An et al., 2023; Kudo et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023;
Saparov & He, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Mészáros et al., 2024; Thomm et al., 2024). While LLMs’
performance on OOD data can be improved by various techniques (Anil et al., 2022; Borazjanizadeh
& Piantadosi, 2024; Hu et al., 2024), generalization to problems of arbitrary complexity under a
set of known inference rules is still an open problem. For instance, transformer-based LLMs struggle
to generalize to longer problem proofs when solving logical reasoning tasks (Dziri et al., 2023;
Saparov et al., 2023). We contribute to this literature by providing an evaluation framework for OOD
generalization to complex arithmetic proofs. Our work relates to scalable oversight (Bowman et al.,
2022) and easy-to-hard generalization (Burns et al., 2023; Hase et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024), which
can be studied in a principled manner with MathGAP by characterizing what is easy and what is hard.

Evaluation on MWP benchmarks. MWPs are often treated as a testbed for studying reasoning
abilities of LLMs (Patel et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2023; Shakarian et al., 2023; Stolfo et al., 2023; Zong
& Krishnamachari, 2023; Huang et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2025); such problems are
interesting because they require several distinct skills to solve, while remaining conceptually simple
(Stern, 1993). However, we are not aware of much work on generalization in regard to problem com-
plexity in this domain. Our study in §5 is related to Hase et al. (2024), who fine-tune LLMs on easy
problems and evaluate them on harder ones at inference, using GSM8k and other possibly contami-
nated datasets. Their complexity metrics focus on problem length, but do not capture how a reasoning
problem gets more complex (i.e., through the characteristics of the proof tree). Mirzadeh et al. (2025)
recently performed evaluations on a version of GSM8k in which variable names and numbers have
been altered, and found that LLMs are surprisingly sensitive to such substitutions. MathGAP is more
general; while it allows for such substitutions as well, our main goal is to vary the proof structures.

3     A F ORMAL T REATMENT OF M ATH W ORD P ROBLEMS
We aim to generate new problems of arbitrary complexity, so we require a formalism to characterize
complexity in a precise manner. First, we explain how the semantics expressed in MWPs can be
written as sequences of logical forms (§3.1). We then show how to apply inference rules on these
logical forms to deduce new ones (§3.2). This leads to a view of problem solutions as proof trees, the
structure of which can be used to characterize the reasoning required to solve the problem.

3.1   M ATH WORD PROBLEMS AS LOGICAL FORMS

Each MWP is represented as a sequence of logical forms under the formalism from Opedal et al.
(2023; 2024), which is a subset of first-order logic. A logical form is a truth statement about the
world that is being described by the problem, representing some arithmetic relationship between
the number of entities possessed by one or several agents. Such statements can refer to the number
of entities an agent has, how many more entities an agent has relative to another, the action of an
agent giving their entities to another agent, etc. Formally, a logical form represents the semantics
of a single sentence and consists of a predicate that takes a set of properties as arguments. Every
logical form has an agent property, an entity property, and a quantity property. Other, optional
properties include unit and attribute. We define a world model as a sequence of logical forms that
align with the sentences of a problem text, thus representing the semantics of the whole problem.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 1: Example logical forms. A logical form comprises a predicate and a set of properties specific
to that predicate. Each logical form induces natural language sentences that preserve its semantics.
                Logical Form
                                                        Example Templates                      Example Sentences
 Predicate (abbr.)   Properties
 container           (agent=a,
 (cont)              quantity=q,               [a] has [q] [u]s of [k] [e]s.          Alice has 5 kilograms of red apples.
                     entity=e,
                     attribute=k,              [a] owns [q] [u]s of [k] [e]s.         Alice owns 5 kilograms of red apples.
                     unit=u)
 comparison          (agentA=a,
                                               [b] has [q] fewer [e]s than [a].       Bob has 3 fewer apples than Alice.
 (comp)              agentB=b,
                     quantity=q,
                                               [a] has [q] more [e]s than [b].        Alice has 3 more apples than Bob.
                     entity=e)
 transfer            (receiver agent=b,
                                               [a] gave [b] [q] [e]s.                 Alice gave Bob 3 apples.
                     sender agent=a,
                     quantity=q,
                                               [b] got [q] more [e]s from [a].        Bob got 3 more apples from Alice.
                     entity=e)
 partwhole           (whole agent= ∧ ni=1 ai , [a1 ], ..., and [an ] have [q] [e]s
                     quantity=q,               combined.                              Alice and Bob have 8 fruits combined.
                     whole entity=e)
 comp-eq             (agentA=a,                The number of [e]s that [c] has more   The number of apples that Charlie has
                     agentB=b,                 than [d] is equal to the difference    more than David is equal to the
                     agentC=c,                 between the number of [e]s that [a]    difference between the number of apples
                     agentD=d,                 and [b] have.                          that Alice and Bob have.
                     entity=e)


For a given predicate and set of properties, we write predicate(property1=x,
property2=y, ...) to express a logical form. Property names are, however, often omit-
ted for brevity, as in predicate(x, y, ...). There are two types of predicates: (i) those that
represent the ownership of some entity by an agent, called container (abbreviated cont), and
(ii) those that represent arithmetic relationships between two sets of properties. The relationship
predicates correspond to arithmetic concepts and are based on a taxonomy from the learning sciences
(Riley et al., 1983); we use transfer, comparison (abbreviated comp), partwhole and
comp-eq.1 The comp-eq predicate was introduced in this paper in order to construct nonlinear
problems of arbitrary length—see App. D for details. Table 1 gives concrete example sentences
for logical forms with each of these predicates, Fig. 5 shows the world model representation of the
problem in Fig. 1, and App. A provides further intuition.2
The logical forms in the world model of a problem are separated into body and question. The
question is a single logical form that appears at the end of the world model. It holds a placeholder
variable instead of an explicit quantity, which represents the correct answer to the problem. For
example, the interrogative sentence “How many apples does Alice have?” is represented by the
question cont(Alice, q, apples), where q is a placeholder variable. The body consists of all
logical forms in the world model that are not questions. The answer to a problem is the logical form
declared by the question with the correct numerical quantity substituted into its placeholder variable.

3.2    C HAIN - OF - THOUGHT SOLUTIONS AS PROOF TREES

Solving MWPs is a form of deductive reasoning, where the correct answer follows from what is
stated in the text through a combination of rules of arithmetic and world knowledge. We use such
derivations, called proofs, to characterize these problems. The proofs in our setup are analogous to
those in other proof systems, such as natural deduction (Gentzen, 1935; Pfenning, 2004).3
We want to formally reason over the logical forms introduced in §3.1. To that end we introduce a set
of inference rules, which are used to prove new logical forms from previously known ones. A proof
step, written in Gentzen-style notation as

                                            L1          L2         ···         LN ,
                                                               L
   1
      The transfer and part-whole concepts are usually called change and combine, respectively, in learning
science literature (Nesher et al., 1982).
    2
      In order to denote that the items of several agents are combined under a partwhole, we treat the
conjunction of agents ∧ n  i=1 ai = a as another agent in Table 1. The same is done for entities, as shown in Table 2.
    3
      In fact, each of our inference rules shown in Table 2 can be decomposed into the primitive inference rules of
natural deduction, using first-order logic expressions. App. B demonstrates by example how this is done.


                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 2: Inference rule templates (left) with corresponding examples of rule applications in natural
language (right). The variables a, b, c, d refer to agents, q, q1 , q2 refer to quantities, and e, f
refer to entities. Attribute and unit properties are excluded here, but analogous rules exist in which
they are present. All inference rules are commutative except the transfer rule; see footnote 4.
Rule applications of an inference rule with premises L1 , L2 , . . . , LN and consequent L are written as
L′1 .L′2 . . . . .L′N . ⊢ L′ ., where L′ is a natural language expression for the logical form L. Axioms are
formed from the facts stated in the problem, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Inference Rules                                                   Example Sentences
              cont(a, q1 , e) comp(b, a, q2 , e)
                                                                   Alice has 3 apples. Bob has 2 more apples than Alice. ⊢
                     cont(b, q1 + q2 , e)                          Bob has 5 apples.
          cont(a, q1 , e)    transfer(a, b, q2 , e)                Alice has 3 apples. Bob gave 2 apples to Alice. ⊢ Alice
                     cont(a, q1 + q2 , e)                          has 5 apples.
              cont(a, q1 , e)   cont(b, q2 , e)
                                                                   Alice has 3 apples. Bob has 5 apples. ⊢ Bob has 2 more
                   comp(b, a, q2 - q1 , e)                         apples than Alice.
        cont(a1 , q1 , e1 )      ...    cont(an , qn , en )
                                     Pn                            Alice has 3 apples. Bob has 5 apples. ⊢ Alice and Bob
             partwhole(∧ n  i=1 ai ,
                                                 n
                                      i=1 qi , ∧ i=1 ei )          have 8 fruits combined.
                                                                   Alice has 7 apples. David has 2 more apples than Charlie.
   cont(a, q1 , e)    comp(d, c, q2 , e)     comp-eq(b, a, d, c)   The number of apples that Bob has more than Alice is the
                        cont(b, q1 + q2 , e)
                                                                   same as the difference between the number of apples that
                                                                   David and Charlie have. ⊢ Bob has 9 apples.



is an instance of an inference rule where the conclusion logical form L is deduced from premises
L1 , L2 , . . . , LN . An axiom is a proof step without premises. The axioms for a problem are the
logical forms in the body of its world model, i.e., all logical forms excluding the question. Table 2
lists the inference rules that we use, along with examples of how they may be expressed in natural
language.4 For example, consider the two logical forms cont(Isabella, 17, apple) and
comp(Lucy, Isabella, 10, apple) from Fig. 1, representing the facts that Isabella has
17 apples and Lucy has 10 more apples than Isabella, respectively. The proof step

        cont(Isabella, 17, apple) comp(Lucy, Isabella, 10, apple)
                        cont(Lucy, 17 + 10, apple)

lets us deduce the logical form cont(Lucy, 27, apple), i.e., that Lucy has 27 apples.
A math word problem can be solved by applying inference rules until the answer to the problem
has been proved. Formally, a proof tree is a rooted ordered tree where each node is labeled with a
unique logical form L, which is the conclusion of a proof step with premises L1 , . . . , LN , matching
the labels of the child nodes in the same order. Leaf nodes are thus labeled with axioms. A proof of
a particular problem is a proof tree where the labels on the leaf nodes are the logical forms in the
body of the problem, and the label at the root is the answer to the problem. The tree shown in Fig. 1
illustrates a proof of the problem given in the same figure.

Complexity of proof trees. We seek a systematic way to analyze whether LLMs can generalize from
simple to more complex proofs.5 The definition of proof given above gives rise to several ways of char-
acterizing reasoning, out of which we consider four: depth, width, shape, and ordering. The depth of
a proof tree is defined as its height, i.e., the maximum path length from the root node to any leaf node.
Next, the width of a proof tree is the number of leaf nodes, or axioms, that it contains. The proof tree
in Fig. 1 thus has depth 2 and width 5. In words, this means that the answer is two proof steps “away”
   4
      The list is not exhaustive as additional variations on the rules exist. In particular, the logical forms may
contain attributes and units (such as the cont examples in Table 1), the cont premises may be replaced by
the partwhole premises (so that partwhole can be used for further proof steps), and the premises can be
given in any order for all inference rules (i.e., they are commutative) except the one using transfer. The
transfer rule is non-commutative since it involves a notion of time. For instance, “Alice (now) has 5 apples.
Alice ate 2 apples.” does not imply the same conclusion as “Alice ate 2 apples. Alice (now) has 5 apples.”
Moreover, note that the third inference rule listed in Table 2 is commutative, since swapping the two premises
yields the conclusion comp(a, b, q1 − q2 , e), which is equivalent to comp(b, a, q2 − q1 , e).
    5
      Note that our use of the term “complexity” is different from its conventional use in proof theory, in which
proof complexity refers to the efficiency of a proof system (Cook & Reckhow, 1979).


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from any of the axioms and that the problem has five (declarative) sentences.6 We distinguish two
forms of proof-tree shapes: We say that a proof tree is linear if each of its proof steps takes at most one
premise that is not an axiom, and nonlinear otherwise.7 In other words, every step in the solution to a
linear problem uses only at most one fact not directly present in the problem; see Fig. 6 for an example.
The proof tree given in Fig. 1 is nonlinear because the proof step that deduces the answer uses two
premises that are not themselves axioms. Lastly, we define canonical ordering as the ordering of the
leaf nodes when visited from left to right. Note that the sentences in the natural language annotation
from Fig. 1 follow the canonical ordering of the proof tree. Informally, this is an easy way to order
the sentences in the problem, since it matches the ordering of the proof steps. However, there exist
multiple alternative orderings in general. In particular, given a proof tree that only contains commuta-
tive inference rules (see footnote 4), all orderings of the leaf nodes are valid. For instance, swapping
the ordering of the first two leaf nodes in the tree in Fig. 1 yields a problem with the same proof.


4       E VALUATION F RAMEWORK

Equipped with the formalism explained in §3, we propose an evaluation framework that tests LLMs
on MWPs that have arbitrarily complex proofs, called MathGAP. In §4.1, we explain the generation
method behind MathGAP. We then outline how this method can be used for OOD evaluation in §4.2.

4.1     G ENERATION M ETHOD

We propose a method for synthetic generation of problems and their CoT solution explanations. The
approach consists of three high-level steps: (i) sample a proof tree, (ii) map the logical forms at the
leaf nodes into a natural language problem, and (iii) map the proof steps into a CoT solution.8 Fig. 1
gives an illustration of these steps; note that the agent properties are abbreviated for brevity.
In detail, the procedure is as follows: We first sample a logical form to label the root of the proof tree.
We then sample an inference rule whose conclusion matches the root, and use it to connect the root
node to child nodes representing the premises of the sampled inference rule. We repeat this procedure
recursively for each premise at the leaf nodes of the current tree until a predetermined stopping
criterion has been reached, resulting in a proof tree. The stopping criterion is user-specified; it could
be, e.g., when the tree has reached a certain depth or width. The categorical properties for the logical
forms (i.e., agent, entity, attribute, and unit) are sampled uniformly at random from some vocabularies.
We then convert each leaf node into a sentence via a natural language template in some order, forming
the text corresponding to the body of the problem. The default order follows the proof tree’s canonical
ordering, but other orders are possible as well. The sentences are sampled uniformly at random from
a predefined set of templates; some example templates are given in Table 1. The question is converted
from the logical form at the root of the proof tree and is sampled from a set of interrogative sentences.
In the final step, we generate the CoT annotation for the problem. We first obtain a sequential
ordering of the CoT proof steps by visiting the nodes in the proof tree with a post-order traversal.9
We then convert each proof step into a sentence via a natural language template. The templates
used for the axioms are identical to those used in the body of the problem text; that is, the proof
steps corresponding to axioms simply repeat the relevant part of the problem text. For the other
proof steps, we use templates designed to explain the computation step that is performed. Fig. 1
    6
      In this paper, the width of the proof tree matches the number of declarative sentences (i.e., all sentences
except the question) in the corresponding problem since we restrict the logical forms and sentences to be
one-to-one. In general, this need not be the case since a single sentence could be written as a conjunction of
several logical forms. One could also construct problems that have irrelevant sentences which either represent
logical forms that will not be used in the proof or have no corresponding logical form at all.
    7
      We note that our notion of linear proofs is distinct from linear logic (Girard, 1987).
    8
      Our pipeline is similar to Opedal et al.’s (2024), except that we use a top-down procedure to generate full
proof trees, rather than a sequential one to generate only axioms. This is a more general approach that enables
generation of proofs with arbitrary shapes, e.g., nonlinear ones using comp-eq; see App. D. Our pipeline is
also similar to the method proposed by Jin et al. (2023) for generating causal reasoning problems.
    9
      Note that the choice of traversing the nodes in post order corresponds to applying each inference rule as
soon as all of its premises are available. In addition, post-order traversal visits the axioms in canonical ordering.
Alternative orders of tree traversal would violate at least one of these constraints.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


illustrates the mapping between the nodes in the proof tree and the sentences in the CoT annotation.
For instance, the third sentence in Fig. 1 explains the conclusion cont(Lucy, 27, apple),
which is deduced from the two leftmost nodes in the tree: “So Lucy has 17 + 10 = 27 apples”.

4.2        M ATH GAP: M ATHEMATICAL G ENERALIZATION ON A RITHMETIC P ROOFS

With our generation method we can generate new synthetic problems where we control for the
structure of the proof and its complexity. This mitigates the risk that the problems are contaminated.
MathGAP can be used for various forms of systematic studies on arithmetic reasoning; here, we focus
on in-context easy-to-hard OOD generalization. Specifically, we select a family of problems of interest
(e.g., linear problems under comp inference rules) and generate a train-test split of problems in which
problems in the test set are more complex than those in the training set (e.g., requiring deeper proofs).
The generation method can be flexibly adapted. One can add new logical forms and inference rules,
restrict the choice of existing ones during sampling, or create logical forms for irrelevant sentences
(Shi et al., 2023). One can also vary the text templates for the logical forms and inference rules,
the vocabularies for agents, entities, attributes, and units, and the range of numbers from which the
quantities are sampled. In addition, one may increase lexical and syntactic diversity by using an LLM
to paraphrase the templated texts, e.g., through a procedure like Mishra et al.’s (2024). We do not
perform such paraphrasing for the data in our experiments since it could introduce bias (Boguraev
et al., 2024; Opedal et al., 2024) and produce problems that are unfaithful to their formal specifications.


5        G ENERALIZING TO C OMPLEX P ROOFS

We apply MathGAP to study how LLMs generalize from proof demonstrations of simple problems in
context to solve problems of higher complexity at inference. We test OOD generalization through
several sets of experiments: depth generalization for linear problems (§5.1), width generalization
for linear problems (§5.2), depth generalization for nonlinear problems (§5.3), and generalization to
permutations of the axioms (§5.4). Our public code repository provides further problem variations.

Experimental setup. For each set of experiments, the general experimental setup is as follows: We
generate multiple test sets of different degrees of complexity with 400 problems in each. We then
generate model predictions for the problems in these test sets under four different prompts: (i) A
zero-shot baseline prompt, which contains only the test problem; (ii) A prompt of primitive examples,
in which all problems contain only one proof step of the same inference rule that is used in the test
problem; (iii) A prompt of examples within a range of complexities, all of which are simpler than
the test problem; (iv) An in-distribution baseline prompt, containing examples that are of the same
complexity as the test problem.
Note that prompts (i) through (iii) evaluate in-context OOD generalization, since the test examples
are from a distribution that is different from that of the in-context examples. For prompts (ii) through
(iv) we generate a new set of in-context examples for every test problem. This is done in order to
avoid bias in the results towards any particular set of examples. We set the number of examples to 12,
except for the experiments on nonlinear problems for which we use 5—see App. C for the rationale.
Importantly, the in-context problems are provided together with their CoT solution annotations,
as generated through the MathGAP pipeline. For prompt (iii), we make sure that there is at least
one problem of every complexity in the range. This prompt can be viewed as a form of in-context
curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009),10 except that we randomize the ordering of the examples
rather than arranging them in increasing order of complexity. This is done since in-context orderings
can have a large effect on performance (Lu et al., 2022), and we do not want our results to overfit to
any particular ordering. More details on the data and prompt are given in App. C.
Responses are generated using greedy decoding and a maximum context length of 4,096 tokens.
Model predictions are obtained by extracting the last number occurring in the model output. We
report answer accuracies and compute 95% confidence intervals using bootstrap sampling (Efron,
1992). We evaluate the following models on all test sets: Mixtral-8x7B (Jiang et al., 2024a), Llama3
with 8B and 70B parameters (Llama Team, 2024), GPT-3.5 Turbo and GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024).
    10
         Related approaches have been explored in previous work (Li et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024b).


                                                           7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                   Linear Problems (Comp)
                      Mixtral 8x7B Instruct            Llama3 8B Instruct              Llama3 70B Instruct                   GPT-3.5 Turbo                       GPT-4o
           1.00
           0.75
Accuracy   0.50
           0.25
           0.00
                  6      7     8      9       10   6     7     8      9     10     6      7       8   9       10         6   7      8          9    10   6   7     8      9    10
                             Depth                           Depth                            Depth                              Depth                           Depth
                                                                     Zero-shot     OOD (primitive)         OOD (range)       In-distribution
                                                                                  Linear Problems (Transfer)
                      Mixtral 8x7B Instruct            Llama3 8B Instruct              Llama3 70B Instruct                   GPT-3.5 Turbo                       GPT-4o
           1.00
           0.75
Accuracy


           0.50
           0.25
           0.00
                  6      7     8      9       10   6     7     8      9     10     6      7       8   9       10         6   7      8          9    10   6   7     8      9    10
                             Depth                           Depth                            Depth                              Depth                           Depth
                                                                     Zero-shot     OOD (primitive)         OOD (range)       In-distribution
                                                                                 Linear Problems (Part-Whole)
                      Mixtral 8x7B Instruct            Llama3 8B Instruct              Llama3 70B Instruct                   GPT-3.5 Turbo                       GPT-4o
           1.00
           0.75
Accuracy


           0.50
           0.25
           0.00
                  7      8     9      10      11   7     8     9      10    11     7      8       9   10      11         7   8      9          10   11   7   8     9      10   11
                             Width                           Width                            Width                              Width                           Width
                                                                     Zero-shot     OOD (primitive)         OOD (range)       In-distribution

 Figure 2: Answer accuracies for generalization to increasing depth and width for linear problems
 across models and in-context distributions. Depth is increased using inference rules involving comp
 and transfer. Width is increased using partwhole. See App. E for example problems.

  5.1             L INEAR D EPTH G ENERALIZATION

 Problem sets. We consider linear problems using both comp and transfer. The five test sets con-
 sist of problems with depths between 6−10. As such, the examples provided in the range of setting (iii)
 described above have depths between 1−5. We give an example of a problem with depth 6 in App. E.1.

 Results. The results are illustrated in the top and middle rows of Fig. 2. As expected, we observe
 a decreasing trend in performance as depth increases, for all in-context distributions. Curiously, GPT-
 3.5-Turbo is the only model for which adding in-context examples consistently leads to improvements.
 For the majority of cases, performance tends to be larger when providing a range of examples of
 varying complexity as compared to only primitive examples. The ranged OOD cases often show com-
 parable performance to that of the in-distribution context, suggesting that these models benefit from
 demonstrations of problems with varying complexity. Llama3-8B is an outlier in that its solving accu-
 racy for in-distribution context is (substantially) lower as compared to other prompts. When inspecting
 the outputs we see that the model often fails to answer the inference question, recognizing only that it
 has been provided a sequence of in-context examples. This could potentially be a consequence of how
 Llama3 is trained, using smaller context windows for the initial stages of pretraining (Llama Team,
 2024). This appears to be remedied by scale since Llama3 70B shows near perfect performance.

  5.2             L INEAR W IDTH G ENERALIZATION

 Problem sets. We test generalization to larger proof width using partwhole problems with
 a fixed depth of 1. The five test sets have widths between 7−11 and the problems in setting (iii)
 described above have widths between 2−6. Note that this matches the width for the problems in §5.1;
 for those problems the width was equal to the depth plus one. App. E.2 gives an example problem.

 Results. The results are shown in the bottom row of Fig. 2. Apart from the GPT models, the perfor-
 mance is generally lower as compared to deep problems with the same number of sentences (§5.1),
 often with a sharper decreasing trend. Such is the case even for Llama3 70B, which performed almost
 perfectly in the linear depth setting. This suggests that it is more difficult to generalize in terms of
 width than in terms of depth, which is somewhat surprising considering that these problems only have


                                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                           Nonlinear Problems
                      Mixtral 8x7B Instruct           Llama3 8B Instruct                            Llama3 70B Instruct                                 GPT-3.5 Turbo               GPT-4o
           1.0

           0.8

Accuracy   0.6

           0.4

           0.2

           0.0
                 3       4            5       6   3     4           5      6               3           4            5             6               3     4           5   6   3   4            5   6
                             Depth                          Depth                                           Depth                                           Depth                   Depth
                                                                               Zero-shot       OOD (primitive)      OOD (range)       In-distribution


Figure 3: Answer accuracies for generalization to increasing depth and width for nonlinear problems
across models and in-context distributions. Depth is increased using inference rules involving comp
and comp-eq. The in-distribution contexts were too large to fit in context for the Llama3 models and
GPT-3.5 Turbo at some of the higher depths. App. F shows results on o1-preview and DeepSeek-R1.

one proof step. For GPT-3.5 and Mixtral-8x7B, we observe that providing in-context examples im-
proves accuracy over zero-shot in most cases. As for linear depth generalization, it seems that having
a range of OOD examples of varying complexity is superior to only including primitive examples. For
the Llama models, adding OOD in-context examples often leads to lower performance over zero-shot.

5.3                  N ONLINEAR D EPTH G ENERALIZATION

Problem sets. We generate test datasets containing nonlinear problems with comp and comp-eq
which have a similar form as the problem in Fig. 1. The procedure is explained in App. D and a more
complex, depth 3 example is given in App. E.3. We generate a test set for each depth between 3−6.
Thus, the ranged OOD context setting contains examples of depths between 1−2.

Results. The results are shown in Fig. 3. All models exhibit a performance trend that tends to zero
as depth increases, albeit at different rates. For Mixtral-8x7B, Llama3-8B, and GPT-3.5 Turbo, the
performance decreases rapidly across all context modes. These models benefit from in-distribution
contexts for low depths, and in some cases, from a range of OOD examples. Llama3-70B and GPT-4o
are more robust to this type of OOD distribution shift,11 but for the deepest problems their performance
tends to zero as well. Thus, the models are able to generalize to some extent but the error rate increases
with complexity, suggesting that LLMs are noisy reasoners (Prabhakar et al., 2024). Moreover, it
is worth noting that, for many cases, providing in-context examples does not significantly improve
performance over zero-shot. On the other hand, for lower depths, it is usually beneficial to provide in-
distribution contexts. We perform an additional analysis on o1-preview and DeepSeek-R1 in App. F.

Comparison to linear problems. Nonlinear problems are more difficult than the linear ones, even
when controlling for the number of axioms given in the problem (i.e., its width). To see this, note that
a nonlinear problem with depth 3 has 10 axioms (see App. D). This is the same number of axioms as
the linear comparison and transfer problems (§5.1) with depth 9 and the linear part-whole problems
(§5.2) with width 10. Comparing the results across those problem sets, we observe considerably lower
accuracies for the nonlinear problems in most cases. We believe there are two main explanations
for this: (i) Solving nonlinear problems requires keeping intermediate conclusions in memory while
proving other intermediate conclusions, before being able to use them for further proof steps. It is
thus less predictable where the relevant tokens will be located within the context window as compared
to linear problems, in which intermediate conclusions are used immediately in a new proof step. (ii)
Nonlinear problems use the comp-eq rule, which is most likely less frequent in the training set. In-
specting the model outputs we find support for both of these explanations—errors show up both when
a previously deduced conclusion is needed as well as when a comp-eq is required in a proof step.

5.4                  O RDER G ENERALIZATION

Problem sets. LLMs are known to be sensitive to changes in the order of axioms in logical and math-
ematical reasoning problems (Chen et al., 2024; Eisape et al., 2024). Here, we present a systematic
analysis of their sensitivity to a particular form of order permutation. We consider linear, left-leaning
   11
      Note that GPT-4o performs better on depth 6 problems than depth 5 problems under the in-distribution
prompt. Although we provided the same model id as in the other cases—which according to the documentation
points to the original “gpt-4o-2024-05-13” snapshot—this particular test was performed at a later point in time.


                                                                                                           9
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                   Permuted Linear Problems
                      Mixtral 8x7B Instruct           Llama3 8B Instruct                   Llama3 70B Instruct                         GPT-3.5 Turbo                GPT-4o
           1.00
           0.75
Accuracy   0.50
           0.25
           0.00
                  1      2      3       4     5   1     2      3       4   5          1      2      3       4    5         1       2        3      4   5   1   2      3       4   5
                             Distance                       Distance                             Distance                               Distance                   Distance
                                                                               Zero-shot          OOD (range)        In-distribution

 Figure 4: Answer accuracies for generalization to permutations across models and in-context
 distributions. We measure complexity as the distance of the movement of a sentence to the beginning
 of the problem, as compared to its position in the canonical ordering of the problem.


 proof trees using comp that have depth 5, and generate problems that deviate from the canonical, left-
 to-right order of the leaf nodes. In particular, we pick one of the leaf nodes to visit first, and then visit
 the remaining leaf nodes in left-to-right order. This has the effect of moving one of the sentences in the
 canonically-ordered problem text to the beginning of the problem. An illustration is shown in Fig. 7
 and App. E.4 gives further examples. We characterize complexity as the distance of the movement,
 with the hypothesis that a greater movement from a canonical ordering constitutes a more difficult
 problem. We create five test sets with movement distances between 1−5. We do not include a primi-
 tive OOD in-context distribution since the notion of a primitive problem is ill-defined in this case. The
 range prompt includes movements of all distances between 1−5 except the one present in the test set.


 Results. The results are shown in Fig. 4. First, note that all models show lower performance on
 perturbed problems as compared to non-perturbed ones (compare to Fig. 2), suggesting that they
 are sensitive to simple perturbations of axiom orderings. Second, there is a nonlinear relationship
 between accuracy and distance of the movement, in contrast to the monotonically decreasing relation
 we expected. More specifically, the performance is the highest for the problems where the sentence
 is moved from near the beginning or the end of the problem.12 In addition, including in-context
 examples gives a larger boost in performance for short and long movements, as compared to medium-
 length ones. Inspecting the model outputs, we observe that the models often make logical mistakes
 when the sentence that has been moved is needed for the subsequent proof steps. These kinds of
 mistakes appear to be more common than arithmetic errors.


  6               C ONCLUSION

 This paper introduced MathGAP, a framework for evaluating LLMs on math word problems with
 proofs that are arbitrarily complex. MathGAP can flexibly generate synthetic arithmetic word
 problems with controllable proof tree characteristics. Importantly, this enables studies of easy-to-
 hard OOD generalization that avoid issues of data contamination, since a train-test split where the
 distributions are different can be created programmatically. In particular, the test set can be made
 arbitrarily more complex than the training set. We applied MathGAP to study whether LLMs can
 learn from simple examples in context to solve more complex problems in a test set. All models
 showed a decrease in performance as complexity of proof trees increases through depth and/or width.
 The LLMs struggled more with wider problems than with deeper problems, and were worse at solving
 problems with nonlinear shapes as compared to linear ones. We also found that LLMs are sensitive to
 the order in which sentences are presented. We further demonstrated that we can use MathGAP to
 construct problems that are challenging even for state-of-the-art reasoning models like OpenAI o1
 and DeepSeek-R1—see App. F.
 Code to generate problems with MathGAP, including problem types beyond those considered in this
 paper, can be found in our public code repository. Finally, see App. G for a discussion on limitations
 of the present work.


    12
       This is consistent with findings on retrieval-augmented generation, for which models are better at using
 information that occurs near the beginning or end of the prompt (Liu et al., 2024a).


                                                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Alessandro Stolfo, Moritz Miller, Ryan Cotterell, Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Yanick Zengaffinen,
and Yilmazcan Ozyurt for useful discussion. Andreas Opedal acknowledges funding from the Max
Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Avi Singh, Lei Zhang, Bernd Bohnet, Luis Rosias, Stephanie Chan, Biao
  Zhang, Ankesh Anand, Zaheer Abbas, Azade Nova, John D. Co-Reyes, Eric Chu, Feryal Behba-
  hani, Aleksandra Faust, and Hugo Larochelle. Many-shot in-context learning. In A. Glober-
  son, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 76930–76966. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2024/file/8cb564df771e9eacbfe9d72bd46a24a9-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Shengnan An, Zeqi Lin, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen, Nanning Zheng, Jian-Guang Lou, and Dongmei Zhang.
  How do in-context examples affect compositional generalization? In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 11027–11052, Toronto, Canada,
  July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.acl-long.618.
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra, Vinay Ra-
  masesh, Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur.         Ex-
  ploring length generalization in large language models.   In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 38546–38556. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/fb7451e43f9c1c35b774bcfad7a5714b-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning.
  In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’09,
  pp. 41–48, New York, NY, USA, 2009. Association for Computing Machinery. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/1553374.1553380.
Sasha Boguraev, Ben Lipkin, Leonie Weissweiler, and Kyle Mahowald. Models can and should em-
  brace the communicative nature of human-generated math. In The 4th Workshop on Mathematical
  Reasoning and AI at NeurIPS’24, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17005.
Nasim Borazjanizadeh and Steven T. Piantadosi. Reliable reasoning beyond natural language, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11373.
Samuel R. Bowman, Jeeyoon Hyun, Ethan Perez, Edwin Chen, Craig Pettit, Scott Heiner, Kamilė
  Lukošiūtė, Amanda Askell, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron
  McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Daniela Amodei, Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Jackson Kernion, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal
  Ndousse, Liane Lovitt, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Nicholas Joseph, Noemı́ Mercado, Nova
  DasSarma, Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish, Sandipan Kundu, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec,
  Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan, Tristan
  Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. Measuring progress on
  scalable oversight for large language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.
  03540.
Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbrenner,
  Yining Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, Ilya Sutskever, and Jeff Wu. Weak-to-
  strong generalization: Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2312.09390.
Xinyun Chen, Ryan Andrew Chi, Xuezhi Wang, and Denny Zhou. Premise order matters in reasoning
  with large language models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.08939.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2110.14168.

Stephen A. Cook and Robert A. Reckhow. The relative efficiency of propositional proof sys-
  tems. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 44(1):36–50, 1979. URL http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/
  ˜sacook/homepage/cook_reckhow.pdf.
DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning,
  2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948.

Chunyuan Deng, Yilun Zhao, Xiangru Tang, Mark Gerstein, and Arman Cohan. Investigating data
  contamination in modern benchmarks for large language models. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez,
  and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 8706–8719, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.482.

Jesse Dodge, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasović, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groeneveld,
  Margaret Mitchell, and Matt Gardner. Documenting large webtext corpora: A case study on
  the colossal clean crawled corpus. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia,
  and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 1286–1305, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic,
  November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2021.emnlp-main.98.

Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang (Lorraine) Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Sean
 Welleck, Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena Hwang, Soumya Sanyal, Xiang
  Ren, Allyson Ettinger, Zaid Harchaoui, and Yejin Choi. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers on
  compositionality. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.),
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 70293–70332. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2023/file/deb3c28192f979302c157cb653c15e90-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Bradley Efron. Bootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknife. In Breakthroughs in Statistics:
  Methodology and Distribution, pp. 569–593. Springer, 1992. URL https://link.springer.
  com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4612-4380-9_41.

Tiwalayo Eisape, Michael Henry Tessler, Ishita Dasgupta, Fei Sha, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Tal
  Linzen. A systematic comparison of syllogistic reasoning in humans and language models. In
  Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
  nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8425–8444, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.
  466.

Yanai Elazar, Akshita Bhagia, Ian Helgi Magnusson, Abhilasha Ravichander, Dustin Schwenk, Alane
  Suhr, Evan Pete Walsh, Dirk Groeneveld, Luca Soldaini, Sameer Singh, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  Noah A. Smith, and Jesse Dodge. What’s in my big data? In The Twelfth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.20707.

Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter Clark, and Tushar Khot. Complexity-based prompting
  for multi-step reasoning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.00720.

Gerhard Gentzen. Untersuchungen über das logische schließen. I. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 39(1):
 176–210, Dec 1935. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01201353.

Jean-Yves Girard. Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 50(1):1–101, 1987. URL https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0304397587900454.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peter Hase, Mohit Bansal, Peter Clark, and Sarah Wiegreffe. The unreasonable effectiveness of
  easy training data for hard tasks. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 7002–7024, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.378.
Yi Hu, Xiaojuan Tang, Haotong Yang, and Muhan Zhang. Case-based or rule-based: How do
  transformers do the math? In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller,
  Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  19438–19474. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/
  hu24n.html.
Yinya Huang, Xiaohan Lin, Zhengying Liu, Qingxing Cao, Huajian Xin, Haiming Wang, Zhenguo
  Li, Linqi Song, and Xiaodan Liang. Mustard: Mastering uniform synthesis of theorem and
  proof data. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.08957.
Alon Jacovi, Avi Caciularu, Omer Goldman, and Yoav Goldberg. Stop uploading test data in plain
  text: Practical strategies for mitigating data contamination by evaluation benchmarks. In Houda
  Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 5075–5084, Singapore, December 2023. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.
  308.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris
  Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand,
  Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-
  Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le
  Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed.
  Mixtral of experts, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04088.
Bowen Jiang, Yangxinyu Xie, Zhuoqun Hao, Xiaomeng Wang, Tanwi Mallick, Weijie J Su,
  Camillo Jose Taylor, and Dan Roth. A peek into token bias: Large language models are not
  yet genuine reasoners. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  4722–4756, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024b. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.272.
Zhijing Jin, Yuen Chen, Felix Leeb, Luigi Gresele, Ojasv Kamal, Zhiheng LYU, Kevin
  Blin, Fernando Gonzalez Adauto, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Bernhard
  Schölkopf. Cladder: Assessing causal reasoning in language models. In A. Oh, T. Nau-
  mann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 31038–31065. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/631bb9434d718ea309af82566347d607-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Douwe Kiela, Max Bartolo, Yixin Nie, Divyansh Kaushik, Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Bertie
 Vidgen, Grusha Prasad, Amanpreet Singh, Pratik Ringshia, Zhiyi Ma, Tristan Thrush, Sebastian
  Riedel, Zeerak Waseem, Pontus Stenetorp, Robin Jia, Mohit Bansal, Christopher Potts, and Adina
 Williams. Dynabench: Rethinking benchmarking in NLP. In Kristina Toutanova, Anna Rumshisky,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Iz Beltagy, Steven Bethard, Ryan Cotterell, Tanmoy
  Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American
 Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
 4110–4124, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.324.
Keito Kudo, Yoichi Aoki, Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Ana Brassard, Masashi Yoshikawa, Keisuke Sak-
  aguchi, and Kentaro Inui. Do deep neural networks capture compositionality in arithmetic
  reasoning? In Andreas Vlachos and Isabelle Augenstein (eds.), Proceedings of the 17th
  Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  1351–1362, Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.98.
Changqun Li, Linlin Wang, Xin Lin, Gerard de Melo, and Liang He. Curriculum prompt learning with
  self-training for abstractive dialogue summarization. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and
  Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 1096–1106, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.
  72.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T. Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Transformers
  learn shortcuts to automata. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.10749.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni,
  and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transac-
  tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–173, 2024a. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2024.tacl-1.9.
Yinpeng Liu, Jiawei Liu, Xiang Shi, Qikai Cheng, Yong Huang, and Wei Lu. Let’s learn step
  by step: Enhancing in-context learning ability with curriculum learning, 2024b. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.10738.
Llama Team. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
  21783.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically
  ordered prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In
  Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 8086–8098, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.556.
Anna Mészáros, Szilvia Ujváry, Wieland Brendel, Patrik Reizinger, and Ferenc Huszár. Rule ex-
  trapolation in language modeling: A study of compositional generalization on ood prompts. In
 A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (eds.),
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 34870–34899. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2024/file/3d9ef68629089da055334c2d41dfcf93-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Keivan Alizadeh, Hooman Shahrokhi, Oncel Tuzel, Samy Bengio, and
  Mehrdad Farajtabar. Gsm-symbolic: Understanding the limitations of mathematical reasoning in
  large language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05229.
Shubhra Mishra, Gabriel Poesia, Belinda Mo, and Noah D. Goodman. Mathcamps: Fine-grained
  synthesis of mathematical problems from human curricula, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2407.00900.
Pearla Nesher, James G. Greeno, and Mary S. Riley. The development of semantic categories
  for addition and subtraction. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 13:373–394, 1982. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:120936397.
Andreas Opedal, Niklas Stoehr, Abulhair Saparov, and Mrinmaya Sachan. World models for math
  story problems. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 9088–9115, Toronto, Canada,
 July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.findings-acl.579.
Andreas Opedal, Alessandro Stolfo, Haruki Shirakami, Ying Jiao, Ryan Cotterell, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, Abulhair Saparov, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Do language models exhibit the same
  cognitive biases in problem solving as human learners? In Proceedings of the 41st International
 Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.
 18070.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Arkil Patel, Satwik Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal. Are NLP models really able to solve simple math
  word problems? In Kristina Toutanova, Anna Rumshisky, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tur,
  Iz Beltagy, Steven Bethard, Ryan Cotterell, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2080–2094, Online, June 2021. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.
  168.
Frank Pfenning. Natural deduction. Lecture notes in 15-815 Automated Theorem Proving, 2004. URL
  https://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜fp/courses/atp/handouts/ch2-natded.pdf.
Akshara Prabhakar, Thomas L. Griffiths, and R. Thomas McCoy. Deciphering the factors influ-
  encing the efficacy of chain-of-thought: Probability, memorization, and noisy reasoning. In
 Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Findings of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pp. 3710–3724, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  findings-emnlp.212/.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining
  term frequencies on few-shot numerical reasoning. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and
  Yue Zhang (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp.
  840–854, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.59.
Mary Riley, James Greeno, and Joan Heller. Development of Children’s Problem-Solving Ability in
 Arithmetic, pp. 153–196. Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh, 01
 1983. URL https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED252410.
Oscar Sainz, Jon Campos, Iker Garcı́a-Ferrero, Julen Etxaniz, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, and Eneko
  Agirre. NLP evaluation in trouble: On the need to measure LLM data contamination for each
  benchmark. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 10776–10787, Singapore, December 2023.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-emnlp.722.
Abulhair Saparov and He He. Language models are greedy reasoners: A systematic formal analysis
  of chain-of-thought. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.01240.
Abulhair Saparov, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Vishakh Padmakumar, Nitish Joshi, Mehran
  Kazemi, Najoung Kim, and He He.       Testing the general deductive reasoning ca-
  pacity of large language models using ood examples.     In A. Oh, T. Naumann,
 A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 3083–3105. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/09425891e393e64b0535194a81ba15b7-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Avi Schwarzschild, Eitan Borgnia, Arjun Gupta, Furong Huang, Uzi Vishkin, Micah Goldblum,
  and Tom Goldstein. Can you learn an algorithm? generalizing from easy to hard problems with
  recurrent networks. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman
  Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 6695–
  6706. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2021/file/3501672ebc68a5524629080e3ef60aef-Paper.pdf.
Paulo Shakarian, Abhinav Koyyalamudi, Noel Ngu, and Lakshmivihari Mareedu. An independent
  evaluation of ChatGPT on mathematical word problems (MWP). In Andreas Martin, Hans-
  Georg Fill, Aurona Gerber, Knut Hinkelmann, Doug Lenat, Reinhard Stolle, and Frank van
  Harmelen (eds.), Proceedings of the AAAI 2023 Spring Symposium on Challenges Requiring
  the Combination of Machine Learning and Knowledge Engineering (AAAI-MAKE 2023), Hyatt
  Regency, San Francisco Airport, California, USA, March 27-29, 2023, volume 3433 of CEUR


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org, 2023. URL https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3433/
  paper8.pdf.

Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed H. Chi, Nathanael
  Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context.
  In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and
  Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 31210–31227. PMLR, 23–29 Jul
  2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/shi23a.html.

Elsbeth Stern. What makes certain arithmetic word problems involving the comparison of sets
  so difficult for children? Journal of Educational Psychology, 85:7–23, 1993. URL https:
  //psycnet.apa.org/record/1993-21196-001.

Alessandro Stolfo, Zhijing Jin, Kumar Shridhar, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Mrinmaya Sachan. A
  causal framework to quantify the robustness of mathematical reasoning with language models. In
  Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 545–
  561, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.32.

Zhiqing Sun, Longhui Yu, Yikang Shen, Weiyang Liu, Yiming Yang, Sean Welleck, and Chuang
  Gan. Easy-to-hard generalization: Scalable alignment beyond human supervision. In The Thirty-
  eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2403.09472.

Jonathan Thomm, Giacomo Camposampiero, Aleksandar Terzic, Michael Hersche, Bern-
  hard Schölkopf, and Abbas Rahimi.    Limits of transformer language models on
  learning to compose algorithms. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan,
  U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 37, pp. 7631–7674. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024.  URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/
  0e797d5139ad94fc2dc2080c09119f29-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In
  Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.

Tian Ye, Zicheng Xu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zeyuan Allen-Zhu. Physics of language models: Part 2.1,
  grade-school math and the hidden reasoning process. In The Thirteenth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20311.

Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng YU, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, James Kwok, Zhenguo
  Li, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions for
  large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.12284.

Hugh Zhang, Jeff Da, Dean Lee, Vaughn Robinson, Catherine Wu, Will Song, Tiffany Zhao, Pranav
  Raja, Charlotte Zhuang, Dylan Slack, Qin Lyu, Sean Hendryx, Russell Kaplan, Michele Lunati,
  and Summer Yue. A careful examination of large language model performance on grade school
  arithmetic. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 46819–46836. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2024/file/53384f2090c6a5cac952c598fd67992f-Paper-Datasets_
  and_Benchmarks_Track.pdf.

Yi Zhang, Arturs Backurs, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Suriya Gunasekar, and Tal Wagner.
  Unveiling transformers with LEGO: a synthetic reasoning task, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2206.04301.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Problem Text                                                      World Model

      1 Isabella has 17 apples.                                         1 container(Isabella, 17, apple);
      2 Lucy has 10 more apples than Isabella.                          2 comparison(Lucy, Isabella, 10, apple);
      3 John has 11 apples.                                             3 container(John, 11, apple);
      4 Emily has 19 apples.                                            4 container(Emily, 19, apple);
      5 The number of apples that Lucy has more than Sam is the         5 comp-eq(Lucy, Sam, Emily, John, apple);
      same as the diﬀerence between the number of apples that
      John has compared to Emily.                                       6 container(Sam, q, apple);
                                                                        7 container(Sam, 19, apple);
      6 How many apples does Sam have?
      7 Answer: 19


Figure 5: World model (right) of a math word problem (left). Each sentence in the problem text is rep-
resented by a logical form which consists of a predicate with property arguments. The logical forms in
the body are used as axioms in the proof of the problem, as shown in Fig. 1. The sentences and logical
forms labeled (1) through (5) are the body of the problem, (6) is the question and (7) is the answer.


Mingyu Zong and Bhaskar Krishnamachari. Solving math word problems concerning systems of
 equations with GPT-3. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 37(13):
 15972–15979, Sep. 2023. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/
 view/26896.


 A    I NTUITION ON L OGICAL F ORMS
 A cont logical form expresses the fact that an agent owns a particular entity in some quantity (e.g.,
“Alice has 5 apples”). A comp logical form expresses how much more some agent owns of a particular
 entity than some other agent (e.g., “Bob has 3 fewer apples than Alice”). A transfer logical form
 expresses the transfer of a certain quantity of an entity from one agent to another (e.g., “Alice gave
 Bob 3 apples”). A partwhole logical form expresses a superset relation between the combined
 entities of several agents (e.g., Alice and Bob combine their fruits). Finally, a comp-eq logical form
 expresses that the quantity of a particular comp between two agents is equal to the difference of the
 quantities of the entity of two other agents (e.g., “The number of apples that Alice has more than Bob
 is the same as the difference between the number of apples that Charlie and David have”).
Fig. 5 gives an example problem text along with its world model.

 B    D EFINING I NFERENCE RULES WITH NATURAL D EDUCTION
Our inference rules can be written using the primitive inference rules present in natural deduction
(Gentzen, 1935; Pfenning, 2004) as applied to first-order logic expressions; see Opedal et al. (2023,
App. D) for details on how the formalism described in §3 is a form of first-order logic. In this section
we illustrate an example using the inference rule

                                 cont(a, q1 , e) comp(b, a, q2 , e) ,
                                        cont(b, q1 + q2 , e)
involving comp. This inference rule is composed of rules in natural deduction as follows:

       1. ∃v1 (Owner(v1 , a) ∧ Measure(v1 , q1 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ v1 .e(x)) by Axiom (1st premise, definition
          of container as in Opedal et al. 2023, App. D.2.1).
       2. Owner(v1 , a) ∧ Measure(v1 , q1 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ v1 .e(x) by ∃-elimination [1].
       3. ∃e1 (ComparisonAdd(e1 ) ∧ Source(e1 , v1 ) ∧ Target(e1 , v2 ) ∧ Time(v1 ) =
          Time(v2 ) ∧ ∃r(Arg(e1 , r) ∧ Measure(r, q2 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ r.e(x))) by Axiom (2nd premise,
          definition of comparison as in Opedal et al. 2023, App. D.2.2).
       4. ComparisonAdd(e1 ) ∧ Source(e1 , v1 ) ∧ Target(e1 , v2 ) ∧ Time(v1 ) = Time(v2 ) ∧
          ∃r(Arg(e1 , r) ∧ Measure(r, q2 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ r.e(x)) by ∃-elimination [3].


                                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     5. ∃r(Arg(e1 , r) ∧ Measure(r, q2 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ r.e(x)) by ∧-elimination [4].
     6. Arg(e1 , r) ∧ Measure(r, q2 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ r.e(x) by ∃-elimination [5].
     7. Arg(e1 , r) ∧ ∀x ∈ r.e(x) by ∧-elimination [6].
     8. ComparisonAdd(e1 ) ∧ Arg(e1 , r) ∧ ∀x ∈ r.e(x) by ∧-introduction [7].
     9. ∀e∀r(ComparisonAdd(e) ∧ Arg(e, r) ∧ ∀x ∈ r.e(x) → ∃v∃o∃q(Target(e, v) ∧
        Owner(v, o) ∧ Measure(v, q) ∧ ∀x ∈ v.e(x)) by Axiom (theorem on the existence
        of containers from existing relations as in Opedal et al. 2023, App. D.4).
    10. ComparisonAdd(e1 ) ∧ Arg(e1 , r) ∧ ∀x ∈ r.e(x) → ∃v∃o∃q(Target(e1 , v) ∧
        Owner(v, o) ∧ Measure(v, q) ∧ ∀x ∈ v.e(x)) by ∀-elimination [9].
    11. ∃v∃o∃q(Target(e1 , v)∧Owner(v, o)∧Measure(v, q)∧∀x ∈ v.e(x)) by →-elimination
        [8, 10].
    12. Target(e1 , v2 ) ∧ Owner(v2 , b) ∧ Measure(v2 , qt ) ∧ ∀x ∈ v2 .e(x) by ∃-elimination
        [11].
    13. Owner(v2 , b) ∧ Measure(v2 , qt ) ∧ ∀x ∈ v2 .e(x) by ∧-elimination [12].
    14. ∀e∀vs ∀vt ∀ms ∀mt ∀r(ComparisonAdd(e) ∧ Arg(e, r) ∧ Source(e, vs ) ∧
        Target(e, vt ) ∧ Measure(vs , ms ) ∧ Measure(vt , mt ) → ms + r = mt ) by
        Axiom (theorem defining the semantics of comparison as in Opedal et al. 2023, App. D.3).
    15. ComparisonAdd(e1 ) ∧ Arg(e1 , r) ∧ Source(e1 , v1 ) ∧ Target(e1 , v2 ) ∧
        Measure(v1 , q1 ) ∧ Measure(v2 , qt ) → q1 + q2 = qt by ∀-elimination [14].
    16. Measure(v1 , q1 ) by ∧-elimination [2].
    17. Measure(v2 , qt ) by ∧-elimination [13].
    18. ComparisonAdd(e1 ) ∧ Arg(e1 , r) by ∧-elimination [8].
    19. Source(e1 , v1 ) ∧ Target(e1 , v2 ) by ∧-elimination [4].
    20. ComparisonAdd(e1 ) ∧ Arg(e1 , r) ∧ Source(e1 , v1 ) ∧ Target(e1 , v2 ) ∧
        Measure(v1 , q1 ) ∧ Measure(v2 , qt ) by ∧-introduction [4, 16, 17, 18, 19].
    21. q1 + q2 = qt by →-elimination [15, 20].
    22. Owner(v2 , b) ∧ Measure(v2 , q1 + q2 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ v2 .e(x) by =-elimination [13, 21].
    23. ∃v2 (Owner(v2 , b) ∧ Measure(v2 , q1 + q2 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ v2 .e(x)) by ∃-introduction [22].

Note that the conclusion (step 22) is the first-order logic equivalent of cont(b, q1 + q2 , e),
which is the conclusion of the comparison inference rule.


C    M ORE D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTS

Generated problems. The quantities are sampled uniformly at random from the range 2−20. We
use a handwritten list of 52 English-language names for most problems, with the exception of the
larger nonlinear problems for which we use a larger list of 4,945 predominantly English-language
names from https://github.com/dominictarr/random-name. For the entities we use a handwritten word
list with 51 items. We restrict each problem to have one entity, We determine uniformly at random
whether the problem has attributes, units, or neither of them.

Prompts. We use 12 in-context examples for all test sets except for the nonlinear problems, for
which we use 5. We use fewer in-context examples for nonlinear problems since the number of
sentences in a nonlinear problem increases exponentially with depth. The number 12 was deemed
large enough so that additional examples would have a negligible positive impact on performance;
see, e.g., Agarwal et al. (2024, Fig. 7). Moreover, in preliminary experiments we found that the
number of in-context examples had little effect on performance. The in-context examples are written
out using the pattern “Q: {problem}\nA: {CoT solution}\n”.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Models. The maximum context windows for Mixtral-8x7B, Llama3 8B, Llama3 70B, GPT-3.5
Turbo and GPT-4o are 65k, 8k, 8k, 16k, 128k, respectively. Combined with a maximum number
of output tokens of 4,096, the models have a theoretically sufficient context size to solve all test
problems. The largest test problems (nonlinear depth 6) have around 2.5k tokens, including CoT
annotation.
For GPT-3.5 Turbo and GPT-4o we used “gpt-3.5-turbo-0125” and “gpt-4o-2024-05-13” as the model
ids for all experiments.

D    N ONLINEAR C OMPARISON P ROBLEMS

In this section we explain why we have introduced the comp-eq predicate to generate nonlinear trees.
We also give the procedure for generating the nonlinear problems used for the experiments in §5.3.

Motivating example. We first motivate why we introduce the comp-eq predicate to build proof
trees with nonlinear shape of arbitrary depth. Consider the following problem which is based solely
on logical forms with cont and comp: “Alice has 5 apples. Bob has 3 more apples than Alice.
Charlie has 10 apples. David has 2 more apples than Charlie. How many more apples does David
have than Bob?”. This problem is represented by the following nonlinear proof tree of depth 2:

    cont(A, 5, a) comp(B, A, 3, a) cont(C, 10, a) comp(D, C, 2, a)
             cont(B, 8, a)                  cont(D, 12, a) .
                           comp(D, B, 4, a)
Now, say we are following the top-down generation procedure described in §4.1 and wish to expand
the tree to higher depths. However, the two leaf nodes labeled with comp are impossible to expand
further under the given inference rules. For instance, the comp(B, A, 3, a) would be deduced
by the two premises cont(A, 5, a) and cont(B, 8, a), but those two logical forms are
already present elsewhere in the tree and are thus not available. This leaves only the two cont nodes
for further expansion. However, any further subtrees of the cont nodes will be linear, since none of
the comp nodes generated along the way will be able to be expanded.13
The inference rule with comp-eq addresses this issue. To see this, replace the subtree rooted
at cont(B, 8, a) in the proof tree above with some subtree that uses an inference rule with
comp-eq, e.g.,

            cont(A, 5, a) comp(E, F, 4, a) comp-eq(B, A, E, F) .
                              cont(B, 8, a)
Note that, in this case, both cont(A, 5, a) and comp(E, F, 4, a) can be expanded. In
particular, comp(E, F, 4, a) introduces two new agents E and F, so it can be expanded similarly
to the root node from our example above.

Procedure. We want to sample a nonlinear proof tree with depth D. We start by sampling either a
cont node or a comp node uniformly at random to determine the root of the tree. Next, we sample
an inference rule for which the root logical form is the conclusion. We then sample inference rules
from the child nodes in breadth-first order until all leaves except the ones labeled with comp-eq
(which cannot be expanded) have depth D. For comp nodes, there is only one inference rule possible
(the third row in Table 2). For cont nodes we sample a comp rule (i.e., the first row in Table 2) if
the cont node has depth D − 1, and a comp-eq rule (i.e., the fifth row in Table 2) otherwise. This
ensures that we can continue to grow the tree nonlinearly until the specified depth, following the
reasoning given in the paragraph above.
Note that the width of the proof trees generated with this procedure will be the number of leaf nodes
in a perfect binary tree with depth D, i.e., 2D , plus the number of nodes labeled with comp-eq.
Thus, a depth 2 problem will have a width of either 4 or 5, a depth 3 problem will have a width of 10,
  13
     This reasoning assumes that we only use the inference rules with cont and comp from Table 2. Deeper
nonlinear problems could be achieved by using the partwhole rule as well.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Proof tree

            1   cont(I,17,apple)       2   comp(L,I,10,apple)
                         3   cont(L,27,apple)                                    4   comp(L,J,11,apple)
                                                      5   cont(J,16,apple)                                      6   comp(J,E,9,apple)

                                                                                      7   cont(E,7,apple)


    Word problem                                                        Chain-of-Thought Reasoning Trace
    1 Isabella has 17 apples. 2 Lucy has 10 more apples than                 1 Isabella has 17 apples. 2 Lucy has 10 more apples than Isabella.
    Isabella. 4 Lucy has 11 more apples than John. 6 Emily has               3 So Lucy has 17 + 10 = 27 apples. 4 Lucy has 11 more apples than
    9 fewer apples than John.                                                John. 5 So John has 27 - 11 = 16 apples. 6 Emily has 9 fewer apples
                                                                             than John. 7 So Emily has 16 - 9 = 7 apples.
      7   How many apples does Emily have?


Figure 6: Example of a linear problem using comp with depth 3 and width 4. This problem is linear
because each parent node in the tree has at most one child that is not a leaf node. Compare to the
nonlinear problem shown in Fig. 1.


and a depth 4 problem will have a width of either 20 or 21. In general, the width W (D) for a proof
tree of depth D is:
                                                    D−2
                                                    X
                                   W (D) = 2D +          fc (d),
                                                                               d=0

where fc (d) gives the number of comp-eq nodes as a function of the level d, following the recursion

                                               1 if root is cont
                                    fc (0) =
                                               0 if root is comp

                                               1 if root is cont
                                    fc (1) =
                                               2 if root is comp
                                              fc (d) = fc (d − 1) + 2fc (d − 2), d ≥ 2.

E         E XAMPLE P ROBLEMS AND I LLUSTRATIONS

In this section we provide example problems for each set of experiments (§§ 5.1 to 5.4).

E.1        E XAMPLE LINEAR COMPARISON PROBLEM ( DEPTH 6)

Jackson has 16 red bottles of soap. Jackson has 10 more red bottles of soap than Abigail. Joseph has
18 more red bottles of soap than Abigail. Joseph has 14 fewer red bottles of soap than James. Michael
has 2 more red bottles of soap than James. Ryan has 16 fewer red bottles of soap than Michael. Mia
has 10 more red bottles of soap than Ryan. What is the number of red bottles of soap that Mia has?

E.2        E XAMPLE PARTWHOLE WIDTH PROBLEM ( WIDTH 7)

Emily has 5 apples. Lily has 8 bananas. Abigail has 9 bananas. Benjamin has 11 grapes. Christopher
has 20 apples. Mila has 16 grapes. Sophia has 11 watermelons. If everyone sums up the fruits that
they have, how many fruits does everybody have in total?

E.3        E XAMPLE NONLINEAR COMPARISON PROBLEM ( DEPTH 3)

Ella has 11 yellow plates. Ella has 19 fewer yellow plates than Jacob. Evelyn has 16 yellow plates.
Daniel has 10 yellow plates. The number of yellow plates that Emma has more than Jacob is the
same as the difference between the number of yellow plates that Evelyn has compared to Daniel.
Lucy has 2 yellow plates. Amelia has 6 more yellow plates than Lucy. Layla has 17 yellow plates.


                                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Proof tree

            2   cont(I,17,apple)       3   comp(L,I,10,apple)
                         4   cont(L,27,apple)                                  1   comp(L,J,11,apple)
                                                    5   cont(J,16,apple)                                      6   comp(J,E,9,apple)

                                                                                    7   cont(E,7,apple)


  Word problem (movement distance: 2)                                 Chain-of-Thought Reasoning Trace
   1 Lucy has 11 more apples than John. 2 Isabella has 17                  1 Lucy has 11 more apples than John. 2 Isabella has 17 apples. 3 Lucy
   apples. 3 Lucy has 10 more apples than Isabella. 6 Emily                as 10 more apples than Isabella. 4 So Lucy has 17 + 10 = 27 apples. 5 So
   has 9 fewer apples than John.                                           John has 27 - 11 = 16 apples. 6 Emily has 9 fewer apples than John. 7 So
                                                                           Emily has 16 - 9 = 7 apples.
      7   How many apples does Emily have?


Figure 7: The same proof tree as Fig. 6 but with a permuted ordering as in the experiments discussed
in §5.4. In this specific example, the leaf node labeled with comp(L, J, 11, apple) is visited
first (the other nodes follow post-order traversal). This translates into moving the sentence “Lucy
has 11 more apples than John” to the front of the problem. As compared to the canonically ordered
problem shown in Fig. 6, the sentence has moved two steps.


Layla has 13 fewer yellow plates than Sophia. The number of yellow plates that Emma has more than
Henry is the same as the difference between the number of yellow plates that Amelia has compared to
Sophia. What is the number of yellow plates that Henry has?


E.4        P ERMUTED PROBLEMS

C ANONICALLY ORDERED PROBLEM TEXT

Nicholas has 19 computers. Lucy has 6 fewer computers than Nicholas. Harper has 6 fewer
computers than Lucy. John has 10 more computers than Harper. Abigail has 15 fewer computers
than John. Abigail has 12 fewer computers than Logan. How many computers does Logan have in
their collection?


P ERMUTED PROBLEM TEXT ( DISTANCE 1)

Lucy has 6 fewer computers than Nicholas. Nicholas has 19 computers. [Original Position] Harper
has 6 fewer computers than Lucy. John has 10 more computers than Harper. Abigail has 15 fewer
computers than John. Abigail has 12 fewer computers than Logan. How many computers does Logan
have in their collection?


P ERMUTED PROBLEM TEXT ( DISTANCE 3)

John has 10 more computers than Harper. Nicholas has 19 computers. Lucy has 6 fewer computers
than Nicholas. Harper has 6 fewer computers than Lucy. [Original Position] Abigail has 15 fewer
computers than John. Abigail has 12 fewer computers than Logan. How many computers does Logan
have in their collection?


P ERMUTED PROBLEM TEXT ( DISTANCE 5)

Abigail has 12 fewer computers than Logan. Nicholas has 19 computers. Lucy has 6 fewer computers
than Nicholas. Harper has 6 fewer computers than Lucy. John has 10 more computers than Harper.
Abigail has 15 fewer computers than John. [Original Position] How many computers does Logan
have in their collection?


                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Nonlinear Problems
                         OpenAI o1 (preview)                                DeepSeek-R1
               1.0


    Accuracy   0.5

               0.0
                     3    4              5           6              3   4                 5   6
                               Depth                                          Depth

Figure 8: Answer accuracies for generalization to increasing depth and width for nonlinear problems
for OpenAI o1-preview and DeepSeek-R1 under zero-shot prompting and a maximum context length
of 4,096 tokens.


F     A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS ON R EASONING M ODELS

Fig. 8 shows additional results on the OpenAI o1-preview model (“o1-preview-2024-09-12”) and
DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI, 2025), evaluated on the nonlinear test sets. We only used zero-
shot prompting due to the high costs of performing inference on these models. Using a simple,
straightforward prompt is also consistent with OpenAI’s current recommendations. We see that these
models show superior performance to all models from the main text, with o1 generalizing better than
R1. However, as with the other models, the performance decreases as complexity increases.
Importantly, we noted that performance can be drastically improved by increasing the limit on
the number of output tokens. The results presented in Fig. 8 used a token limit of 4,096, like the
experiments in the main paper. For o1, we compared the effect of the token limit on an additional test
set of 400 nonlinear problems with depth 7. With a token limit of 4,096, the model could only answer
0.25% of the problems correctly. However, with a token limit of 10,000, it answered 76.5% of the
problems correctly. For R1, the performance on problems with depth 6 is increased to 77.5% when
using a token limit of 10,000. These results are noteworthy and suggests that the inference techniques
used by these models is highly effective for decomposing complex problems into smaller steps.
To test the limits of these models, we performed a final evaluation on a subset of 100 of the depth 7
problems where the sentences in each problem were randomly ordered (apart from the question). Re-
call from §3.2 that permuting the sentences in random order is valid since all the inference rules used
in our nonlinear problems are commutative. In this experiment, we allowed 25,000 output tokens for
both models, which is the current recommendation by OpenAI. On this set, the answer accuracy was
only 5.0% for o1 and 11.0% for R1. Thus, we conclude that MathGAP is future-proof in the sense that
it can generate problems on which current state-of-the-art reasoning models fail. We stress, however,
that the aim of this paper is not to construct a challenging test set for state-of-the-art models; there are
several other ways that MathGAP can be used to create problems that might be even more difficult.


G       L IMITATIONS

We did not prioritize linguistic diversity in our problem sets; future work may investigate how our
findings generalize to distributions of problems with higher linguistic diversity. We did also not
consider or study the possibility of token biases (Jiang et al., 2024b). It is beyond the scope of the
present study to consider problem texts in languages other than English; however, it is straightforward
to extend MathGAP to other languages. In addition, we cannot guarantee that the distributions of our
generated problems are different from those of any potential internal data-generating mechanisms
from Meta or OpenAI. However, we deem it to be unlikely that they use a similar formalism as we do
here, and it gets increasingly unlikely that problems are similar as complexity increases.
While the more complex nonlinear problems are indeed challenging even for the most capable models,
we note the purpose of our study was not to create a challenging evaluation set for state-of-the-art
LLMs. If that is the goal, one could create harder problems by combining several inference rules
(e.g., additionally including the rate concept; Opedal et al., 2023), allowing a wider variety of
proof-tree shapes, and presenting the axioms in arbitrary orderings. It is also possible to create more
syntactically complex templates (and paraphrase those using LLMs) and use numbers on which it is
more challenging for models to perform arithmetic (Razeghi et al., 2022).


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, it is hard to make a direct comparison between the difficulty of linear and nonlinear problems,
since they use different inference rules. In particular, nonlinear proofs contain comp-eq predicates,
which are not present in linear proofs.


                                                  23
