Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E VERYTHING , E VERYWHERE , A LL AT O NCE :
I S M ECHANISTIC I NTERPRETABILITY I DENTIFIABLE ?
 Maxime Méloux, François Portet, Silviu Maniu, Maxime Peyrard
 Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France
 {melouxm,portetf,manius,peyrardm}@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr



                                            A BSTRACT

         As AI systems are increasingly deployed in high-stakes applications, ensur-
         ing their interpretability is essential. Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) aims to
         reverse-engineer neural networks by extracting human-understandable algorithms
         embedded within their structures to explain their behavior. This work systemati-
         cally examines a fundamental question: for a fixed behavior to explain, and under
         the criteria that MI sets for itself, are we guaranteed a unique explanation? Draw-
         ing an analogy with the concept of identifiability in statistics, which ensures the
         uniqueness of parameters inferred from data under specific modeling assumptions,
         we speak about the identifiability of explanations produced by MI. We identify
         two broad strategies to produce MI explanations: (i) “where-then-what”, which
         first detects a subset of the network (a circuit) that replicates the model’s behavior
         before deriving its interpretation, and (ii) “what-then-where”, which begins with
         candidate explanatory algorithms and searches in the activation subspaces of the
         neural model where the candidate algorithm may be implemented, relying on no-
         tions of causal alignment between the states of the candidate algorithm and the
         neural network. We systematically test the identifiability of both strategies us-
         ing simple tasks (learning Boolean functions) and multi-layer perceptrons small
         enough to allow a complete enumeration of candidate explanations. Our experi-
         ments reveal overwhelming evidence of non-identifiability in all cases: multiple
         circuits can replicate model behavior, multiple interpretations can exist for a cir-
         cuit, several algorithms can be causally aligned with the neural network, and a
         single algorithm can be causally aligned with different subspaces of the network.
         We discuss whether the unicity intuition is necessary. One could adopt a prag-
         matic stance, requiring explanations only to meet predictive and/or manipulability
         standards. However, if unicity is considered essential, e.g., to provide a sense of
         understanding, we also discuss less permissive criteria. Finally, we also refer to
         the inner interpretability framework that demands explanations to be validated by
         multiple complementary criteria. This work aims to contribute constructively to
         the ongoing effort to formalize what we expect from explanations in AI.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Interpretability in machine learning spans diverse goals and methods (Molnar, 2022; Carvalho et al.,
2019; Teney et al., 2022), from creating inherently interpretable models to applying post hoc tech-
niques to explain model decisions. Mechanistic interpretability (MI) aims to reverse-engineer mod-
els to reveal simple, human-interpretable algorithms embedded in neural network structure (Olah
et al., 2020). MI is focused on generating what we call computational abstractions, where complex
neural networks’ behaviors are explained by simpler algorithms that track the internal computations
(Olah et al., 2020). A computational abstraction – a mechanistic explanation – has two components:
(a) what is the explanatory algorithm, and (b) where in the computational structure is this algo-
rithm embedded? Given the intractability of exhaustively searching all possible algorithms across
all subsets of a neural network, researchers have developed methods with different assumptions
and trade-offs. We categorize these methods into two broad strategies. The first, which we call
where-then-what, focuses on finding a subset of the network – a circuit – that captures most of the
information flow from inputs to outputs. Once this circuit is identified, typically using heuristics,


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the next step is to interpret its components (features) to derive the explanatory algorithm (Dunefsky
et al., 2024; Davies & Khakzar, 2024; Conmy et al., 2023). The second approach, which we name
what-then-where, starts by identifying candidate algorithms and then searches subspaces in the neu-
ral network where the algorithm may be implemented. This is performed using causal alignment
between the explanatory algorithm’s states and the network’s internal states and typically requires
approximation algorithms (Geiger et al., 2022a;b). Each strategy relies on specific criteria to assess
candidate explanations. For instance, circuits can be evaluated by their circuit error, which quan-
tifies how closely the circuit’s predictions match the full model ones (Conmy et al., 2023). In the
what-then-where strategy, candidate algorithms are compared based on causal alignment measures
like intervention interchange accuracy (IIA), which assesses how well the algorithm’s states remain
aligned with the network’s internal states after counterfactual manipulations of the states.
In this work, we question a property of explanation that appears to be tacitly taken for granted: do
MI criteria guarantee a unique explanation of a fixed behavior? The concept of identifiability is
well-established in statistics, where a model is identifiable if its parameters can be uniquely inferred
from data under a given set of modeling assumptions (e.g., Rothenberg, 1971). By analogy, we
extend this terminology to interpretability, defining the identifiability of explanation as the property
where, under fixed assumptions of validity, a unique explanatory algorithm satisfies the criteria.
Specifically, we ask the following questions: In the where-then-what strategy, (i) is the circuit (the
“where”) unique? (ii) Is a given circuit’s grounding interpretation (the “what”) unique? In the what-
then-where strategy, (iii) is the causally-aligned algorithm (the “what”) unique? (iv) For a given
algorithm, is there a unique subspace of the neural network (the “where”) that is causally aligned?
We stress-test the identifiability properties of current MI criteria by conducting experiments in a
controlled, small-scale setting. Using simple tasks like learning Boolean functions and very small
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), we search for Boolean circuit explanations – aiming to discover
which succession of logic gates is implemented by the MLPs. This setup allows us to exhaustively
enumerate incompatible candidate explanations and test them with existing criteria. Our experiments
reveal non-identifiability at every stage of the MI process. Specifically, we find that: (i) Multiple
circuits can perfectly replicate the model’s behavior (with a circuit error of zero), (ii) for a given
circuit, multiple valid interpretations exist, (iii) several algorithms can be perfectly causally aligned
with the neural computation (IIA of one), and (iv) for a given causally aligned algorithm, multiple
subspaces of the neural network can be equally aligned (IIA = 1).
In the discussion, we revisit whether unicity is necessary. We discuss alternative criteria and per-
spectives that do not require modifying existing criteria, such as requiring explanations only to meet
predictive and/or manipulability standards. However, if unicity is considered essential, e.g., to pro-
vide a sense of understanding, we also discuss less permissive criteria. Finally, we also refer to the
inner interpretability framework (Vilas et al., 2024) that requires an explanation to be validated by
multiple complementary criteria. We hope our work contributes constructively to the ongoing effort
to develop rigorous definitions for what it means to explain a complex neural network.


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   M ECHANISTIC I NTERPRETABILITY

Mechanistic interpretability rests on the key assumptions that a neural network’s behavior can be
explained by a simpler algorithm than the full network, and that a sparse subset of the network
executes this algorithm. Previous research has given support to these assumptions: pruning studies
(Gale et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024) and the lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle &
Carbin, 2019; Liu et al., 2024) suggest that networks are often overparameterized, and only a fraction
of neurons and connections are critical to the final performance. Training sub-networks (Yuan et al.,
2019) to approximate the full model (Liao & Kyrillidis, 2022), similar to dropout (Srivastava et al.,
2014), supports the idea that sub-networks can approximate the full network’s behavior well.
This search for interpretable circuits is inspired by neuroscience, which has long sought to uncover
neural circuits that explain observed behaviors (Yuste, 2008). Once the neural circuit is discovered,
researchers focus on interpreting the functional roles of each component in the brain (Yuste, 2008).
Research in computer vision has already shown that some nodes within neural networks compute


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


interpretable features (Olah et al., 2017). Connections between such features, also called circuits,
can be compact explanations of model behavior (Olah et al., 2020; Carter et al., 2019; Dreyer et al.,
2024). Finally, recent work has applied mechanistic interpretability to LLMs (Elhage et al., 2021),
especially in transformer models (Templeton et al., 2024; Bricken et al., 2023; Vilas et al., 2023). For
example, Wang et al. (2022) identified a circuit responsible for Indirect Object Identification (IOI)
in transformers, highlighting the potential for mechanistic explanations of complex LLM behaviors.

2.2   D EFINITIONS

A satisfactory mechanistic explanation of
a model’s behavior consists of two com-
                                                         Base                1. Circuit         Computational
ponents: the what, a high-level algorithm
                                                    Neural Network                               Abstraction
that closely approximates the model’s be-
havior and tracks its internal computation,                                                             0

and the where, specifying how and where                                                                         a     b       c       F2
this algorithm is embedded in the model’s
low-level neural computation.                                                                   F0 0 1          0 1       F1

We refer to the combination of an explana-                                                         I
tory algorithm and the mapping between
                                                                           2. Mapping 𝝉
the high- and low-level states as a compu-                        neural activations ↔ feature values
tational abstraction. This is an abstraction                                                            F                 c
                                                                                                            2
as it simplifies the neural network’s com-            F       0     1        F       0      1
                                                          0                      1
                                                                                                                 b
putation, focusing on a subset of the com-                                                                                        a


putational graph and abstracting neural ac-
tivations into simpler, high-level features.
For example, consider the mechanistic ex-       Figure 1: Illustration of the computational abstraction
planation of how a vision algorithm recog-      components within a neural network. The circuit rep-
nizes rectangles. We might identify a com-      resents a subgraph, and the mapping specifies the high-
putational abstraction where certain mod-       level features computed by the circuit, detailing how
ules perform edge detection, others detect      their values arise from low-level neural activations. To-
right angles, and a final component applies     gether, these form the computational abstraction (ex-
an AND logic gate to confirm the pres-          planation of the neural network). Here, feature F2 has
ence of four right angles. This abstraction     three possible values and is defined within the 2D ac-
specifies the algorithm and how and where       tivation space of two neurons. Features F0 and F1 are
low-level neural activations correspond to      binary variables, each assigned to a single neuron. F0
high-level features of the algorithm. In        covers the entire activation space and F1 only maps
this work, we interchange the terms expla-      specific intervals, leaving some activations unassigned.
nation and computational abstraction.
Formally, we define a computational ab-
straction A as a tuple (S, τ ), where S is the circuit, the subset of the neural network’s computational
graph responsible for the behavior of interest, and τ is the mapping between the states of the circuit
and the states of the variables of the algorithm, which specifies how to interpret the computational
function of the circuit’s components. We now proceed to define the circuit and mapping formally.
Definition 1 (Circuit). Let G = (V, E) represent the computational graph of a neural network,
where V is the set of nodes (neurons) and E ⊆ V × V is the set of edges (connections between
neurons). A circuit S = (VS , ES ) is a subgraph of G that contains at least one path from a subset
of input nodes to a subset of output nodes.
Definition 2 (Mapping (τ )). A mapping between low-level values taken by neurons and high-level
values taken by the variables of the explanatory algorithm consists of a set of K surjective maps,
one for each high-level variable. Each associates the neural network activations with the values of
the corresponding high-level variable. For a group of neurons Vj in the neural network, mapped to a
high-level variable Aj with possible values {f0 , . . . , fm }, the mapping τj : R|Vj | → {f0 , . . . , fm }
assigns a vector of activations  to one of the possible values of Aj . Each mapping should
                                                                                          be surjective
 ∀fi , ∃h ∈ R|Vj | : τj (h) = fi and with a non-empty pre-image ∀fi , τj−1 (fi ) ̸= ∅
These conditions ensure that all high-level values can be realized by some set of low-level activa-
tions.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In practice, we are interested in mappings that satisfy a consistency requirement. Intuitively, consis-
tency means that if we first perform part of the computation using the neural network and then apply
the mapping to get the state of a high-level variable, the outcome should be identical to applying the
mapping and then performing the computation of the high-level algorithm. The computations in the
neural network and the high-level algorithm should align consistently according to the mapping.
Definition 3 (Consistent Mapping). Let τ be a mapping between groups of low-level neurons {Vj }
and their corresponding high-level variables {Aj }. The mapping τ is said to be consistent if for any
high-level variable Aj , with parents P Aj , the following diagram commutes:

                                                      Alg.
                                          P Aj                Aj
                                              τP Ai          τj


                                         R|VP Aj |    NN
                                                             R|Vj |

Here: τP Aj represents the application of τ to each variable in P Aj ; N N refers to the computation
between the low-level neural network states; and Alg. refers to the computation between high-level
variables governed by the explanatory algorithm.
Previous works have explored various types of high-level features and representational abstractions,
including mappings based on “directions in activation space” or specific points within activation
subspaces (Olah et al., 2020; 2018; Bereska & Gavves, 2024). This work focuses on explana-
tory algorithms represented as Boolean circuits, where high-level features are binary (0 or 1). The
mappings specify which activations correspond to 0 and 1. Boolean circuits are computationally
universal and thus sufficient to demonstrate identifiability issues in existing MI criteria.

2.3   A PPROACHES TO C IRCUIT D ISCOVERY

We identify and describe two strategies for reverse-engineering neural networks: the where-then-
what and what-then-where approaches.

W HERE - THEN - WHAT
Methods from this strategy first aim to identify a circuit that replicates the behavior of the full model
well. Once a circuit is found, the next step is to interpret its components to uncover the high-level
algorithm being implemented (Dunefsky et al., 2024; Davies & Khakzar, 2024). The evaluation
criteria for circuits is how well they replicate the full model’s behavior for the input of interest.
Definition 4 (Circuit Error). Let S be the function computed by a circuit and g the function computed
by the model    on which the circuit is defined. For the input set x, the error of the circuit S is:
            x∈x 1[S(x) = g(x)]
      1
         P
1 − |x|

In the case of perturbed inputs, it can also be defined via the KL divergence between the logits of
the circuit and the model (Conmy et al., 2023).
In practice, circuit search relies on causal mediation analysis, which seeks to isolate the subset of
the network that carries the information from the inputs to the output. Since it is computationally
intractable to enumerate all possible circuits in complex models (Adolfi et al., 2024b), existing
methods focus on computing mediation formulas for individual components to decide their inclusion
in the circuit (Vig et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022; Monea et al., 2024; Kramár et al., 2024; Conmy
et al., 2023; Geva et al., 2023; Syed et al., 2023).
A combination of data analysis and human input is typically used to interpret candidate circuits.
For example, activation maximization identifies inputs that maximally activate a component, which
helps clarify its function (Zhou et al., 2016; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Simonyan et al., 2014). This
technique has been extended to modern LLMs (Peyrard et al., 2021; Jawahar et al., 2019; Dai et al.,
2022). However, polysemantic neurons, which encode multiple concepts simultaneously (Templeton
et al., 2024; Bricken et al., 2023), complicate the interpretation of LLMs components. For a broader
overview of these challenges, we refer readers to the following surveys: Sajjad et al. (2022); Khakzar
et al. (2021). In this work, we use the concept of consistent mapping as the objective evaluation of
the quality of an interpretation.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W HAT- THEN - WHERE
Methods from this strategy first hypothesize a candidate high-level algorithm and then search for
mappings between the states of this algorithm and subspaces of the neural activations. The goal is
to identify mappings where the high-level and low-level states are causally aligned, meaning they
respond similarly under interventions.
Given a candidate high-level algorithm A, neural activations H, and a mapping τ defined between
them, counterfactual interventions are performed on the inner variables of A, and corresponding
interventions are applied to H via τ . Intervention interchange accuracy (IIA) (Geiger et al., 2022b)
is then defined for each high-level variable and measures the similarity of outputs in A and H after
intervening (metric for causal alignment). We give in Appendix A a complete, formal definition.
A perfect IIA score (1) for all variables indicates that all possible interventions produce the same ef-
fect in low-level and high-level models. In practice, exhaustive enumeration is often impractical, and
IIA is approximated using randomly sampled inputs (Geiger et al., 2022b). Similarly to the map-
ping consistency defined above, perfect causal alignment requires diagram commutation between
low- and high-level models under interventions.
Searching for causal alignment between high-level models and neural activations can be computa-
tionally expensive, as it often requires testing many potential mappings. The Distributed Align-
ment Search method (Geiger et al., 2024) addresses this challenge by employing gradient de-
scent to search for alignments efficiently. This approach also allows for distributed representa-
tions, where multiple neurons represent a single high-level variable. Indeed, an underlying assump-
tion of IIA is that the neural activations corresponding to distinct high-level variables are disjoint:
∀x, y ∈ V, τ −1 (x) ∩ τ −1 (y) = ∅, which may not occur in real-world examples (Olah et al., 2020).
Currently, no systematic method exists for choosing which candidate algorithms to test. Previous
work (Wu et al., 2023) has manually proposed a few candidates, but the vast space of possible
algorithms makes this an open challenge.

2.4   E XPLANATION “I DENTIFIABILITY ”

The assumption of explanatory unicity – the idea that there exists a single, unique explanation for
a given phenomenon – is not only implicit in the practice of mechanistic interpretability (see rel-
evant citations in Appendix C) but also rooted in human cognitive and psychological tendencies
(Trout, 2007; Waskan, 2024; Gopnik, 2000). Humans demonstrate a cognitive preference for coher-
ent explanations that integrate disparate observations into a unified narrative (e.g., Friedman, 1974;
Kitcher, 1962; 1981; Schurz, 1999; Kveraga et al., 2007). This preference aligns with the psy-
chological need for cognitive closure, defined as the desire for a definitive conclusion (Kruglanski,
1989). Multiple incompatible explanations disrupt coherence, leading to ambiguity and a sense of
unresolved understanding.
Conversely, in the philosophy of science, explanatory pluralism acknowledges that the world is too
complex to be fully described by a single comprehensive explanation (Kellert et al., 2006; Potochnik,
2017). Multiple explanations often coexist without conflict because they address different explana-
tory goals (e.g., explaining distinct behaviors) or employ different simplification strategies (e.g.,
differing levels of abstraction Marr & Poggio, 1976). However, in this work, we deliberately search
for conflicting explanations by fixing both the explanatory goal and the simplification strategies, as
the ones defined by MI criteria.
Identifiability and incompatible explanations.
As mentioned in Section 1, we borrow the term of identifiability from the field of statistics (Rothen-
berg, 1971), defining identifiability of explanation as the property where a unique explanation is
valid under fixed standards of validity. An MI strategy is not identifiable if its standards of validity
do not discriminate between two incompatible explanations.
We define two explanations as incompatible or conflicting if they share the same explanatory goal
and simplification strategy, but posit different computational abstractions. In our context, the ex-
planatory goal is fixed: explaining the specific input-output behavior of a trained MLP. The simplifi-
cation strategy is also fixed, corresponding to one of two predefined strategies to find computational
abstractions: the what-then-where or the where-then-what defined above.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 Candidate Algorithms                         Computational Abstractions
                                                                                                  Example of 2 perfect mappings for one algorithm
                                                                  2 candidates are tested
                                                                           𝐍𝐀𝐍𝐃
               What-then-where: searching for different             A
                                                                                    𝐀𝐍𝐃

                  candidate algorithms causally aligned in the
                     activations of the base neural network         B
                                                                            𝐎𝐑
                    Base Neural Network
                                                                         ¬𝐀 𝐀𝐍𝐃 𝐁

                                                                                                                                           …
                                                                                     𝐎𝐑
                                                                    A
              Train an MLP to implement XOR
                                                                    B
                                                                         𝐀 𝐀𝐍𝐃 ¬𝐁                                              159 perfect mappings (IIA=1)
              𝐴
                                              𝐶
             𝐵                                                                      Circuits                         Computational Abstractions
                                                                   85 unique circuits with perfect accuracy     25 unique abstractions with exact grounding
                         𝐴 = 0|1 + 𝒩(0, ℰ)                                                                     between neural activations and gate definitions
                         𝐵 = 0|1 + 𝒩(0, ℰ)
                    𝐶 = 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝐴 ⊕ 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑(𝐵)


                    Where-then-what: searching circuits
                         that support behavior and then
                    interpreting their features via grounding
                                                                                          …                                         …

Figure 2: Illustration of identifiability problems using the XOR example. We train a small
MLP with two hidden layers of size 3 to compute the XOR function perfectly. The figure shows
the outcome of stress-testing the two reverse-engineering strategies: Top: For the what-then-where
strategy, we enumerate all subsets of neurons searching for subsets causally aligned with interme-
diate variables of candidate algorithms, with alignment measured by IIA. Even testing only two
candidate algorithms, we find perfect implementations of both in the model. Multiple mappings
(localizations) for each algorithm were identified, showing that neither the algorithm (what) nor its
location in the network (where) is unique. Bottom: For the where-then-what strategy, we enumerate
circuits (sub-networks) and test whether each computes the XOR independently. For each circuit,
we search for possible feature interpretations of the selected neurons, identifying intermediate logic
gates whose values can be mapped consistently with the neurons’ activations. Consistency is defined
as in 3. We find many different perfect circuits (the where is not unique) and for any given circuit,
we find multiple valid interpretations (the what is not unique).


Incompatibility of two explanations can occur if (1) the two explanations posit different algorithms
for the same behavior, or (2) the same algorithm is embedded in different subspaces of the neural
network. Both scenarios entail different internal representations and causal pathways linking inputs
to outputs. In Figure 2, we report examples of incompatible explanations in trained MLPs.
Our experiments show that even the strict causal criteria of MI allow many incompatible computa-
tional abstractions. In the discussion (Section 5), we revisit whether this expectation of unicity is
necessary or even achievable.


3   I LLUSTRATING P OTENTIAL I DENTIFIABILITY I SSUES

This section highlights identifiability counter-examples for a small MLP trained to compute the XOR
function. It is well-known that an MLP requires at least two layers to compute the XOR function.
Once the network can do so, the interpretability exercise becomes: how is the XOR implemented?
For a mechanistic explanation, the answer must have two components: what algorithm is being used,
such as which combination of logic gates transforms the inputs into the XOR truth table, and where
these intermediate logic gates are located within the neural network’s computation—i.e., where the
algorithm is executed within the MLP.
To stress-test the two main MI strategies (where-then-what and what-then-where), we chose an MLP
small enough to allow exhaustive enumeration of all circuits and extensive search over mappings.
The MLP is trained on binary inputs with a single logit output to produce the XOR behavior. The
inputs are 0 or 1 and can have a randomly sampled Gaussian noise of a fixed standard deviation.


                                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our methods to test the different criteria defined in the previous section are as follows:
Circuit search: We enumerate all possible circuits, and then execute the validation data of the XOR
on each circuit as if it were a standalone neural network, effectively removing from the computation
each node and edge that is not part of the circuit. If a circuit achieves perfect accuracy (zero circuit
error), we label it a perfect circuit, as it exactly replicates the model’s behavior. This search tests the
identifiability property of the circuit error criteria.
Interpretation search: For each perfect circuit, we attempt to interpret the activations of the in-
cluded neurons based on XOR validation data. As the scope of interpretations is limited to logic
gates, we search, for each neuron, a logic gate whose values are consistent with that neuron’s acti-
vation. The method proceeds recursively, layer by layer, based on a given neuron’s relationship with
its parents in the circuit. The parents already have an interpretation (mapping their activations to 0
or 1). We enumerate all possible inputs from the parents and examine how they are mapped into the
neuron’s activation by the model. We then list all possible ways to separate these inputs and label
the resulting logic gate. If we find no valid interpretation for a given neuron (e.g., all inputs overlap
in the output activation and no separation is possible), we end this candidate interpretation of the cir-
cuit. If we find multiple, we expand the tree of possible candidate interpretations for the circuit. To
avoid trivial over-counting, we ignore value relabeling (e.g., swapping 0 and 1) and, by convention,
assign 1 to the larger intervals and 0 to the smaller ones. The outcome is a computational abstrac-
tion, a Boolean circuit computing the XOR function whose internal logic gates are mapped to some
neural network components. Note that this method undercounts possible interpretations because it
does not consider cases where the high-level logic gates are mapped on multiple low-level neurons.
This search tests the identifiability property of the mapping consistency criteria.
Algorithm search: We enumerate all algorithms implementing the XOR gate by considering
Boolean formula parse trees. We assume that each neuron’s activations encode either the iden-
tity, AND, or OR gate, a network of depth d can implement only formulas with a parse tree of depth
≤ d. We therefore recursively enumerate all unique formulas of depth d or less using AND, OR,
and negation. For d = 3, this results in 56 XOR-equivalent algorithms.
Mapping search: For a given candidate algorithm with specified intermediate logic gates, we ex-
plore all possible neuron subsets and mappings between these subsets and the algorithm’s interme-
diate gates. We then measure the causal alignment of the mapping using IIA. If a mapping achieves
perfect IIA, we call it a perfect mapping. If there is no other mapping with larger images (set
inclusion-wise), we also call this mapping minimal. In the example described in this section, we
manually test two candidate algorithms, while the next section enumerates algorithms that imple-
ment the target function, excluding trivial variations (e.g., negating gates). This search tests the
identifiability property of the IIA criteria.
We depict in Figure 2 counter-examples for each criterion in one small MLP. In this example, for the
what-then-where strategy, we only test two candidate algorithms but find 159 perfect minimal map-
pings within the neural network activations, with perfect mappings for both algorithms. Therefore,
the algorithm is not unique and, for a given algorithm, its localization is not unique. For the where-
then-what strategy, we find 85 unique circuits with perfect accuracy, with an average of 535.8 logic
gate interpretations (consistent mappings) per circuit. Therefore, the localization is not unique, and
for a given circuit, the interpreted algorithm is not unique. Overall, in this example, we obtain 159 +
45,543 computational abstractions, most of which are incompatible. This is a serious identifiability
problem as there is no clear and consensual criterion to decide among all these explanations.


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1   Q UANTITATIVE ANALYSIS

We now repeat the experiment used for the XOR example with different seeds, while varying the
architecture size and the complexity of the global behavior.
The basic setup is consistent across all experiments. We choose n 2-input logic gates L1 , . . . , Ln ,
generate a multilayer perceptron (MLP) N with layer sizes (2, k, k, n), and train N to implement
the gates L1 , . . . Ln . Similarly to the previous section, training is performed on binary samples with
added Gaussian noise and continues until the network’ mean squared loss is lower than n × 10−3 .


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We then quantify the identifiability issues again. For the circuit-first search (where-then-what strat-
egy), we count perfect circuits for L in N and valid interpretations for each circuit. For the
algorithm-first search (what-then-where strategy), we count perfectly aligned algorithms for L in
N and perfect minimal mappings for each algorithm.
In the circuit-first search, we only search for circuits containing two inputs and one output for each
target gate. Furthermore, due to the combinatorial explosion in circuit enumeration, we only test
circuits with a sparsity greater than 0.3, where sparsity is measured as the fraction of components
excluded from the circuit. This number is chosen as the smallest sparsity that remains manageable
for the size of MLPs that we consider. As a result, the reported number of circuits should be consid-
ered a lower bound. Furthermore, the number of potential interpretations for a single circuit grows
exponentially with its size. Since we count interpretations for only the sparser circuits, the reported
number of interpretations is also significantly lower than an exhaustive search would yield.

4.1.1   A RCHITECTURE SIZE
Increasing the neural network’s size may impact the number of computational abstractions found
in networks. Although a larger architecture may create more computational abstractions due to the
increased search space, it could also lead to greater overparameterization, meaning a smaller subset
of the network may suffice to implement the target gate. This, in turn, could reduce the number of
valid abstractions if most of the network is inactive during inference.
In the left side of Figure 3, we report the total number of explanations found when the architecture
size ranges from k = 2 to k = 5. We exclude from this figure the networks for which no valid
mapping or interpretation was found, which we give in Appendix D.2 along with additional plots.


Figure 3: Number of computational abstractions found in the circuit-first approach (circuit interpre-
tations) and the algorithm-first approach (perfect minimal mappings), as a function of architecture
size k (left) or of the number n of gates the model is trained on (right, averaged over all target gates).
One point per neural network.

In both cases, we observe that the number of computational abstractions found significantly in-
creases with network size, with median values growing from 38 to 910,000 in the circuit-first method
and from 8 to 3,700 in the algorithm-first approach. Less than 2% of the trained networks contain
exactly one valid minimal mapping, and no network contains exactly one circuit interpretation.

4.1.2   M ULTIPLE TASKS
We also investigate the effect of global behavior complexity. The model is trained to implement
a single logic gate in the basic setup. What happens when the network is trained in a multi-task
setting? As the number of target tasks increases, we expect the network to use its activations more
efficiently, possibly relying on a smaller subset of its structure for each task. To explore this, we fix
k = 3 and vary n from 1 to 6, sampling n logic gates (without replacement) from the same list as
above, extended to include the negation of the gates (NOR, NAND, NIMP, and XNOR). The neural
network N is then trained to implement these gates in parallel, using two shared input neurons and
n output neurons (one per gate). We repeat this procedure using different random seeds.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The right side of Figure 3 contains the total number of computational abstractions obtained when
training each neural network on a different number of logic gates in parallel, ranging from 1 to 6.
More detailed plots are available in Appendix D.3.
In both approaches, the number of interpretations significantly decreases with the number of training
tasks (p = 0.05), up to 4 tasks. Past that point, the variation is no longer statistically significant.

4.2   T RAINING DYNAMICS

A possible explanation for the high number of computational abstractions we find in trained net-
works is that our networks do not perfectly implement the target logic gates, since training is stopped
when a low but non-zero loss value is reached. We explored this effect by varying the loss cutoff in
the basic setup. The results are given in Appendix D.4. More generally, the influence of the training
distribution on the number of valid computational abstractions is investigated in Appendix D.6. In
addition, we find that adding noise to binary samples during training has no significant effect on the
results obtained in the algorithm-first method, but decreases the number of circuits while increas-
ing the overall number of interpretations found in the circuit-first method (results are described in
Appendix D.5). Training dynamics and generalization abilities of a model may therefore reduce the
number of available abstractions, but this effect alone is unlikely to mitigate the issue entirely.

4.3   T OWARDS LARGER MODELS

While enumerating circuits or mappings is infeasible in large networks, it is still possible to find
counterexamples in which multiple circuits exist. For example, we trained a larger MLP on a subset
of the MNIST dataset (Deng, 2012), filtered to contain only the digits 0 and 1. We obtained a
regression model with layer sizes (784, 128, 128, 3, 3, 3, 1). After training, we extracted the last
layers of the model to form two sub-networks: one of size (784, 128, 128, 3) and one of size (3, 3, 3,
1). We fed the training samples through the larger sub-network, generating a new dataset comprised
of partial computations of the overall model.
Applying the circuit search method to the smaller sub-network using this new dataset yielded 3,209
valid circuits. While we cannot enumerate circuits in the first half of the network, any such valid
circuit can include one of the circuits of the second half as its continuation. Two situations may
arise: If the first half of the MLP does not contain any valid circuits, then no valid circuit exists for
the full network; if valid circuits exist in the first half of the MLP, then a minimum of 3,209 valid
circuits exist in the full network. This shows, at least in the case of circuits, that the problem does
not seem to disappear with significantly larger scale and more complex data distributions.

5     W HAT D OES IT M EAN FOR I NTERPRETABILITY ?
Our findings challenge the strong intuition that a unique mechanistic explanation exists for a given
behavior under fixed explanatory goals and validity criteria. Even when employing the strict causal
requirements of MI, we find that many incompatible explanations can coexist. While predictive
of behavior and causally aligned with the neural network’s states, these explanations differ in the
computational algorithms they postulate or how they are embedded in the network’s subspaces. We
now discuss several ways to move forward from this striking observation.

5.1   D OES LACK OF UNICITY MATTER ?

Whether multiple “valid” explanations pose a real problem is worth considering. From a pragmatic
stance, one could argue that unicity is not essential if the explanations meet functional goals such
as predictivity, controllability, or utility in decision-making (Van Fraassen, 1988; Achinstein, 1984).
This perspective emphasizes crafting practical criteria to evaluate explanations based on their utility,
rather than their ontological closeness to the truth. Stating explicitly the pragmatic goals of an
explanation can also clarify what is expected of an explanation (Woodward & Ross, 2021). For
example, in the recent debate about interpretability illusion, Makelov et al. (2023) mention problems
about interventions that can potentially activate dormant pathways leading the resulting explanation
to misrepresent the mechanisms at play. In their response, one of the arguments advanced by Wu
et al. (2024) is to point out that the explanation produced by their method (DAS), still meets the


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


pragmatic goals of predictivity and manipulability, ensuring its usefulness. The debate is resolved
by clarifying the epistemic goals of the explanation.

5.2   I F YES , HOW CAN WE AIM TO RESOLVE IT ?

If we decide that identifiability of explanations is important, our work demonstrates that current
MI criteria are insufficient to guarantee it. One potential approach to resolving this issue involves
introducing additional heuristics, such as prioritizing the sparsest circuits. However, Occam’s razor
alone is unlikely to solve the problem. Should we dismiss an entirely different candidate explanation
simply because it involves one additional node than another? In our experiments, simplicity or
sparsity cannot single out one explanation.
To address these challenges, we believe that ideas from causal abstraction (Beckers & Halpern, 2019;
Beckers et al., 2020; Rubenstein et al., 2017) can be helpful (Geiger et al., 2022a). Although IIA
is directly inspired by causal abstraction, it does not fully implement it in its current form. Unlike
current MI frameworks, causal abstraction requires that all lower-level model states are accounted
for in higher-level representations. Furthermore, if components are excluded from an explanation,
their absence must be justified causally. This intuition has been formalized recently through the
concept of faithfulness, which evaluates how well a circuit replicates the model’s behavior and the
(lack of) impact of excluded elements (Hanna et al., 2024).
Alternatively, one can look at broader approaches and not focus on searching for explanations that
optimize a single criterion. Interestingly, Vilas et al. (2024) propose an inner interpretability frame-
work based on lessons from cognitive neuroscience. In this framework, the authors emphasize the
importance of building multi-level mechanistic explanations and stress-testing these explanations
with proper hypotheses testing. An explanation validated by many criteria and which exhibits differ-
ent properties (e.g., invariances) becomes more trustworthy. This framework provides a promising
path to establish MI as a natural science akin to neuroscience or biology.

5.3   I S I DENTIFIABILITY EVEN ACHIEVABLE ?

In some domains of science, competing theories coexist despite being ontologically incompatible.
For instance, the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations of classical mechanics posit different
underlying entities but yield identical experimental predictions. Such scenarios are examples of con-
trastive underdetermination, a philosophical debate about whether empirical evidence can or should
uniquely determine scientific explanations (Stanford, 2023). The intrinsic computational hardness
of interpretability queries (Adolfi et al., 2024b;a) suggests that MI may have fundamental limits,
leaving it possibly underdetermined. More broadly, the search for MI explanations can be seen as
a type of causal representation learning, where identifiability may depend on strong constraints that
might not be realistic Morioka & Hyvärinen (2024).

5.4   F ROM TOY MODELS TO REAL MODELS

Our experiments focus on toy MLPs trained on toy tasks, which differ drastically from large lan-
guage models (LLMs) trained on vast, complex datasets using Transformer architectures. This raises
the possibility that the issues in small models may not apply to larger, more sophisticated models.
However, if this is true, why the problems would disappear at larger scales must be demonstrated.
Understanding why current criteria function well in some regimes but not in others would also lead
to refined criteria and definitions.

5.5   C ONCLUSION

Our results should encourage the community to reflect on the role of unicity when searching for and
communicating about mechanistic explanations found in neural networks. We believe that exploring
stricter criteria based on causal abstraction, explicitly formulating pragmatic goals of explanations
and embracing broader frameworks such as the inner interpretability one are all promising directions.
The code and parameters used to conduct this paper’s experiments can be found on GitHub.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was conducted within French research unit UMR 5217 and was partially supported by
CNRS (grant ANR-22-CPJ2-0036-01) and by MIAI@Grenoble-Alpes (grant ANR-19-P3IA-0003).
It was granted access to the HPC resources of IDRIS under the allocation 2025-AD011014834
made by GENCI.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Pete Achinstein. The pragmatic character of explanation. In PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meet-
  ing of the Philosophy of Science Association, volume 1984, pp. 274–292. Cambridge University
  Press, 1984.
Federico Adolfi, Martina G. Vilas, and Todd Wareham. The computational complexity of circuit
  discovery for inner interpretability, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08025.
Federico Adolfi, Martina G. Vilas, and Todd Wareham. Complexity-Theoretic Limits on the
  Promises of Artificial Neural Network Reverse-Engineering. Proceedings of the Annual Meet-
  ing of the Cognitive Science Society, 46(0), 2024b. URL https://escholarship.org/
  uc/item/2h78n1hj.
Sander Beckers and Joseph Y. Halpern. Abstracting causal models. Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence, 33(01):2678–2685, Jul. 2019. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33012678.
  URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/4117.
Sander Beckers, Frederick Eberhardt, and Joseph Y. Halpern. Approximate causal abstractions.
  In Ryan P. Adams and Vibhav Gogate (eds.), Proceedings of The 35th Uncertainty in Artifi-
  cial Intelligence Conference, volume 115 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  606–615. PMLR, 22–25 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v115/
  beckers20a.html.
Leonard Bereska and Efstratios Gavves. Mechanistic interpretability for ai safety – a review, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14082.
Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Con-
  erly, Nick Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu,
  Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex
  Tamkin, Karina Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter,
  Tom Henighan, and Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language
  models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. https://transformer-
  circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.
Nick Cammarata, Gabriel Goh, Shan Carter, Chelsea Voss, Ludwig Schubert, and Chris Olah. Curve
  Circuits. Distill, 6(1):e00024.006, January 2021. ISSN 2476-0757. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.
  006. URL https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/curve-circuits.
Shan Carter, Zan Armstrong, Ludwig Schubert, Ian Johnson, and Chris Olah. Activation atlas.
  Distill, 2019. doi: 10.23915/distill.00015. https://distill.pub/2019/activation-atlas.
Diogo V. Carvalho, Eduardo M. Pereira, and Jaime S. Cardoso. Machine learning interpretability:
  A survey on methods and metrics. Electronics, 8(8), 2019. ISSN 2079-9292. doi: 10.3390/
  electronics8080832. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/8/8/832.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. In A. Oh,
  T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 16318–16352. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/34e1dbe95d34d7ebaf99b9bcaeb5b2be-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons
  in pretrained transformers. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/.
Adam Davies and Ashkan Khakzar. The cognitive revolution in interpretability: From explaining
  behavior to interpreting representations and algorithms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2408.05859.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.

Maximilian Dreyer, Erblina Purelku, Johanna Vielhaben, Wojciech Samek, and Sebastian La-
 puschkin. Pure: Turning polysemantic neurons into pure features by identifying relevant circuits,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.06453.

Jacob Dunefsky, Philippe Chlenski, and Neel Nanda. Transcoders find interpretable llm feature
  circuits, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11944.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.

Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neu-
  ral networks. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/
  conf/iclr/iclr2019.html#FrankleC19.

Michael Friedman. Explanation and scientific understanding. Journal of Philosophy, 71(1):5–19,
 1974. doi: 10.2307/2024924.

Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. The state of sparsity in deep neural networks, 2019.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.09574.

Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Karel D’Oosterlinck, Elisa Kreiss, Noah D. Goodman, Thomas
  Icard, and Christopher Potts. Faithful, interpretable model explanations via causal ab-
  straction. Stanford AI Lab Blog, 2022a. URL https://ai.stanford.edu/blog/
  causal-abstraction/.

Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Hanson Lu, Josh Rozner, Elisa Kreiss, Thomas Icard, Noah Good-
  man, and Christopher Potts. Inducing causal structure for interpretable neural networks. In Ka-
  malika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7324–7338. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022b. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/geiger22a.html.

Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah Goodman. Find-
  ing alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations.
  In Francesco Locatello and Vanessa Didelez (eds.), Proceedings of the Third Conference on
  Causal Learning and Reasoning, volume 236 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  160–187. PMLR, 01–03 Apr 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v236/
  geiger24a.html.

Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
 cessing, pp. 12216–12235, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
 tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.751. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
 emnlp-main.751.

Alison Gopnik. Explanation as orgasm and the drive for causal knowledge: The function, evolution,
  and phenomenology of the theory formation system. In Explanation and cognition., pp. 299–323.
  The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, US, 2000. ISBN 0-262-11249-3 (Hardcover).

Michael Hanna, Sandro Pezzelle, and Yonatan Belinkov. Have faith in faithfulness: Going beyond
 circuit overlap when finding model mechanisms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2403.17806.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ganesh Jawahar, Benoı̂t Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. What does BERT learn about the structure of
  language? In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, July 2019.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/.
Stephen H. Kellert, Helen Longino, and C. Kenneth Waters. Introduction: The pluralist stance.
  In Stephen H. Kellert, Helen Longino, and C. Kenneth Waters (eds.), Scientific Pluralism, pp.
  vii–xxix. University of Minnesota Press, 2006.
Ashkan Khakzar, Soroosh Baselizadeh, Saurabh Khanduja, Christian Rupprecht, Seong Tae Kim,
  and Nassir Navab. Neural response interpretation through the lens of critical pathways. In 2021
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13523–13533,
  2021. doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01332.
Philip Kitcher. Explanatory unification and the causal structure of the world. In Philip Kitcher and
  Wesley C. Salmon (eds.), Scientific Explanation, pp. 410–505. Univ of Minnesota Pr, 1962.
Philip Kitcher. Explanatory unification. Philosophy of Science, 48(4):507–531, 1981. ISSN
  00318248, 1539767X. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/186834.
János Kramár, Tom Lieberum, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Atp*: An efficient and scalable method
   for localizing llm behaviour to components, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.
   00745.
Arie W. Kruglanski. Lay epistemics and human knowledge: Cognitive and motivational bases. Lay
  epistemics and human knowledge: Cognitive and motivational bases. Plenum Press, New York,
  NY, US, 1989. ISBN 9780306430787.
Kestutis Kveraga, Avniel S. Ghuman, and Moshe Bar. Top-down predictions in the cognitive brain.
  Brain and Cognition, 65(2):145–168, 2007. ISSN 0278-2626. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  bandc.2007.06.007. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  pii/S0278262607000954.
Fangshuo Liao and Anastasios Kyrillidis. On the convergence of shallow neural network training
  with randomly masked neurons, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.02668.
Bohan Liu, Zijie Zhang, Peixiong He, Zhensen Wang, Yang Xiao, Ruimeng Ye, Yang Zhou, Wei-
  Shinn Ku, and Bo Hui. A survey of lottery ticket hypothesis, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2403.04861.
Xinyin Ma, Gongfan Fang, and Xinchao Wang. Llm-pruner: On the structural pruning of large
  language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Aleksandar Makelov, Georg Lange, and Neel Nanda. Is this the subspace you are looking for? an
  interpretability illusion for subspace activation patching, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2311.17030.
Samuel Marks, Can Rager, Eric J. Michaud, Yonatan Belinkov, David Bau, and Aaron Mueller.
  Sparse feature circuits: Discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language models,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19647.
D. Marr and T. Poggio. From understanding computation to understanding neural circuitry. Techni-
  cal report, USA, 1976.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual associ-
  ations in GPT. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2022. arXiv:2202.05262.
Christoph Molnar. Interpretable Machine Learning. 2 edition, 2022.               URL https://
  christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book.
Giovanni Monea, Maxime Peyrard, Martin Josifoski, Vishrav Chaudhary, Jason Eisner, Emre
  Kıcıman, Hamid Palangi, Barun Patra, and Robert West. A glitch in the matrix? locating and de-
  tecting language model grounding with fakepedia, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2312.02073.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hiroshi Morioka and Aapo Hyvärinen. Causal representation learning made identifiable by group-
  ing of observational variables. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024.

Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature visualization. Distill, 2017. doi:
  10.23915/distill.00007. https://distill.pub/2017/feature-visualization.

Chris Olah, Arvind Satyanarayan, Ian Johnson, Shan Carter, Ludwig Schubert, Katherine Ye, and
  Alexander Mordvintsev. The building blocks of interpretability. Distill, 2018. doi: 10.23915/
  distill.00010. https://distill.pub/2018/building-blocks.

Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in.

Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press, USA, 2nd
  edition, 2009. ISBN 052189560X.

Maxime Peyrard, Beatriz Borges, Kristina Gligorić, and Robert West. Laughing heads: Can trans-
 formers detect what makes a sentence funny? In Zhi-Hua Zhou (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirtieth
 International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21, pp. 3899–3905. International
 Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 8 2021. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2021/537.
 URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2021/537. Main Track.

Angela Potochnik. Idealization and the Aims of Science. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
  2017.

Thomas J. Rothenberg. Identification in parametric models. Econometrica, 39(3):577–591, 1971.
  ISSN 00129682, 14680262. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/1913267.

P. K. Rubenstein, S. Weichwald, S. Bongers, J. M. Mooij, D. Janzing, M. Grosse-Wentrup, and
   B. Schölkopf. Causal consistency of structural equation models. In Proceedings of the 33rd
   Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), pp. ID 11, August 2017. URL http:
   //auai.org/uai2017/proceedings/papers/11.pdf. *equal contribution.

Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, and Fahim Dalvi. Neuron-level Interpretation of Deep NLP Models:
  A Survey. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:1285–1303, 11
  2022. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00519. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/
  tacl_a_00519.

Gerhard Schurz. Explanation as unification. Synthese, 120(1):95–114, 1999. doi: 10.1023/a:
  1005214721929.

Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps, 2014. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1312.6034.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 15(56):1929–1958, 2014. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/
  srivastava14a.html.

Kyle Stanford. Underdetermination of Scientific Theory. In Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman
  (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
  Summer 2023 edition, 2023.

Mingjie Sun, Zhuang Liu, Anna Bair, and J. Zico Kolter. A simple and effective pruning approach
 for large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11695.

Aaquib Syed, Can Rager, and Arthur Conmy. Attribution patching outperforms automated circuit
  discovery, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10348.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen,
  Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L
  Turner, Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers,
  Edward Rees, Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, Shan Carter, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan.
  Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Trans-
  former Circuits Thread, 2024. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/
  scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.
Damien Teney, Maxime Peyrard, and Ehsan Abbasnejad. Predicting is not understanding: Recogniz-
  ing and addressing underspecification in machine learning. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 458–476. Springer, 2022.
J. D. Trout. The psychology of scientific explanation. Philosophy Compass, 2(3):564–591,
   2007. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-9991.2007.00081.x. URL https://compass.
   onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1747-9991.2007.00081.x.
Bas Van Fraassen. The pragmatic theory of explanation. Theories of explanation, 8:135–155, 1988.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer,
  and Stuart Shieber. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation
  analysis. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 12388–12401. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/92650b2e92217715fe312e6fa7b90d82-Paper.pdf.
Martina G. Vilas, Timothy Schaumlöffel, and Gemma Roig.    Analyzing vision trans-
 formers for image classification in class embedding space.  In Advances in Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 40030–40041, 2023.        URL
 https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
 7dd309df03d37643b96f5048b44da798-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Martina G. Vilas, Federico Adolfi, David Poeppel, and Gemma Roig. Position: An inner in-
 terpretability framework for ai inspired by lessons from cognitive neuroscience, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01352.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.00593.
Jonathan Waskan. Experimental Philosophy of Science: Scientific Explanation, pp. 237–262. De
  Gruyter, Berlin, Boston, 2024. ISBN 9783110716931. doi: doi:10.1515/9783110716931-011.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110716931-011.
James Woodward and Lauren Ross. Scientific Explanation. In Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stan-
  ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Summer 2021
  edition, 2021.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and Noah Goodman. In-
  terpretability at scale: Identifying causal mechanisms in alpaca. In A. Oh, T. Nau-
  mann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 78205–78226. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/f6a8b109d4d4fd64c75e94aaf85d9697-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and
  Noah D. Goodman. A reply to makelov et al. (2023)’s ”interpretability illusion” arguments, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12631.
Binhang Yuan, Anastasios Kyrillidis, and Christopher M. Jermaine. Distributed learning of deep
  neural networks using independent subnet training. CoRR, abs/1910.02120, 2019. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1910.02120.
Rafael Yuste. Circuit neuroscience: the road ahead. Frontiers in neuroscience, 2:1038, 2008.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 David J. Fleet, Tomás Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars (eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV
 2014 - 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part
 I, volume 8689 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014. doi: 10.1007/
 978-3-319-10590-1\ 53. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1_
 53.
B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba. Learning deep features for dis-
  criminative localization. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition (CVPR), pp. 2921–2929, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, jun 2016. IEEE Computer Society.
  doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.319. URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.
  1109/CVPR.2016.319.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    F ORMAL DEFINITION OF IIA

The definitions in this section are adapted from Geiger et al. (2022b). We begin by setting notation
conventions.
Let N be a neural network, and A be a high-level algorithm.
Let τ be a mapping between low-level neuron groups {Vj } of N and the values of their correspond-
ing high-level variables {Aj } in A.
Let Vin (resp. Vout ) be the neuron groups corresponding to the inputs (resp. outputs) of N .
Let Ain (resp. Aout ) be the variables in A with no parents (resp. no children).
Notation (Value reading). Let vin ∈ R|Vin | be some possible input values of the network N . We note
N [vin , Vj ] the values of the activations of Vj that are obtained when setting the values of Vin to vin
and running the computation graph of N .
Similarly, let ain ∈ R|Ain | be some possible values of the variables of A with no parents. We note
A[ain , Aj ] the values of the variable Aj that are obtained when setting the values of Ain to ain and
running the algorithm A.

Notation (Intervention). Let vj ∈ R|Vj | be some possible activations of the variable Vj in the
network N . We note NVj ←vj a copy of N , in which the activations of Vj are forcibly set to the
value vj during the computation.
Similarly, let aj ∈ R|aj | be a possible value of the variable Aj in the algorithm A. We note AAj ←aj
a copy of A, in which the value of Aj is forcibly set to the value aj when the algorithm is run.


This notion is aligned with the do-operator (Pearl, 2009).
Definition 5 (Intervention interchange). Let basel,in , sourcel,in ∈ R|Vj | be some possible input values
of the network N . We call low-level intervention interchange the quantity:
                 IIlow (N, basel,in , sourcel,in , Vk ) = (NVk ←N [sourcel,in ,Vk ] )[basel,in , Vout ]

Similarly, let baseh,in , sourceh,in ∈ R|Aj | be some possible values of the variables in A with no
parent. We call high-level intervention interchange the quantity:
               IIhigh (N, baseh,in , sourceh,in , Ak ) = (AAk ←N [sourceh,in ,Ak ] )[baseh,in , Aout ]


This corresponds to the notion of counterfactual intervention: After running the algorithm (or net-
work) on a set of inputs (source) and recording the value of a given variable, we execute the algo-
rithm again on a different set of inputs (base) but restore the value of the variable from the first run
during the computation. The system is now in a counterfactual state, and we measure its new output.
                                                                                        Q
Definition 6 (IIA). Let Val(Aj ) be the set of possible values of Aj , and Val(Ain ) = V ∈Vin Val(V )
be the set of possible combinations of values of the variables in A with no parents. Let Ak be a
high-level variable of A.
The intervention interchange accuracy of the mapping τ for the variable Ak is the quantity:

                                        1
                                                                   1 [IIhigh (A, b, s, Ak ) = IIlow (N, b, s, Vk )]
                                                       X
       IIA(N, A, Ak , τ ) =                    2
                                 |Val(Ain )|       b,s∈Val(Ain )



B    O UTPUT EXAMPLES

This section contains additional examples of computational abstractions found by both strategies.
Specifically, we report abstractions found in a single neural network trained on the XOR gate with
k = 3 and n = 1 with a loss cutoff of 10−3 .


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1   C IRCUIT- FIRST APPROACH

An exhaustive pass of the circuit-first approach (with no minimal sparsity threshold) yielded 59
circuits (*where*). We depict in Figure 4 the 12 most sparse circuits found.


               Figure 4: The 12 most sparse circuits found in the example network.

When searching for interpretations (*what*) in all 59 circuits, we find 114,230 interpretations. We
then focus on circuit 8 (second row, last column in Figure 4, chosen for illustration purposes as it
yields 24 valid interpretations, which we fully list in Table 1. Each of these interpretations leads
to a different explanation of the network; for example, interpretation 1 corresponds to the formula
¬(¬(A ∧ B) → ¬(A ∨ B)), while interpretation 2 corresponds to ¬((¬(A ∧ B) ∨ ¬(A ∨ B)) →
(¬(A ∧ B) → ¬(A ∨ B))).

B.2   A LGORITHM - FIRST APPROACH

In the algorithm-first approach, exhaustive enumeration yields 56 possible logic formulas for the
XOR gate with a depth of 3 (excluding commutative-invariant formulas). Four of these formulas
produce valid mappings for the neural network. Those mappings are listed in Table 2.


C     I DENTIFIABILITY IN CIRCUIT LITERATURE

Identifiability is, to the best of our knowledge, never stated as an explicit assumption in existing
works about circuits. In this section, we list examples from the literature that indicate that it is
nonetheless typically taken for granted:

       • Cammarata et al. (2021): ”the curve circuit” (multiple occurrences)
       • Wang et al. (2022): ”discover the circuit”, ”discovering the circuit”, ”uncover the circuit”
       • Kramár et al. (2024): ”we investigate the circuit underlying multiple-choice question-
         answering”
       • Conmy et al. (2023): ”Choosing a clearly defined behavior means that the circuit will be
         easier to interpret than a mix of circuits corresponding to a vague behavior”, ”ACDC [...]
         fully recovers the circuit of toy model”.
       • Hanna et al. (2024): ”We next search for the circuit responsible for computing this task”
       • Marks et al. (2024): ”The circuit for agreement across a prepositional phrase (Figure 12)”


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Neuron (1, 0)     Neuron (1, 1)      Neuron (2, 0)      Neuron (2, 1)       Neuron (3, 0)
 #      Gate     Sep.      Gate   Sep.        Gate   Sep.        Gate   Sep.         Gate Sep.
 1      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.151 IMP          0.777 OR            0.5   NOT A
 2      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.151 IMP          0.777 OR            0.5   RNIMP
 3      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.151 IMP          0.777 A             0.5   NOT A
 4      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.151 IMP          0.777 A             0.5   RNIMP
 5      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.151 IMP          0.987 NIMP          0.5   IMP
 6      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.151 IMP          0.987 NIMP          0.5   NOT A
 7      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.151 IMP          0.987 NIMP          0.5   B
 8      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.151 IMP          0.987 NIMP          0.5   RNIMP
 9      -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.397 NOT A        0.987 NIMP          0.5   B
 10     -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.397 NOT A        0.987 NIMP          0.5   RNIMP
 11     -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.397 NOR          0.987 NIMP          0.5   B
 12     -0.003 NAND        0.693 NOR          0.397 NOR          0.987 NIMP          0.5   RNIMP
 13     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.151 RIMP         0.777 OR            0.5   NOT A
 14     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.151 RIMP         0.777 OR            0.5   RNIMP
 15     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.151 RIMP         0.777 B             0.5   NOT A
 16     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.151 RIMP         0.777 B             0.5   RNIMP
 17     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.151 RIMP         0.987 RNIMP         0.5   IMP
 18     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.151 RIMP         0.987 RNIMP         0.5   NOT A
 19     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.151 RIMP         0.987 RNIMP         0.5   B
 20     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.151 RIMP         0.987 RNIMP         0.5   RNIMP
 21     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.397 NOT B        0.987 RNIMP         0.5   B
 22     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.397 NOT B        0.987 RNIMP         0.5   RNIMP
 23     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.397 NOR          0.987 RNIMP         0.5   B
 24     0.321    NOR       0.230 NAND         0.397 NOR          0.987 RNIMP         0.5   RNIMP

Table 1: The list of interpretations found for circuit 8 of 59 in the example network. For each
interpretation, the four intermediate neurons and the output one are assigned a logic gate and a
separation boundary. Each neuron is represented by its layer and position in the layer (indexed from
0), as read from left to right and from top to bottom in Figure 4. IMP refers to the implication gate
(A implies B), NIMP to its negation, and RIMP and RNIMP refer to the reversed implication gate
(B implies A) and its negation.


      Formula 1: ¬(A ∧ B) ∧ (A ∨ B)                   Formula 2: ¬((A ∧ B) ∨ ¬(A ∨ B))
      Mapping A ∨ B           ¬(A ∧ B)                Mapping A ∧ B           ¬(A ∨ B)
      1         Neuron (1, 2) Neuron (1, 1)           1         Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 2)
      2         Neuron (1, 0) Neuron (1, 1)           2         Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 0)


       Formula 39: ¬((A ∧ B) ∨ ¬(A ∨ B)) ∧ (A ∨ B)
       Mapping A ∧ B           A∨B           ¬((A ∧ B) ∨ ¬(A ∨ B))              ¬(A ∨ B)
       1         Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 2) Neuron (2, 0)                      Neuron (1, 0)
       2         Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 2) Neuron (2, 1)                      Neuron (1, 0)
       3         Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 0) Neuron (2, 0)                      Neuron (1, 2)
       4         Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 0) Neuron (2, 1)                      Neuron (1, 2)


      Formula 40: ¬(((A ∧ B) ∨ ¬(A ∨ B)) ∨ ¬(A ∨ B))
      Mapping (A ∧ B) ∨ ¬(A ∨ B) A ∧ B             ¬(A ∨ B) (left)             ¬(A ∨ B) (left)
      1         Neuron (2, 1)        Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 0)               Neuron (1, 2)
      2         Neuron (2, 1)        Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 2)               Neuron (1, 0)
      3         Neuron (2, 0)        Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 0)               Neuron (1, 2)
      4         Neuron (2, 0)        Neuron (1, 1) Neuron (1, 2)               Neuron (1, 0)

Table 2: The list of valid minimal mappings for the example network. For each intermediate node
of each formula, we specify which neuron corresponds to that node.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     A DDITIONAL PLOTS

D.1   TARGET GATE VARIATION

Figure 5 contains the total number of computational abstractions obtained after fixing k = 3 and
n = 1 and sampling the target gate from the following list: AND, OR, XOR, IMP.


Figure 5: Total number of interpretations found in the circuit-first approach and of mappings found
in the algorithm-first approach, grouped by target gate.

Figure 6 contains the results of the same experiment but displays separate plots for the number
of circuits and interpretations per circuit (resp. algorithms and mappings per algorithm) for each
network.


Figure 6: Left: Number of circuits and average interpretations per circuit found in the circuit-first
approach. Right: Number of algorithms and average mappings per algorithm found in the algorithm-
first approach (right). Results are grouped by target gate over 100 experiments.


D.2   A RCHITECTURE SIZE

Figure 7 contains additional plots for the experiment described in 4.1.1, in which we vary the archi-
tecture size.

D.3   M ULTI - TASK TRAINING

We report in Figure 8 additional plots for the experiment in which we vary the number of gates the
model is being trained on (described in 4.1.2).


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Number of abstractions found in the circuit-first approach (left) and the algorithm-first
approach (right) as a function of the architecture size.


Figure 8: Number of abstractions found in the circuit-first approach (left) and the algorithm-first
approach (right) as a function of the number of training tasks.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4   L OSS CUTOFF

We report in Figure 9 plots for the experiment in which we apply the basic setup with n = 1 and k3
on a set of networks, trained while varying the loss cutoff from 10−1 to 10−6 . For the algorithm-first
approach, a two-sample t-test indicates a modest but significant decrease in the number of algorithms
found when the loss cutoff is lower or equal to 10−5 . In contrast, the number of mappings per
algorithm does not statistically vary. For the circuit-first approach, significantly fewer circuits and
interpretations per circuit are found when the loss cutoff is high (0.1), but values do not otherwise
vary for lower loss values. In addition, we found that multiple computational abstractions can still
be identified in randomly initialized networks that happen to implement a logic gate (i.e. without
training).


Figure 9: Number of abstractions found in the circuit-first approach (left) and the algorithm-first
approach (right) as a function of the neural network’s training loss cutoff.


D.5   E FFECT OF NOISE

We report in Table 3 the number of abstractions found in the basic setup (without noisy inputs) for
both approaches, and compare it to the results found when repeating the same setup while adding
Gaussian noise from N (0, 0.1) to the inputs at training time. We also report the p-value obtained
with Welch’s t-test.

                         Criterion                 Basic setup    Noisy setup     p-value
                       Algorithms                     2.70           2.56          0.766
            Minimal mappings/algorithm (avg)          2.84           3.05          0.617
                     Total mappings                   9.86           9.89          0.959
                          Circuits                    52.3           28.6         < 0.001
               Interpretations/circuit (avg)         2,270          16,400        < 0.001
                   Total interpretations            107,000        285,000        < 0.001

Table 3: Number of abstractions found for both approaches in each setup (averaged over all net-
works).


D.6   T RAINING DISTRIBUTION

The influence of the training distribution was investigated through the following procedure:

      1. Sample a random neural network N N and target gate with n = 1 and k = 3
      2. Draw x1 , . . . , x4 from U[0,1]
      3. Train N N on a skewed input distribution, with weights Pxixi for each input i, and a loss
                                                                 i
         cutoff of 10−3 .
      4. Exhaustively enumerate all circuits, interpretations, algorithms, and mappings as in the
         basic setup.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      5. Repeat from step 1.

We repeated those steps 100 times, resulting in varying training distributions with joint entropy
varying from 0.8 to 2.0 bits. We then performed a linear regression of the resulting counts as a
function of the distribution’s joint entropy. We give in Table 4 the results for this experiment, which
show that the results of the algorithm-first approach do not significantly depend on the training
distribution. On the other hand, having an unbalanced distribution causes an increase in the number
of circuits and total interpretations found in the circuit-first approach, but a decrease in the number
of interpretations per circuit.

                            Criterion                    Slope     Intercept   p-value
                          Algorithms                     -0.21       2.86       0.857
               Minimal mappings/algorithm (avg)          -0.14       1.42       0.807
                        Total mappings                   -0.17       8.82       0.974
                             Circuits                    -326         556       0.001
                  Interpretations/circuit (avg)          1,235        139       0.029
                      Total interpretations            -174,000    367,000      0.018

Table 4: Linear regression performed on the number of computational abstractions as a function of
the training distribution’s joint entropy (in bits).


                                                  24
