Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


VVC-G YM : A F IXED -W ING UAV R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING E NVIRONMENT FOR M ULTI -G OAL L ONG -
H ORIZON P ROBLEMS
  Xudong Gong1,2        Dawei Feng1,2∗ Kele Xu1,2       Weijia Wang3       Zhangjun Sun3
  Xing Zhou4       Si Zheng5 Bo Ding1,2 Huaimin Wang1,2
 1
   College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology,
 Changsha, Hunan, China
 2
   State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Changsha, Hunan, China
 3
   Flight Automatic Control Research Institute, AVIC, Xian, Shaanxi, China
 4
   College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology,
 Changsha, Hunan, China
 5
   Qiyuan Lab, Beijing, China



                                             A BSTRACT

            Multi-goal long-horizon problems are prevalent in real-world applications. The
            additional goal space introduced by multi-goal problems intensifies the spatial
            complexity of exploration; meanwhile, the long interaction sequences in long-
            horizon problems exacerbate the temporal complexity of exploration. Address-
            ing the great exploration challenge posed by multi-goal long-horizon problems
            depends not only on the design of algorithms but also on the design of environ-
            ments and the availability of demonstrations to assist in training. To facilitate
            the above research, we propose a multi-goal long-horizon Reinforcement Learn-
            ing (RL) environment based on realistic fixed-wing UAV’s velocity vector con-
            trol, named VVC-Gym, and generate multiple demonstration sets of various qual-
            ity. Through experimentation, we analyze the impact of different environment
            designs on training, assess the quantity and quality of demonstrations and their
            influence on training, and assess the effectiveness of various RL algorithms, pro-
            viding baselines on VVC-Gym and its corresponding demonstrations. The results
            suggest that VVC-Gym is suitable for studying: (1) the influence of environment
            designs on addressing multi-goal long-horizon problems with RL. (2) the assis-
            tance that demonstrations can provide in overcoming the exploration challenges
            of multi-goal long-horizon problems. (3) the RL algorithm designs with the least
            possible impact from environment designs on the efficiency and effectiveness of
            training. Our code is available at https://github.com/GongXudong/fly-craft and
            https://github.com/GongXudong/fly-craft-examples and demonstrations are avail-
            able at https://www.openml.org/d/46000.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Many real-world applications fall into the category of multi-goal long-horizon problems. For in-
stance, a UAV must be capable of achieving not only the left-side goal but also the right-side goal
(multi-goal); when completing an ascending turn, it is necessary to perform a horizontal turn first,
then accelerate in a straight line, and finally climb in altitude (long-horizon). Addressing multi-goal
long-horizon problems with Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) encounters a sig-
nificant exploration challenge: (1) the multi-goal nature requires the policy to explore not only the
state and action spaces but also the additional goal space during training, which intensifies the spatial
complexity of exploration; (2) due to the learning signal decreasing exponentially with the horizon
(Osband et al., 2016), the long-horizon nature exacerbates the temporal complexity of exploration.

    ∗
        Correspondence to Dawei Feng davyfeng.c@qq.com.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  VVC-Gym                                          Reinforcement
                                                                                      Learning        Baselines
                                                                                                      • Goal-conditioned RL
            Space Definition                 Transition                              Interaction      • Demonstration-based RL
            • Observation Space                                         Reward
     Task   • Goal Space
                                      • Dynamics
                                      • Termination Conditions
                                                                       Functions                      • Non-Markovian reward
            • Action Space
                                                                                                   Imitation
                                    Action        State                                            Learning

                                  Equations of Motion
     Simulator           AeroDynamic
                          Calculation
                                                      Aircraft Model                   Demonstrations


                                        Figure 1: The framework of VVC-Gym.


Existing work predominantly focuses on the design of algorithms, neglecting the importance of en-
vironment design and the potential benefits that demonstrations can provide during training. Specif-
ically, (1) insufficient environment designs hinder training efficiency and effectiveness, such as the
absence of effective termination conditions, which can lead to the collection of numerous ineffec-
tive samples after severe states occur; (2) demonstrations can assist in overcoming the exploration
challenge from multiple perspectives, for instance, by constraining the policy’s exploration space
and providing a behavioral prior for the policy. Moreover, within the Goal-Conditioned RL (GCRL)
community (Liu et al., 2022), existing multi-goal environments (Plappert et al., 2018; Ghosh et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2022) often feature tasks that are relatively simple with short control
sequences, while also commonly encountering the aforementioned two issues. Consequently, the
GCRL community urgently requires a multi-goal long-horizon environment that allows researchers
to (1) evaluate GCRL on more realistic and complex tasks, (2) investigate the impact of environ-
ment designs on GCRL training, (3) investigate how demonstrations can be utilized to overcome the
exploration challenge, and (4) when engaged in algorithm design, suffer the least possible impact
from environment design on the efficiency and effectiveness of training.
To facilitate the community’s research on multi-goal long-horizon problems, we: (1) provide the
GCRL community with the first RL environment on realistic fixed-wing UAV’s velocity vector con-
trol (VVC) task, VVC-Gym. VVC is a typical multi-goal long-horizon problem; on one hand, VVC
requires the UAV to achieve arbitrary desired velocity vectors, which is a typical multi-goal problem.
On the other hand, fixed-wing UAVs are high-speed vehicles, and precise control at high velocities
necessitates frequent control outputs (Wang & Wang, 2020), resulting in the long-horizon problem.
(2) conduct ablation studies on the environment design of VVC-Gym, showcasing how VVC-Gym
can facilitate researchers in studying the influence of environment design on GCRL training. (3)
Equip VVC-Gym with multi-quality demonstration sets, evaluate them from various perspectives,
and show their effectiveness in aiding GCRL in overcoming the exploration challenge. (4) Provide
baselines on VVC-Gym and corresponding demonstrations to illustrate their broad applicability in
studying RL, including GCRL, demonstration-based RL (Ramı́rez et al., 2022).

2    R ELATED W ORK

Multi-goal environments. Existing GCRL research often conducts experiments on open-source
multi-goal environments, such as: (1) the robotic arm control task based on Mujoco (Nair et al.,
2018; Plappert et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2020; Foundation, 2022), DMC (Tunyasuvunakool et al.,
2020), Panda-Gym (Gallouédec et al., 2021). (2) maze-like tasks such as PointMaze (Trott et al.,
2019) and AntMaze (Nachum et al., 2018). (3) Atari games (Warde-Farley et al., 2018), etc. Most of
these environments either utilize non-realistic tasks with short horizons or employ simplistic envi-
ronment designs, such as sparse rewards, without considering mechanisms for terminating episodes
in the event of severe states, resulting in low exploration efficiency at the environment level. Addi-
tionally, some lack accompanying demonstrations, which precludes the support for demonstration-
based RL. In contrast, we introduce VVC-Gym to address these issues. VVC-Gym features various
environment designs and includes accompanying demonstration sets. It facilitates studying the influ-
ence of environment designs on GCRL training and demonstrations’ aids in overcoming exploration


                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


challenges. Additionally, the default environment designs of VVC-Gym enable effective GCRL
algorithm evaluation unaffected by environmental designs.
RL for multi-goal problems. Hindsight experience replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) is
a core method employed by existing GCRL algorithms (GCRL algorithm background is provided
in Appendix E) to address the multi-goal challenge. HER enhances sample efficiency by replacing
the desired goals of failed trajectories with the achieved states to yield positive rewards. (Pitis
et al., 2020) summarizes a general goal-conditioned off-policy RL framework for solving multi-goal
problems. In this framework, most research focuses on how to sample behavioral goals to further
improve sampling efficiency, with the core idea being to avoid sampling training data on goals that
the current policy has no capability of achieving (also known as self-curriculum methods). For
instance, RIG (Nair et al., 2018) samples goals directly from the distribution of achieved goals,
DISCERN (Warde-Farley et al., 2018) samples uniformly on the support set of the distribution of
achieved goals, and MEGA (Pitis et al., 2020) uses inverse probability weighting sampling (Jacq
et al., 2023) on the distribution of achieved goals to samples goals that the current policy can achieve
but not well. Additionally, (Gong et al., 2024a) introduces a general framework for goal-conditioned
on-policy RL algorithms. These studies focus on the algorithmic perspective, without considering
the potential impact of environment design on training efficiency.
RL for long-horizon problems. Existing work addresses the long-horizon challenges through
three approaches. The first approach is Imitation Learning (IL) (Zheng et al., 2022), where poli-
cies learned from demonstrations serve as a behavioral prior to bias the exploration of RL (Baker
et al., 2022; Gong et al., 2024b). This method implicitly constrains the exploration space, thereby
significantly enhancing exploration efficiency (Ramı́rez et al., 2022). The second approach involves
designing efficient exploration strategies, with a focus on the behavioral goal selection strategy (re-
fer to the above RL for multi-goal problems). The third approach is to design subgoal generation
strategies, which are centered around the idea of decomposing long-horizon tasks into smaller, more
manageable subtasks (Nasiriany et al., 2019). While the aforementioned research concentrates on al-
gorithms designs to tackle the long-horizon challenge, our work is dedicated to providing the GCRL
community with a novel and realistic multi-goal long-horizon RL environment. We offer baselines
for the three aforementioned methods on VVC-Gym, demonstrating its suitability as a testbed for
researching multi-goal long-horizon problems.


3     VVC-G YM

The framework of VVC-Gym is depicted in Fig. 1. VVC-Gym comprises two main modules: the
Simulator and the Task. The Simulator is responsible for UAV-related simulations, while the Task
encapsulates the velocity vector control task based on the Gymnasium. Additionally, we equip
VVC-Gym with multi-quality demonstrations and provide baselines on VVC-Gym. The detailed
simulation process is described in Appendix A, and the baselines are presented in Section 4.3. In
this section, we provide a detailed introduction to the Task and demonstrations.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

During the process, roll angle ϕ, pitch angle θ, yaw angle ψ, flight path elevator angle µ, flight path
azimuth angle χ, true airspeed v, altitude h, roll rate p (observation space) are observable. The agent
is tasked with manipulating the UAV’s velocity vector (v, µ, χ) to match a desired velocity vector
(vg , µg , χg ) (goal space), by controlling the deflections of the aileron actuator δa , elevator actuator
δe , rudder actuator δr , and power level actuator δpla (action space).
Two control modes are provided: The first is the guidance law mode, where the controller outputs
intermediate control commands: roll rate command pc , overload command nzc , and the position of
the power level actuator δpla . These three intermediate commands are then transformed into final
control commands δa , δe , δr , δpla through a control law model that smooths the output, which is
detailed in Appendix B. The smoothing action of the control law model serves a purpose similar to
the temporal abstraction provided by frame-skipping (Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2021), alleviating the
temporal complexity of exploration. The second mode is the end-to-end mode, where the controller
directly outputs δa , δe , δr , δpla . This mode exhibits significant oscillation in actions during training,
and combined with the long-horizon nature of the VVC task, the training suffers greatly from the

                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


temporal complexity of exploration. In Appendix I, we provide experimental analysis of the distinct
impacts of these two training modes on RL training.

3.2    T RANSITION

The VVC-Gym’s Transition employs a modular design principle, comprising the Dynamics sub-
module and the Termination Condition sub-module. The Dynamics sub-module is responsible for
communicating with the Simulator, sending actions, and receiving the new state of the UAV. The
Simulator performs the core computations of the aerodynamic equations detailed in Appendix A.
The Termination Condition sub-module is tasked with terminating an episode based on certain con-
ditions, which are user-defined and can be used to study how to avoid collecting ineffective samples,
thereby enhancing exploration efficiency. To facilitate research, we provide 3 categories, totaling 7
default termination conditions:
The first category consists of termination conditions for determining whether the UAV has achieved
its desired goals:
      (1) Reach Target Termination (RT): if error of ⃗v keeps in the error band for at least TR steps.
The second category consists of termination conditions for truncating excessively long trajectories
from both temporal and spatial dimensions:
      (2) Timeout termination (T): if the goal is not achieved within the step limit Tmax .
      (3) Crash Termination (C): if the altitude of UAV is less than the safe altitude h0 .
The third category consists of termination conditions for truncating unreasonable or invalid trajec-
tories:
      (4) Continuously Move Away Termination (CMA): if the velocity vector moves away from
          the desired velocity vector continuously for TM steps.
      (5) Continuously Roll Termination (CR): if the UAV rolls ϕmax continuously.
      (6) Extreme State Termination (ES): if the true airspeed v reaches the limit vmax or the roll
          rate p reaches the limit pmax .
      (7) Negative Overload and Big Roll Angle Termination (NOBR): if the overload component
          along the OZ axis of the Body Coordinate System nz is negative and the roll angle ϕ is
          bigger than a limit ϕN for more than TN steps.
We believe that for multi-goal long-horizon problems, termination conditions can be designed by ref-
erencing the above three categories, which respectively represent (1) the conditions for goal achieve-
ment, (2) the maximum limit for exploration, and (3) the truncation of unreasonable or invalid tra-
jectories based on the characteristics of the task itself. The 7 termination conditions proposed for
our fixed-wing UAV control scenario are all relatively simple. Although they are straightforward,
our experiments in Section 4 show that they can significantly enhance exploration efficiency.

3.3    R EWARD F UNCTION

Addressing multi-goal long-horizon problems’ exploration challenge requires informative rewards,
which can remarkably enhance training efficiency(Sutton & Barto, 2018; Eckstein & Schiffmann,
2020). Existing multi-goal long-horizon environments typically employ either sparse rewards or
simplistic distance-based rewards, such as rg (st ) = −∥ζ(st ), g∥, where ζ maps a state to its
achieved goal and ∥·∥ calculates the difference between two goals (Liu et al., 2022). Such simplistic
reward functions are not conducive to investigation into the impact of reward design on training. To
this end, we propose a general distance-based goal-conditioned reward structure:
                    
                    0,
                                       if triggers RT
              rg,t = rpenalty ,         if triggers any of CMA, CR, C, ES, or NOBR                  (1)
                    −( ∥ζ(st )−g∥ )b , else
                    
                            σ
where rpenalty is a negative number, ∥.∥ calculates the difference in two velocity vectors, σ is a
normalization factor for velocity vector difference such that ∥ζ(stσ)−g∥ ∈ [0, 1], b is a scaling factor


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that controls change rate of the reward function over different error intervals. This reward function
gives the agent a negative reward between [−1, 0] at each step if the agent does not trigger any
termination condition. The closer the current velocity vector aligns with the desired velocity vector,
the closer the reward gets to 0. This negative reward spurs the agent to achieve the desired velocity
vector promptly. The differences from previous rewards (Bøhn et al., 2019; Koch et al., 2019b;a)
are highlighted in two aspects:
(1) Penalty rpenalty is incorporated into the reward to work in synergy with the termination con-
ditions, thereby enhancing exploration efficiency. It penalizes the agent for activating non-RT ter-
minations. Crucially, rpenalty must be much less than the minimum single-step reward to prevent
premature episode terminations. This ensures the agent doesn’t intentionally trigger termination to
avoid low cumulative reward due to negative rewards in each step (Eckstein & Schiffmann, 2020).
We propose two approaches to set rpenalty : The large negative constant method, which sets
rpenalty much lower than the average reward from triggering termination T, to discourage premature
episode terminations via other conditions. The pessimistic estimation method, which sets rpenalty
based on the remaining steps until the maximum Tmax . If the agent triggers a termination at step Tτ
                                                                                      Tmax −Tτ
and receives the worst reward of −1 per step, rpenalty is given by rpenalty = − 1−γ 1−γ         . We
analyze the effects of these methods on learning in Section 4.4.2.
                                                                               change slowly
                                                                                                                Large error
(2) Scaling factor b is incorporated into the reward to adjust the                              � =− �2

change rate of rewards in different learning stages. As shown in
Fig. 2, with b > 1, the reward reacts quickly to large errors but slowly       change rapidly
                                                                                                            change rapidly


to small ones, speeding up goal approach from afar but hindering fine
                                                                                                � =− �0.5
adjustments near the goal. Conversely, b < 1 favors accuracy over
                                                                               Small error                  change slowly
speed. The choice of b balances the speed of goal achievement with
its accuracy. The effect of b on learning is analyzed in Section 4.4.2.
                                                                              Figure 2: reward b
3.4   D EMONSTRATIONS

Demonstrations facilitate the utilization of demonstration-based methods to enhance the learning
efficiency of RL, enabling RL to tackle exploration-challenging tasks (Ramı́rez et al., 2022). When
collecting demonstrations, it is significantly less labor-intensive for human experts to design a sim-
ple controller than to collect directly. However, this approach presents the challenge of low demon-
stration quality (Brown et al., 2020; Sasaki & Yamashina, 2020; Xu et al., 2022) from the simple
controller designs. Nevertheless, demonstrations generated by human-designed simple controllers
still hold significant value in enhancing the efficiency of RL training (Gong et al., 2024b). There-
fore, based on a simple human-designed PID controller (Visioli, 2006), detailed in Appendix C, we
generate multi-quality demonstrations through the following three steps:
Generating demonstrations with the PID controller. We first discretize the desired goal space,
detailed in Appendix D, to obtain a desired goal set. We then use the PID controller to sample within
                                                                                     0
this goal set, recording trajectories that successfully trigger the RT condition as DE .
Augmenting demonstrations based on symmetry. Demonstration DE is augmented by leveraging
the symmetry in the flight path azimuth angle, as detailed in Appendix D. The augmented demon-
stration set is denoted as DE .
Generating more and high-quality demonstrations. Iterative Regularized Policy Optimization
(IRPO) (Gong et al., 2024b) is employed to iteratively optimize the policy and generate demon-
             i
strations DE   , i ∈ [1, 2, . . . , ND ], with increasingly improved quantity and quality. These demon-
strations are then further augmented with the method detailed in the second step, resulting in
DEi , i ∈ [1, 2, . . . , N ].
                          D

In Section 4.2, we provide a detailed analysis of the differences between these demonstration sets.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we: (1) compare the impact of using versus not using the environment designs
introduced in Section 3 on GCRL training. (2) present analysis on demonstration quantity and
quality. (3) provide baselines for GCRL and demonstration-based RL, showcasing the extensive


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         0.6         w/ env designs                      0.5
            0.8
                                                                     w/o env designs                     0.4


                                              Success Rate


                                                                                              Success Rate
 Success Rate
            0.6                                          0.4                                             0.3
            0.4                                                                                          0.2                     w/ pre-train
                                                         0.2                                                                     w/o pre-train
            0.2             w/ env designs                                                               0.1
                            w/o env designs
            0.0                                          0.0                                             0.0
               0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                        0.0   0.5    1.0    1.5  2.0                    0.0   0.5   1.0     1.5      2.0
                    Environment Steps 1e6                            Environment Steps 1e8                           Environment Steps 1e8
                   (a) SAC+HER                                        (b) PPO

Figure 3: Comparison between policies trained by SAC+HER and                                  Figure 4: GCRL with and with-
PPO on using versus not using the environment designs introduced                              out pre-training from demonstra-
in Section 3. ”w/ env designs” refers to using all 7 termination                              tions. Results come from PPO
                                                                                                    0
conditions and reward Eq. 1, while ”w/o env designs” refers to                                and DE   trained on the hard ver-
only using RT and T and reward rg (st ) = −∥ζ(st ), g∥. Results                               sion of VVC-Gym over 5 ran-
come from experiments over 5 random seeds.                                                    dom seeds.

applicability of VVC-Gym and demonstrations in GCRL research. (4) conduct ablation studies to
assess the impact of various environment designs on GCRL training.
In the experiments, we employ two versions of the velocity vector control task: the normal ver-
sion and the hard version, which are detailed in Appendix F. In the experiments, unless otherwise
specified, the normal version are used, with the hard version only used when specifically indicated.

4.1             M AIN R ESULTS

To demonstrate the benefits of the termination conditions and informative reward function in ad-
dressing multi-goal long-horizon problems, we evaluate the impact of the environment designs
proposed in Section 3 on GCRL training by training policies with SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) +
HER (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) (with a goal-conditioned policy
(Schaul et al., 2015)) on VVC-Gym. The experimental results are displayed in Fig. 3. The results
indicate that, irrespective of the specific algorithm employed, policies trained with our environment
designs surpass those trained without these designs, when an equivalent training budget is allocated.
This demonstrates that the termination conditions and reward function tailored for VVC-Gym effec-
tively facilitate more efficient training for GCRL algorithms. We provide a detailed analysis of the
reasons why the termination conditions and reward function contribute to the training in Section 4.4.
To illustrate the benefits of demonstrations for GCRL training, we examine the effect of pre-training
with demonstrations on the subsequent GCRL training. The results are presented in Fig. 4. It is
evident that when an algorithm attempts to train a policy directly without pre-training, it struggles
to learn any skills due to the task’s intrinsic exploration complexity. In contrast, after pre-training
the policy with Goal-Conditioned Behavioral Cloning (GCBC) (Ding et al., 2019), the algorithm
is capable of further improving policy performance through subsequent GCRL training. This high-
lights the importance of demonstrations in facilitating more efficient GCRL training. An extensive
analysis of demonstration quantity and quality is provided in Section 4.2, and the performance of
various algorithms on different demonstration sets is detailed in Section 4.3.

4.2             A NALYSIS OF D EMONSTRATION Q UANTITY AND Q UALITY

Demonstrations are collected with methods detailed in Section 3.4. IRPO is used to collect ND = 3
demonstration sets. We analyze the statistical information of the demonstration sets, and the results
                                                                              i
are presented in Table 1. In terms of quantity, as the index i increases, DE     covers an increasing
number of goals, resulting in an increase in total transitions. In terms of quality, there is no signif-
icant difference in the goal achieving accuracy. In addition, as discussed in Appendix M, we also
consider the state and action smoothness, which also do not exhibit significant differences across dif-
         i
ferent DE  . However, the average length of the trajectories decreases, indicating that as i increases,
                                    i
the trajectories contained within DE  are able to achieve goals more quickly without compromising
goal achieving accuracy and state and action smoothness. In summary, as i increases, the trajectory
                           i
quantity and quality of DE    improves. The variations among these 8 demonstration sets enable re-


                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Trajectory Number, Average Length of Trajectory, Total Transition Number, and Goal
Achieving Accuracy of Demonstrations

                   Number of       Goal space     Average length     Number of                    Accuracy
 Demonstration
                   trajectories   coverage (%)    of trajectories    transitions      errorv       errorµ       errorχ
        0
       DE            10184            20.08       282.01±149.98       2872051        6.56±3.25    0.36±0.35   0.53±0.45
        0
       DE            10264            20.24       281.83±149.48       2892731        6.56±3.25    0.36±0.36   0.53±0.45
        1
       DE            24924            49.15        124.64±53.07       3106516        4.12±3.45    0.59±0.32   0.57±0.41
        1
       DE            27021            53.28        119.64±47.55       3232896        4.47±3.49    0.58±0.32   0.60±0.44
        2
       DE            33114            65.29        117.65±46.24       3895791        4.83±3.45    0.57±0.33   0.66±0.54
        2
       DE            34952            68.92        115.76±45.65       4045887        5.16±3.47    0.56±0.33   0.68±0.60
       D3            38654            76.22        116.59±46.81       4506827        5.24±3.41    0.60±0.34   0.71±0.69
        3
       DE            39835            78.55        116.56±47.62       4643048        5.29±3.38    0.60±0.35   0.74±0.75

Table 2: Performance of GCRL algorithms on VVC-Gym. Table 3: Performance of pre-train &
Results (% success rates over 5 random seeds) come from fine-tune algorithms on the hard ver-
the hard version of VVC-Gym.                            sion of VVC-Gym (% success rates
                                                        over 5 random seeds).
         (a) GCRL algorithms                  (b) Curriculum methods
  RL type      Algorithm     Success rate     Curriculum   Success rate            Demos     GCBC       GCBC + PPO
                                                                                     0
                                                                                    DE     17.08±0.57   38.31±1.62
                 SAC         1.08±0.48          None       38.31±1.62
 Off-policy                                                                          1
                                                                                    DE     36.54±1.97   53.83±0.80
                 HER          8.32±1.86         RIG        49.03±1.54
                 PPO          0.04±0.03                                              2
                                                                                    DE     41.79±0.44   68.47±1.20
 On-policy                                    DISCERN      49.36±1.91
              GCBC + PPO     38.31±1.62        MEGA        48.62±2.35                3
                                                                                    DE     42.77±1.35   71.68±2.86


searchers to investigate the influence of demonstration quantity and quality on demonstration-based
RL.

4.3   GCRL AND D EMONSTRATION - BASED RL BASELINES

In this section, we show the potential of VVC-Gym in studying RL by establishing baselines for:
(1) GCRL. (2) demonstration-based RL, including IL and RL from demonstrations (RLfD) (Ramı́rez
et al., 2022). Additionally, the reward function in VVC-Gym can be configured as Non-Markovian
Reward (NMR) (Abel et al., 2021). We discuss NMR in Appendix H and provide relevant baselines.
Investigating GCRL. To demonstrate the suitability of VVC-Gym for studying GCRL, we conduct
experiments on VVC-Gym as follows:
(1) We train the off-policy GCRL algorithm SAC and HER, the on-policy GCRL algorithm PPO
and GCBC+PPO, with the corresponding results presented in Table 2a. It is noted that, firstly,
while employing a goal-conditioned policy or a goal-conditioned value function directly can adapt
standard RL algorithms (SAC and PPO) to address multi-goal problems, the performance is poor.
However, the integration of techniques specifically designed to tackle exploration challenges, such
as HER and GCBC-pretraining, leads to a significant improvement in policy performance. Secondly,
both HER and GCBC+PPO show potential for increased success rates, suggesting that VVC-Gym
poses a challenging task that is well-suited for studying multi-goal long-horizon problems.
(2) We train self-curriculum methods including RIG (Nair et al., 2018), DISCERN (Warde-Farley
et al., 2018), and MEGA (Pitis et al., 2020), with the results presented in Table 2b. It is evident
that different self-curriculum methods can enhance learning effectiveness, although the differences
among these three methods are not pronounced, suggesting that VVC-Gym is suitable for studying
self-curriculum in GCRL. It has been observed that while the implementation of curriculum methods
can significantly enhance the policy’s success rate, the rate remains relatively low for the VVC task.
This is primarily attributed to the inherent challenges associated with the VVC task, which we have
thoroughly discussed in Appendix J.
(3) We utilize the policy trained by GCBC+PPO+MEGA (Gong et al., 2025) to complete
a long-horizon ascending turn task, as shown in Fig. 5. The optimal solution to this task
involves initially performing a horizontal turn, followed by a straight-line acceleration, and

                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           with terminations         without terminations                                with terminations         without terminations                            RT       T       CMA       CR       C       ES   NOBR                                 T       CMA    CR       C       ES       NOBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               400
               100                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                             0.8                                                                               350
                                                                                             0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           steps when terminated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               300
               150                                                                                                                                                           0.6
 mean reward
                                                                                             0.4


                                                                                  success rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               250


                                                                                                                                                                    percentage
               200                                                                           0.3                                                                             0.4                                                                               200
                                                                                             0.2                                                                                                                                                               150
               250                                                                                                                                                           0.2                                                                               100
                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
               300                                                                           0.0                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                     0.0      0.5              1.0         1.5              2.0                    0.0      0.5              1.0         1.5              2.0                      0    1       2         3        4       5   6     7                               0       1    2    3     4       5        6      7
                                         episodes                           1e8                                       env steps                           1e8                                             episodes                  1e5                                                episodes                     1e5


(a) Cumulative reward dur- (b) Success rate during (c) Triggering proportions (d) Episode length when
ing training               training                of each termination condi- termination condition trig-
                                                   tion during training       gers

Figure 6: The left two figures: Comparison between training process with and without termination
conditions. The right two figures: Analysis of training process when employing the 7 termination
conditions. Results come from experiments over 5 random seeds.

finally ascending in altitude. We sequentially assign these three sub-
goals to the aforementioned trained policy, and it can be observed that
the policy is able to complete the task effectively. This demonstrates
that VVC-Gym supports the modification of the goal for the current
episode as necessary (Bøhn et al., 2023). From the inverse perspec-
tive, if presented with a complex long-horizon task, VVC-Gym can
facilitate research on sub-goal generation methods.
Investigating demonstration-based RL. Demonstration-based RL
can help overcome the exploration challenge (Ramı́rez et al., 2022;
Gong et al., 2024b). To showcase the suitability of VVC-Gym for Figure 5: A long-horizon
studying demonstration-based RL, we conduct experiments on VVC- ascending turn task finished
Gym with the GCBC and RLfD algorithm GCBC+PPO (Vinyals by a GCRL policy with pre-
et al., 2019; Baker et al., 2022), with the results presented in Table 3. defined sub-goals.
It is evident that, firstly, the performance of GCBC trained on the
relatively low-quality and low-quantity DE    0 far exceeds that of the non-demonstration-based RL

algorithms such as SAC, SAC+HER, and PPO as shown in Table 2a. Secondly, both GCBC and
GCBC+PPO exhibit improved policy performance as the quantity and quality of the demonstrations
increase. This suggests that VVC-Gym and the accompanying demonstrations are well-suited for
studying demonstration-based RL, including the investigation of the impact of demonstration quan-
tity and quality on training, and the development of high-performing policies even with imperfect
demonstrations.

4.4                   A BLATION S TUDIES

In this section, we conduct ablation studies on the termination conditions and the reward function,
examining how their settings affect training. In the experiments, all configurations of the environ-
ment and algorithm, except for those being studied in the ablation study, are listed in Appendix F in
G.

4.4.1                      A BLATION ON T ERMINATION C ONDITIONS
To demonstrate the role of each termination condition during RL training, we conduct ablation
studies on termination conditions by training policies using PPO, with experimental details listed in
Appendix K. Fig. 6 shows the corresponding results. Fig. 6a and 6b illustrate the trends in cumulative
reward and success rate with and without the use of termination conditions. Without them, the
policy experiences a rapid rise in cumulative reward, which then plateaus at a certain level, while
the success rate remains near zero throughout the training process. The rapid increase in cumulative
reward is primarily due to the fact that the reward for triggering T is higher than that for other non-RT
termination conditions. Conversely, with the use of termination conditions, the policy’s cumulative
reward can be consistently enhanced, incrementally raising the success rate.
Fig. 6c and 6d illustrate why the use of termination conditions results in better policies. Fig. 6c
shows how the frequency of termination conditions changes over training, while Fig. 6d shows the
average length of episodes when termination conditions are triggered. It is evident that employing


                                                                                                                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               RT   T    CMA          CR       C   ES   NOBR                                             rpenalty = (1       Tmax T )/(1   )       rpenalty = 1000                               0.25         0.5        1.0     2.0   4.0                             0.25         0.5        1.0    2.0   4.0
         1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6                                                                    50
         0.8                                                                                   0.2


                                                               wv * errorv + wd * errorangle
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5                                                                   100


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mean reward
         0.6                                                                                                                                                                         0.4


                                                                                                                                                                          success rate
percentage
                                                                                               0.4                                                                                                                                                         150
         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.3                                                                   200
                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
         0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               250
                                                                                               0.8                                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           300
         0.0                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
               0    1    2        3        4       5    6                                            0      1            2         3           4   5        6                              0.0          0.5            1.0      1.5    2.0                       0.0          0.5           1.0      1.5    2.0
                               episodes                 1e5                                                                     episode                         1e5                                                 env steps          1e8                                                episodes          1e8

(a) Triggering proportions (b) Weighted sum of errors                                                                                                                     (a) Success rate during(b) Cumulative reward dur-
of each termination condi- in magnitude and direction                                                                                                                     training               ing training
tion during training       of velocity vector

Figure 7: Results of ablation on rpenalty . Results Figure 8: Results of ablation study on b. Results
come from experiments over 5 random seeds.          come from experiments over 5 random seeds.

termination conditions can lead the training process to exhibit several distinct stages, each with
unique characteristics, as outlined in Appendix K. The training stages indicate two key advantages
of using termination conditions: First, they enable early termination of unreasonable episodes at
various stages, avoiding the collection of meaningless samples after the occurrence of severe states
(as shown by Fig. 6d). This results in more episodes sampled within the same computational budget,
thus enhancing training efficiency. Second, the training process features several smooth transitions,
which aid in the gradual mastery of goal achievement (as shown by Fig. 6c). This incremental
learning process eases policy learning, allowing capabilities to evolve progressively.

4.4.2                   A BLATION ON R EWARD F UNCTIONS

In this section, we conduct ablation studies on the settings of rpenalty , b to analyze the impact of
different settings on training. The specific experimental settings are detailed in Appendix L.
Ablation study on the setting of rpenalty . In our experiments, we set the penalty reward rpenalty
with a large negative constant and a pessimistic estimation, with the results shown in Fig. 7. Fig. 7a
illustrates the trend in the proportion of termination conditions triggered during training when us-
ing the large negative constant. It is obvious that the agent prefers timeout terminations over other
types, indicating a distinct intermediate learning phase where it shifts from frequently triggering
non-timeout terminations to timeout termination. Fig. 7b shows the trend in the error between
the end-of-episode state and the goal during training. It is observed that the policy intentionally
increases the error, or moves away from the goal, to trigger timeout termination and thus avoid
the large penalty associated with triggering C, CR, NOBR, ES, and CMA. Furthermore, in Ap-
pendix L.2, we provide an analysis of cumulative rewards and success rates, which further corrob-
orates the aforementioned analysis. In summary, employing the large negative constant method in-
troduces an intermediate learning stage where the policy adopts an opportunistic and easier-to-learn
manner to trigger timeout terminations by moving away from the goal. This intermediate phase is
counterproductive to the agent’s goal achievement learning process.
Ablation study on the setting of b. To analyze the impact of the scaling factor b on policy training,
we conduct training with different b and show the corresponding results in Fig. 8. Fig. 8a and 8b
show the success rate and cumulative reward during training, respectively. It can be observed that,
except for b = 0.5, policies trained with other b barely possess the capability to achieve goals.
However, the larger the value of b, the higher the cumulative reward, indicating that with a larger b,
the policy tends to have a higher average reward per step. This suggests that with a larger b, although
the policy may not meet the precision requirements for triggering RT, it can quickly move closer to
the goal from a greater distance. However, the low success rate of larger b indicates that it fails in
helping the policy to continuously approach the goal. We provide a detailed analysis of the impact
of b on velocity direction in the appendix L.3. In summary, the selection of b should be carefully
considered based on the task requirements, trading off between the speed and accuracy of achieving
goals.
In summary, through ablation studies, we demonstrate that both termination conditions and reward
structure have a significant impact on GCRL training, affecting both the training process and the final
training outcomes. The default termination conditions and general reward structure of VVC-Gym
facilitate researchers in exploring the effects of various environment designs on GCRL training.


                                                                                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS , AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we introduce VVC-Gym, a fixed-wing UAV environment tailored for researching
multi-goal long-horizon problems, accompanied by multi-quality demonstration sets. We offer a
comprehensive description of the VVC-Gym design and the methodology for generating demon-
strations. Additionally, we provide several baselines for Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning
(GCRL) and demonstration-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) on VVC-Gym and the accompa-
nying demonstrations. Finally, we conduct ablation studies on environment designs, illustrating that
VVC-Gym is well-suited for investigating the impact of environment designs on GCRL training.
Despite the contributions of our work, there are several limitations and directions for extension
that should be noted in future research: (1) construct tasks with longer control sequences, including
Basic Flight Maneuvers (BFMs) such as Slow Roll and Knife Edge, to facilitate GCRL researchers in
utilizing VVC-Gym as a challenging long-horizon task environment for their studies. (2) Establish
baselines for automatic sub-goal generation methods and offline RL algorithms (Liu et al., 2024;
2025). (3) Explore methods for collecting low-cost demonstrations for velocity vector control tasks
from human play data.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province
(No. 2023RC1005) and partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
62306325).

R EFERENCES
David Abel, Will Dabney, Anna Harutyunyan, Mark K Ho, Michael Littman, Doina Precup, and
  Satinder Singh. On the expressivity of markov reward. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 34:7799–7812, 2021.

David Abel, André Barreto, Michael Bowling, Will Dabney, Steven Hansen, Anna Harutyunyan,
  Mark K Ho, Ramana Kumar, Michael L Littman, Doina Precup, et al. Expressing non-markov
  reward to a markov agent. In Multidisciplinary Conference on Reinforcement Learning and De-
  cision Making, 2022.

David Allerton. Principles of flight simulation, volume 27. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24639–24654,
  2022.

Suneel Belkhale, Yuchen Cui, and Dorsa Sadigh. Data quality in imitation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2023.

Eivind Bøhn, Erlend M Coates, Signe Moe, and Tor Ame Johansen. Deep reinforcement learning
  attitude control of fixed-wing uavs using proximal policy optimization. In 2019 international
  conference on unmanned aircraft systems (ICUAS), pp. 523–533. IEEE, 2019.

Eivind Bøhn, Erlend M Coates, Dirk Reinhardt, and Tor Arne Johansen. Data-efficient deep rein-
  forcement learning for attitude control of fixed-wing uavs: Field experiments. IEEE Transactions
  on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2023.

Daniel S Brown, Wonjoon Goo, and Scott Niekum. Better-than-demonstrator imitation learning
  via automatically-ranked demonstrations. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 330–359. PMLR,
  2020.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shanelle G Clarke and Inseok Hwang. Deep reinforcement learning control for aerobatic maneuver-
  ing of agile fixed-wing aircraft. In AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum, pp. 0136, 2020.

Yiming Ding, Carlos Florensa, Pieter Abbeel, and Mariano Phielipp. Goal-conditioned imitation
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Felix Eckstein and W Schiffmann. Learning to fly–building an autopilot system based on neural
  networks and reinforcement learning. Master’s thesis, FernUniversitat Hagen, 2020.

Farama Foundation. An api standard for single-agent reinforcement learning environments, with
  popular reference environments and related utilities (formerly gym), 2022. https://github.
  com/Farama-Foundation/Gymnasium [Accessed: (2024-04-02)].

Quentin Gallouédec, Nicolas Cazin, Emmanuel Dellandréa, and Liming Chen. panda-gym: Open-
  source goal-conditioned environments for robotic learning. 4th Robot Learning Workshop: Self-
  Supervised and Lifelong Learning at NeurIPS, 2021.

Maor Gaon and Ronen Brafman. Reinforcement learning with non-markovian rewards. In Proceed-
 ings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 3980–3987, 2020.

Dibya Ghosh, Abhishek Gupta, Ashwin Reddy, Justin Fu, Coline Manon Devin, Benjamin Eysen-
  bach, and Sergey Levine. Learning to reach goals via iterated supervised learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Adam Gleave, Mohammad Taufeeque, Juan Rocamonde, Erik Jenner, Steven H. Wang, Sam Toyer,
  Maximilian Ernestus, Nora Belrose, Scott Emmons, and Stuart Russell. imitation: Clean imitation
  learning implementations. arXiv:2211.11972v1 [cs.LG], 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2211.11972.

Xudong Gong, Dawei Feng, Kele Xu, Bo Ding, and Huaimin Wang. Goal-conditioned on-policy re-
  inforcement learning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2024a.

Xudong Gong, Dawei Feng, Kele Xu, Yuanzhao Zhai, ChengKang Yao, Weijia Wang, Bo Ding,
  and Huaimin Wang. Iterative regularized policy optimization with imperfect demonstrations. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024b.

Xudong Gong, Dawei Feng, Kele Xu, Xing Zhou, Si Zheng, Bo Ding, and Huaimin Wang. V-pilot:
  A velocity vector control agent for fixed-wing uavs from imperfect demonstrations. In 2025 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2025.

Abhishek Gupta, Vikash Kumar, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Relay policy
  learning: Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, pp. 1025–1037. PMLR, 2020.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Edward S Hu, Richard Chang, Oleh Rybkin, and Dinesh Jayaraman. Planning goals for exploration.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Alexis D Jacq, Manu Orsini, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Olivier Pietquin, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier
  Bachem. On the importance of data collection for training general goal-reaching policies. In
  Sixteenth European Workshop on Reinforcement Learning, 2023.

Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan, Siddharth Aravindan, Vishwajeet Bagdawat, Varun Bhatt, Harshith
  Goka, Archit Gupta, Kalpesh Krishna, and Vihari Piratla. An analysis of frame-skipping in rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03718, 2021.

William Koch, Renato Mancuso, and Azer Bestavros. Neuroflight: next generation flight control
 firmware. Computing Research Repository, 2019a.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


William Koch, Renato Mancuso, Richard West, and Azer Bestavros. Reinforcement learning for
 uav attitude control. ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical Systems, 3(2):1–21, 2019b.
Minghuan Liu, Menghui Zhu, and Weinan Zhang. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: Prob-
 lems and solutions. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 5502–5511,
 2022.
Tenglong Liu, Yang Li, Yixing Lan, Hao Gao, Wei Pan, and Xin Xu. Adaptive advantage-guided
  policy regularization for offline reinforcement learning. In Forty-first International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2024.
Tenglong Liu, Jianxiong Li, Yinan Zheng, Haoyi Niu, Yixing Lan, Xin Xu, and Xianyuan Zhan.
  Skill expansion and composition in parameter space. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2025.
Siddharth Mysore, Bassel Mabsout, Renato Mancuso, and Kate Saenko. Regularizing action poli-
  cies for smooth control with reinforcement learning. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1810–1816. IEEE, 2021.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ashvin V Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  reinforcement learning with imagined goals. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.
Soroush Nasiriany, Vitchyr Pong, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Planning with goal-conditioned
  policies. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, and Zheng Wen. Generalization and exploration via randomized
  value functions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2377–2386. PMLR, 2016.
Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, Stephen Zhao, Bradly Stadie, and Jimmy Ba. Maximum entropy gain
   exploration for long horizon multi-goal reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pp. 7750–7761. PMLR, 2020.
Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Pow-
 ell, Jonas Schneider, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, et al. Multi-goal reinforce-
 ment learning: Challenging robotics environments and request for research. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1802.09464, 2018.
Dean A Pomerleau. Efficient training of artificial neural networks for autonomous navigation. Neu-
  ral computation, 3(1):88–97, 1991.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.
Jorge Ramı́rez, Wen Yu, and Adolfo Perrusquı́a. Model-free reinforcement learning from expert
  demonstrations: a survey. Artificial Intelligence Review, 55(4):3213–3241, 2022.
Fumihiro Sasaki and Ryota Yamashina. Behavioral cloning from noisy demonstrations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approxima-
  tors. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1312–1320. PMLR, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Flightgear Flight Simulator. Open source aircraft models, 2022. https://mirrors.ibiblio.
   org/flightgear/ftp/Aircraft [Accessed: (2024-05-30)].


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Alexander Trott, Stephan Zheng, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Keeping your distance:
  Solving sparse reward tasks using self-balancing shaped rewards. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
  Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and tasks for
  continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Antonio Visioli. Practical PID control. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
Hao Wang and Weijia Wang. Autonomous control of fixed-wing unmanned aerial system by re-
  inforcement learning. In 2020 3rd International Conference on Unmanned Systems (ICUS), pp.
  911–916. IEEE, 2020.
David Warde-Farley, Tom Van de Wiele, Tejas Kulkarni, Catalin Ionescu, Steven Hansen, and
  Volodymyr Mnih. Unsupervised control through non-parametric discriminative rewards. In In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Haoran Xu, Xianyuan Zhan, Honglei Yin, and Huiling Qin. Discriminator-weighted offline imitation
  learning from suboptimal demonstrations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  24725–24742. PMLR, 2022.
Boyuan Zheng, Sunny Verma, Jianlong Zhou, Ivor W Tsang, and Fang Chen. Imitation learning:
  Progress, taxonomies and challenges. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Sys-
  tems, (99):1–16, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
A    E QUATIONS OF M OTION


The Equations of Motion (EoM) of a Fixed-Wing air-
craft is comprised of translational and rotational nonlin-
ear equations of a 6-Degrees-of-Freedom (6-DoF) system
about the 3 Body Coordinate System (BCS) axes. This
generates a 12-dimensional fully observable state space,
positions and their rates Clarke & Hwang (2020): the ve-
locity component along the OX axis of the BCS u, the
velocity component along the OY axis of the BCS v, the
velocity component along the OZ axis of the BCS w, the
roll angle ϕ, the pitch angle θ, the yaw angle ψ, the roll
rate p, the pitch rate q, the yaw rate r, the coordinate of
the x-axis in the Geodetic Coordinate System (GCS) xE ,
the coordinate of the y-axis in the GCS yE , and the coor- Figure 9: Body coordinate system of
dinate of the z-axis in the GCS zE .                        fixed-wing aircraft (from Fig.3.9 of
                                                            Allerton (2009)).


         du    Tx − D cos α cos β − Y cos α sin β + L sin α − mg sin θ
            =                                                          + rv − qw                        (2)
         dt                                m
         dv   Ty − D sin β + Y cos β + mg sin ϕ cos θ
            =                                          + pw − ru                                        (3)
         dt                         m
         dw    Tz − D sin α cos β − Y sin α sin β − L cos α + mg cos ϕ cos θ
            =                                                                + qu − pv                  (4)
         dt                                   m
         dϕ
            = p + tan θ (q sin ϕ + r cos ϕ)                                                             (5)
         dt
         dθ
            = q cos ϕ − r sin ϕ                                                                         (6)
         dt
         dψ      1
            =        (q sin ϕ + r cos ϕ)                                                                (7)
         dt    cos θ
         dp
            = (c1 r + c2 p) q + c3 Mx + c4 Mz                                                           (8)
         dt
         dq
            = c5 pr − c6 p2 − r2 + c7 My

                                                                                                        (9)
         dt
         dr
            = (c8 p − c2 r) q + c4 Mx + c9 Mz                                                          (10)
         dt


where T is the thrust force, D is the drag force, Y is the side force, L is the lift force, M is the
moment (T, D, Y, L, M are calculated by an aerodynamic model with open-source aircraft model
Simulator (2022). Please refer to the Fig.1 of Wang & Wang (2020) for the detailed calculation
                                                                                   (I −I )I −I 2
process.), m is the mass of the aircraft, g is the gravitational acceleration, c1 = yIx Izz −Iz 2 zx , c2 =
                                                                                                zx
                                                                                                        2
(Ix −Iy +Iz )Izx                                          Iz −Ix                          (Ix −Iy )Ix +Izx
           2
   Ix Iz −Izx    , c3 = Ix IzI−I
                              z               Izx
                                 2 , c4 = I I −I 2 , c5 =
                                            x z
                                                                      Izx        1
                                                            Iy , c6 = Iy , c7 = Iy , c8 =             2
                                                                                             Ix Iz −Izx    ,
                                 zx               zx
                Ix
and c9 = Ix Iz −I 2 , where Ix , Iy , Iz , Izx are moment of inertia.
                    zx


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Comparison of efficiency between VVC-Gym and popular RL environments. The content
within the parentheses indicates the physical engine used in the environment.

                       Reach (Panda)     HalfCheetah (Mujoco)     Ant (Mujoco)   Hammer (Adroit)   VVC-Gym
        FPS                2189                 4042                  2504            2308          3623
 Wall-clock time (s)       4506                 2435                  3947            4306          2854


For the linear velocities along the three axes in the Global Coordinate System (GCS), denoted as
νx , νy , νz , the relationships are as follows


     dxE
νx =     = u cos θ cos ψ + v(sin θ sin ϕ cos ψ − cos ϕ cos ψ) + w(sin θ cos ϕ cos ψ + sin ϕ sin ψ)
      dt
                                                                                              (11)
     dyE
νy =     = u cos θ sin ψ + v(sin θ sin ϕ sin ψ + cos ϕ cos ψ) + w(sin θ cos ϕ sin ψ − sin ϕ cos ψ)
      dt
                                                                                              (12)
     dzE
νz =     = −u sin θ + v sin ϕ cos θ + w cos ϕ sin θ                                           (13)
      dt


                                  q                       √
Besides, the airspeed V =             νx2 + νy2 + νz2 =       u2 + v 2 + w2 , flight path elevator angle µ =
                                                         ν
arcsin( νVz ), the flight path azimuth angle χ = arctan( νxy ), angle of attack α = arctan( w
                                                                                            u ), and
                              ν
sideslip angle β = arcsin( V ).
Although VVC-Gym is implemented in Python, we implement the aforementioned computations
with C++, which renders the simulations in VVC-Gym highly efficient. On a single node (equipped
with an Intel Core i9-10980XE CPU, NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090, and 128GB of memory), we
train for 107 steps using the PPO algorithm (with 64 rollout workers) within the StableBaselines3
framework and compare VVC-Gym with commonly used RL environments. The results are pre-
sented in Table 4. It can be observed that VVC-Gym achieves the sampling speed of environments
commonly used in academic research and even surpasses several of them.



B      T HE C ONTROL L AW

The control law is responsible for converting the pilot’s commands or the signals from the automatic
flight system into precise movements of the aircraft’s control surfaces, such as the ailerons, elevators,
and rudder, to achieve stable flight and precise maneuvering of the aircraft. Our control law model
receives overload command nzc and roll rate command pc as input, and outputs the deflections of
the elevator and aileron, denoted as δe and δa , respectively,

                                                     Z
                         δe = kp,e (nz − nzc ) + ki,e (nz − nzc ) dt + kd,e q                              (14)
                                                   Z
                         δa = kp,a (p − pc ) + ki,a (p − pc ) dt                                           (15)


where kp,e , ki,e , kd,e are the proportional gain, integral gain, and derivative gain of the PID con-
troller that controls the elevator, and kp,a , ki,a are the proportional gain and integral gain of the PID
controller that controls the aileron.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     T HE PID C ONTROLLER OF G UIDANCE L AW FOR V ELOCITY V ECTOR
      C ONTROL
The expert model of the guidance law takes desired velocity vector vc , µc , χc as input and produces
overload command nzc , roll rate command pc , and the deflection of the power level actuator δpla :
                                             ∆χ
                                     nyc,e =      · Vg,hor /g                                         (16)
                                              Tχ
                                             ∆µ
                                     nzc,e =      · Vg /g + cos µ                                     (17)
                                              Tµ
                                            q
                                     nzc = n2yc,e + n2zc,e                                            (18)
                                                   n
                                                     yc,e
                                     ϕc = tan−1                                                       (19)
                                                    cos θ
                                     pc = kp,p (ϕc − ϕ) + kd,p p                                      (20)
                                     δpla = kp,pla (vc − v) + ∆pla                                    (21)
where nyc,e is the lateral overload command in GCS, nzc,e is the normal overload command in
GCS, ∆µ = µc − µ is the error in flight path elevator angle, ∆χ = χc − χ is the error in flight path
azimuth angle, Tχ is the estimation of the time required for the aircraft to reach the desired flight path
azimuth angle, Tµ is the estimation of the time required for the aircraft to reach the desired flight path
elevator angle, Vg is the aircraft ground speed, Vg,hor is the horizontal component of Vg , ϕc is an
intermediate variable representing the roll angle command, kp,p , kd,p are the proportional gain and
integral gain of the PID controller that controls the roll rate command, kp,pla is the proportional gain
of the PID controller that controls the deflection of the power level actuator, and ∆pla is constant
that ensures that the aircraft maintains its velocity without decrease during level flight.

                                                                               Table 5: Parameters used
D     G ENERATING D EMONSTRATIONS                                              to discretize the goal
                                                                               space.
Discretizing the goal space. The goal space G = [vmin , vmax ] ×
[µmin , µmax ] × [χmin , χmax ] is discretized to G′ = {vmin +
       −vmin                                               −µmin                        v     µ      χ
i vmax
    Nv −1    |i ∈ [1, 2, . . . , Nv − 1]} × {µmin + i µmax
                                                        Nµ −1    |i ∈
                                         −χmin
                                                                                min    100   -85    -170
[1, 2, . . . , Nµ − 1]} × {χmin + i χmax
                                      Nχ −1    |i ∈ [1, 2, . . . , Nχ − 1]},    max    300   85     170
where Nv , Nµ , Nχ are the number that we equally divide the v, µ, χ             N      21   35      69
spaces. In the experiments, we utilize the parameters specified in Ta-          #discretized goals: 50715
ble 5 to generate the discrete goal set.
Augmenting demonstrations based on symmetry.                         If DE contain a trajectory
τg = {(s1 , a1 ), . . . , (sT , aT )} that achieves goal g = (v, µ, χ), then DE is aug-
mented with τg−1 = {(s−1              −1             −1 −1
                                 1 , a1 ), . . . , (sT , aT )}, where g
                                                                        −1
                                                                           = (v, µ, −χ), s−1 =
                                  −1
(θ, −ϕ, −ψ, −χ, µ, h, −p, v), a       = (−p, nz , δpla ). If DE has a trajectory that can achieve
g −1 , then the shorter one is kept.

E     A LGORITHM BACKGROUND
E.1   G OAL -C ONDITIONED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Let ∆(X ) denote the probability distribution over a set X . Goal-conditioned RL is described by
goal-augmented MDP Liu et al. (2022); Pitis et al. (2020) M = ⟨S, A, T , r, γ, G, pg , ζ⟩, where
S, A, γ are the state set, action set, and discount factor, T : S × A → ∆(S) is the transition
probabilities, r = {rg |rg : S → R, g ∈ G} is the goal-conditioned reward functions, G is the
space of goals, pg is the desired goal distribution, and ζ : S → G is a tractable mapping function
that maps the state to a specific goal. For a fixed goal g, solving it means finding optimal policy
from a standard MDP Mg = ⟨S, A, T , rg , γ⟩. There are three kinds of goals in goal-conditioned
RL: desired goal is the requirements of the task, and the desired goal distribution is denoted as
pdg ; achieved goal is the corresponding goal achieved by the current timestamp and state, and the


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Table 6: Parameters used in Environment

                  (a) Normal Version                                     (b) Hard Version

           Parameter                 Value                      Parameter                   Value
          vmin , vmax              150, 250                    vmin , vmax               100, 300
          µmin , µmax               -10, 10                    µmin , µmax                -85, 85
          χmin , χmax               -30, 30                    χmin , χmax              -170, 170
      simulation frequency             10                  simulation frequency              10
              Tmax                    400                          Tmax                     400
             wv , wd                0.5, 0.5                      wv , wd                0.5, 0.5
              σv , σd              100, 180                        σv , σd               100, 180
                 b                    0.5                             b                     0.5
            rpenalty         pessimistic estimation              rpenalty         pessimistic estimation
            TR , TM                  10, 20                      TR , TM                   10, 20
                h0                     0                             h0                      0
              ϕmax                    720                          ϕmax                     720
        vmax , pmax in ES          400, 300                  vmax , pmax in ES          400, 300
            ϕN , TN                  60, 20                      ϕN , TN                   60, 20


achieved goal distribution is denoted as pag ; behavioral goal is the goal for sampling trajectory in the
current episode Liu et al. (2022). The policy parameterized by θ is modeled as πθ : S × G → ∆(A)
based on the idea of universal value function approximators (UVFA) Schaul       P∞ et al. (2015). The
objective of goal-conditioned RL is to maximize the expectation Eg∼pdg ,π [ t=0 γ t rg (st )].

E.2     I MITATION L EARNING

Imitation learning is a demonstration-driven, sample-efficient method for learning policies by imi-
tating demonstrators Belkhale et al. (2023). IL assumes access to a dataset DE = (τ1 , . . . , τN ) of
N demonstrations. τi = {(s1 , a1 ), . . . , (sTi , aTi )} is a sequence of length Ti of state-action pairs
sampled by the demonstrator πE (·|st ) through environment dynamics T (·|st , at ). The objective of
IL is to learn a policy πθ : S → ∆(A) parameterized by θ from DE . Behavioral cloning Pomerleau
(1991) is a widely applied IL method, which learns the imitation policy by optimizing a supervised
loss to maximize the likelihood of demonstrator actions Sasaki & Yamashina (2020):
                                    L(θ) = −E(s,a)∼DE [log πθ (a|s)].                                  (22)

F      T WO V ERSIONS OF V ELOCITY V ECTOR C ONTROL TASKS
We implement two versions of the velocity vector control task in VVC-Gym: the normal version
and the hard version, which are detailed in Table 6. The distinction between the two versions lies in
the definition of the goal space. The hard version features a larger goal space, which encompasses
nearly the entire three-dimensional space, making it more challenging.

G      A LGORITHM D ETAILS
The Imitation Gleave et al. (2022) framework is utilized to implement behavioral cloning (BC)
Pomerleau (1991) algorithm with parameters listed in Table 7a, and the Stable Baselines3 Raffin
et al. (2021) framework for SAC and PPO with parameters listed in Table 7b and 7c. 128*128 fully
connected network and the Tanh activation function are used.

H      S UPPORT FOR R ESEARCH ON N ON -M ARKOVIAN R EWARD P ROBLEMS
The values of TR , TM , TN in termination conditions R, CMA, and NOBR respectively shape the
reward function’s characteristics, impacting the policy’s form. When TR = TM = TN = 1, rewards
are Markovian that only depend on the current state, allowing policies to be based solely on the
current state. If any of TR , TM , TN exceed 1, rewards become dependent on a history of consecutive


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Table 7: Algorithm configurations.

         (a) BC                       (b) SAC                                 (c) PPO

    Parameter     Value        Parameter           Value               Parameter           Value
     l2 weight      0
    ent weight    10−2
                                  ent coef         ‘auto’               ent coef           10−2
    batch size    4096            gamma            0.995                gamma              0.995
       epochs      300               lr          3 × 10−4             gae lambda            0.95
                                batch size          1024                   lr            3 × 10−4
                               buffer size        2 × 105              batch size          4096
                             learning starts       10240              train steps         5 × 108
                              gradient steps          1          rollout process num         64
                                train steps          106                n steps            2048
                          rollout process num         1                n epochs              5
                                  use sde          False                use sde             True
                          HER:n sampled goal          4          normalize advantage        True



Table 8: Success rate on MR and various NMR problems. Results come from experiments over 5
random seeds.

                                 TR     Reward type     Success rate
                                 1         MR           84.43±4.74
                                 10        NMR          65.53±12.95
                                 20        NMR          45.03±10.65
                                 30        NMR           21.99±6.63



states, making them non-Markovian, and policies must account for state history Abel et al. (2021);
Gaon & Brafman (2020); Abel et al. (2022).
Investigating non-Markovian reward problems. Non-Markovian reward (NMR) refers to the re-
ward that depends on multiple steps of states and action Abel et al. (2021), such as determining
whether an UAV has stably achieved a desired velocity vector based on a sequence of states. Typi-
cally, the longer the state sequence that a NMR depends on, the more challenging it becomes to train
policies with RL. To illustrate the impact of NMR on RL training, we set different values of TR in
VVC-Gym, which represents the dependency of the NMR on the length of the state sequence. The
results are presented in Table 8. It is observed that as TR increases, the policy’s performance deteri-
orates. Additionally, adjusting TM and TN can also alter the Markovian nature of reward function.
This indicates that VVC-Gym is well-suited for studying NMR problems.



I    T HE T WO C ONTROL M ODES OF VVC-G YM

We train both a guidance law model and an end-to-end model using SAC on the easy version of
VVC-Gym, and present the corresponding results in Table 9. It can be observed that the trained
guidance law model demonstrates superior performance. The reason for this is that the control
law model provided in Appendix B is capable of stabilizing the control outputs, which serves a
purpose analogous to the temporal abstraction achieved through frame-skipping, thereby reducing
the temporal complexity of exploration.
The above results can be interpreted from two perspectives: On one hand, the use of a simple
control law model to stabilize RL outputs helps address the temporal complexity of exploration.
On the other hand, although the end-to-end mode is more difficult to train, it also serves as a more
challenging testbed for evaluating RL exploration methods. Additionally, the end-to-end mode can
also be employed to investigate the oscillation action problem Mysore et al. (2021) in RL.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Success rate of SAC between training a guidance law model and training a end-to-end
model. Results come from experiments over 5 random seeds.

                                        Guidance law model       End-to-end model
                   Success Rate (%)          90.40±0.49              7.60±5.08

Table 10: Success rate (%) of GCRL algorithms on Reach, PointMaze, and VVC. The demon-
strations used in the Reach experiments are from the official script provided by Panda-Gym, the
demonstrations used in the PointMaze experiments are from Minari, and the demonstrations used in
                            0
the VVC experiments are DE    . Results come from experiments over 5 random seeds.

                                       MEGA            GCBC       GCBC+PPO
                         Reach        100.0±0.0    70.63±2.99      100.0±0.0
                       PointMaze      100.0±0.0    75.96±5.34      93.33±3.06
                         VVC          8.32±1.86    17.08±0.57      38.31±1.62


J     C HALLENGE OF THE VVC TASK
Fixed-wing UAV’s VVC is a challenging task. The difficulties lie in: (1) The large exploration
space of the policy, which is a continuous state, continuous action problem, and the policy requires
additional exploration of the goal space during training. (2) The long interaction sequences, with
the average length of demonstrations exceeding 280. Even well-trained policies require an average
of over 100 steps to achieve a goal, and more challenging goals can demand upwards of 300 steps
(see Table 1 for corresponding results).
We provide evidence that VVC is a challenging task through the following three sets of experiments:
Firstly, standard RL algorithms struggle to solve the VVC task. Table 2a shows the success rates
of SAC (1.08%) and PPO (0.04%). It is evident that SAC and PPO struggle to solve the VVC task.
Secondly, existing GCRL algorithms can effectively solve common multi-goal tasks in aca-
demic research, but they can only solve the VVC task to a certain extent. We compare the
performance of different GCRL algorithms on VVC and common multi-goal tasks in academic re-
search, PointMaze (PointMaze Large DIVERSE G-v3) and Reach (PandaReach-v3). The results
are shown in Table 10. It can be seen that these GCRL algorithms can almost completely solve
Reach and PointMaze, but the best algorithm achieves only a 38.31% success rate on VVC. These
results indirectly reflect that VVC is a challenging task.
Thirdly, the human-designed classical PID controller (detailed in Appendix C) has only a
20.08% success rate, which also indirectly reflects that VVC is a challenging task.
We believe that for academic research, the difficulty of the task should progress in tandem with the
research on algorithms. The task should have appropriate levels of difficulty to properly evaluate
different algorithms. If the task is too easy, too hard, or unsolvable, it will fail to provide a useful
signal for benchmarking. Therefore, we believe that the current success rates of GCRL algorithms
on VVC being less than 50% is helpful for researchers to discover more insights when designing
algorithms.

K     A BLATION ON T ERMINATIONS
K.1    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

For the experiment with termination conditions, all of the 7 termination conditions are used in the
environment, with parameters listed in 6a. For the experiment without terminations conditions, only
RT, T, and ES are used in the environment, with the corresponding parameters the same as 6a. In the
comparative experiments, the primary purpose of using ES is to prevent excessive values of linear
velocity v and angular velocity p, which could lead to floating-point overflow errors. However, we
utilize the largest possible values for vmax = 600, pmax = 600 to ensure that ES operates with the


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                with terminations        without terminations                               with terminations        without terminations                                                    with terminations        without terminations                        RT   T       CMA       CR       C       ES   NOBR
      80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0
      70                                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                   80


                                                                                                                                                   wv * errorv + wd * errorangle
      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
      50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   percentage
                                                                                   60                                                                                                                                                                       0.6


                                                                      errorangle
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.3
 errorv
      40
      30                                                                                                                                                                           0.4                                                                      0.4
                                                                                   40
      20                                                                                                                                                                           0.5                                                                      0.2
      10                                                                           20                                                                                              0.6
       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
           0    1       2           3    4        5        6                            0   1       2           3    4        5        6                                                 0   1       2           3    4        5        6                         0        1         2        3       4        5
                               episode                          1e5                                        episode                          1e5                                                             episode                          1e5                                     episodes                  1e5


 (a) Error in magnitude of (b) Error in direction of (c) Weighted sum of er- (d) Triggering proportions
 velocity vector           velocity vector           rors in magnitude and di- of each termination condi-
                                                     rection of velocity vector tion during training

Figure 10: Statistical information on training process of termination conditions. Results come from
experiments over 5 random seeds.


minimal necessary intervention. For the PPO algorithm, both experiments use parameters listed in
7c.

K.2            A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS ON THE A BLATION OF T ERMINATION C ONDITIONS

From Fig. 6c and 6d, it can be observed that when termination conditions are employed, the entire
training process can be divided into four stages:
In the first stage, when the number of training episodes is less than 104 , the policy lacks any mean-
ingful capability and tends to explore randomly. The policy frequently triggers CR, NOBR, ES, and
CMA, with short average episode lengths when these conditions are triggered.
The second stage occurs when the number of training episodes is between 104 and 5 ∗ 104 . During
this stage, the frequency of CR being triggered significantly decreases, while the frequency of C
being triggered increases substantially. Additionally, the average episode lengths for CR, NOBR,
ES, and CMA are notably longer. This indicates that in this stage, the policy has learned how to
quickly avoid triggering CR, NOBR, ES, and CMA. And the higher frequency of triggering C is due
to the policy’s lack of capability to continuously approach the goal, leading to frequent triggering of
C.
The third stage is when the number of training episodes is between 5 ∗ 104 and 3 ∗ 105 . In this stage,
the frequency of C being triggered significantly decreases, while the frequency of T being triggered
rapidly increases. This suggests that as training progresses in this stage, the policy begins to acquire
the ability to approach the goal, but it is not yet able to do so quickly or continuously, resulting in
frequent triggering of T.
The fourth stage occurs when the number of training episodes exceeds 3 ∗ 105 . In this stage, the pol-
icy’s ability to approach the desired goal is gradually improved, leading to an increasing frequency
of triggering RT. The policy starts to possess the capability to complete parts of the goals.
Furthermore, the trend in the error between the state at the end of episode and the goal, which is
present in Fig. 10, also corroborates the aforementioned four stages exhibited by the learning process
when termination conditions are used.


L          A BLATION ON R EWARD F UNCTIONS

L.1            E XPERIMENT D ETAILS .

Aside from the parameters investigated in the ablation study, all other environment and algorithm
configuration parameters are consistent with those detailed in Table 6 and 7. In the ablation study
on rpenalty , rpenalty = −1000 is employed for the large negative constant method, and rpenalty =
      Tmax −Tτ
− 1−γ 1−γ        is employed for the pessimistic estimation method, where Tτ is the length of current
sampled episode τ . In the ablation study on the scaling factor b, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 are
employed for training. From the previous experimental results, it is evident that controlling the


                                                                                                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   rpenalty = (1          Tmax T )/(1        )            rpenalty = 1000                                                      rpenalty = (1      Tmax T )/(1       )                  rpenalty = 1000                                             rpenalty = (1          Tmax T )/(1        )           rpenalty = 1000                                                                            rpenalty = (1         Tmax T )/(1     )                 rpenalty = 1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            120
                                                                                                                                           0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      120
                    200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                           0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
                    400                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80

     mean reward
                                                                                                                                           0.4


                                                                                                                                success rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       errorangle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       errorv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                    600                                                                                                                    0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                                                                           0.2                                                                                                                   40
                    800                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                                                           0.1                                                                                                                   20
                   1000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                           0.0                                                                                                                       0
                          0.0                 0.5                1.0                   1.5                  2.0                                      0.0                   0.5             1.0                       1.5             2.0                                     0           1          2               3            4       5                                     6                                           0                1         2         3             4             5        6
                                                            episodes                                        1e8                                                                     env steps                                        1e8                                                                          episode                                                           1e5                                                                       episode                                        1e5


(a) Cumulative reward dur- (b) Success rate during (c) Error in magnitude of (d) Error in direction of
ing training               training                velocity vector           velocity vector

Figure 11: Statistical information on training process of different rpenalty . Results come from
experiments over 5 random seeds.

                                                      0.25                   0.5              1.0                 2.0                      4.0                                                                          0.25             0.5               1.0                    2.0              4.0                                                                                             0.25                    0.5                  1.0            2.0                    4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                                  80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wv * errorv + wd * errorangle
                                                                                                                                                                                                   80                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                     errorangle
                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                          errorv


                                  40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                   40                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                      0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.7
                                             0             1                 2            3            4           5                  6                                                                          0           1        2            3             4                 5           6                                                                                              0             1              2                3         4          5            6
                                                                                    episode                                                    1e5                                                                                               episode                                            1e5                                                                                                                              episode                                           1e5

                          (a) Error in magnitude of ve-                                                                                                                            (b) Error in direction of ve-                                                                                                                          (c) Weighted sum of errors
                          locity vector                                                                                                                                            locity vector                                                                                                                                          in magnitude and direction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of velocity vector

Figure 12: Errors of velocity vector of policies trained with different b during training. Results come
from experiments over 5 random seeds.

                   RT         T       CMA        CR         C           ES         NOBR                       RT            T             CMA         CR           C         ES      NOBR                               RT       T        CMA         CR         C           ES         NOBR                            RT           T   CMA                                   CR         C       ES                NOBR                        RT        T       CMA         CR             C      ES         NOBR



         0.8                                                                                            0.8                                                                                                      0.8                                                                                          0.8                                                                                                                       0.8

         0.6                                                                                            0.6                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                          0.6                                                                                                                       0.6
percentage


                                                                                               percentage


                                                                                                                                                                                                        percentage


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     percentage


         0.4                                                                                            0.4                                                                                                      0.4                                                                                          0.4                                                                                                              percentage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4

         0.2                                                                                            0.2                                                                                                      0.2                                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                       0.2

         0.0                                                                                            0.0                                                                                                      0.0                                                                                          0.0                                                                                                                       0.0
                   0      1       2          3        4         5            6                                0         1            2           3         4           5     6      7                                  0         1       2        3         4            5          6                                   0            1       2                                  3             4            5                                    0         1          2            3          4           5
                                            episodes                             1e5                                                            episodes                           1e5                                                          episodes                                1e5                                                       episodes                                                      1e5                                                      episodes                             1e5


                        (a) b = 0.25                                                                               (b) b = 0.5                                                                                               (c) b = 1.0                                                                                     (d) b = 2.0                                                                                                              (e) b = 4.0

Figure 13: Triggering proportions of each termination condition during training. Results come from
experiments over 5 random seeds.



magnitude of velocity is simpler than controlling the direction of velocity. Therefore, we used a
larger wd compared to wv , specifically setting wd to 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, and 0.875 for training.


L.2                           A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS OF THE A BLATION ON rpenalty .

Fig. 11c and Fig. 11d respectively depict the error in magnitude of velocity vector and the error
in direction of velocity vector during training. It is evident that when a large negative constant is
employed, the policy opportunistically moves away from the goal to trigger the timeout termina-
tion, thereby avoiding the greater punishment associated with non-timeout termination. The above
analysis aligns with our conclusion in Sec. 4.4.2.
Additionally, Fig. 11a and 11b illustrate the changes in cumulative reward and success rate during
training for the two methods of setting rpenalty . When using the large negative constant method,
the cumulative reward plateaus at around -300 after rising from -1000, and the policy’s success rate
remains nearly zero throughout, indicating that the policy has learned to avoid triggering C, CR,
NOBR, ES, and CMA by frequently triggering timeout terminations, and it is difficult to learn to
achieve goals based on this behavior.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Error in the direction of the velocity vector and the immediate reward at the last step of
the trajectory finished by policies trained with different b. The ‘Error interval’ indicates the range to
which the error in the direction of the velocity vector must decrease before the reward change rate
exceeds 1 (The curve of reward varying with error can be found in Fig. 2). The ‘Error between the
state at the end of episode and the goal’ represents the error in the direction of the velocity vector
between the last state of the trajectory finished by policies and the goal. The ‘Immediate reward at
the last step of episode’ is the immediate reward of the last state of the trajectory finished by policies.

                                            Error between the state
                  Error interval                                           Immediate reward at the
      b                                      at the end of episode
             (reward change rate ¿ 1)                                        last step of episode
                                                  and the goal
  0.25              (0, 63.64)                           70                           -0.79
   0.5                (0, 45)                            40                           -0.47
   1.0                   /                               60                           -0.33
   2.0              (90, 180)                            40                           -0.05
   4.0            (113.39, 180)                          60                           -0.01


L.3       A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS OF THE A BLATION ON b.

Fig. 12a and 12b present the trends in the error of velocity magnitude and velocity direction between
the state at the end of an episode and the goal during training. Controlling the velocity magnitude of
the UAV is relatively simple, and a smaller b is more beneficial for the UAV to improve the accuracy
of reaching the desired velocity magnitude. Controlling the velocity direction of the UAV is more
challenging, and the experiments with b = 0.5 and b = 2.0 achieved the best results. This is because
when b > 1, the reward function changes rapidly in the region of high error but slowly in the region
of low error, which is beneficial for the policy to quickly approach the goal when the error is large
but not beneficial for the policy to continuously approach the goal when the error is small; when
b < 1, the reward function’s characteristics are opposite. Therefore, a b slightly greater or less than
1 can effectively balance the policy’s speed in different error intervals, somewhat improving the
precision of approaching the goal, as shown in Fig. 12c. However, when b is too large or too small,
it significantly increases the policy’s speed in one interval but severely reduces it in another, which,
as evidenced by the experimental results, is not beneficial for the policy to achieve goals.
Fig. 13 presents the proportion of termination conditions triggered by policies trained with different
b during training. From an overall perspective, as learning progresses, the policy effectively learns to
avoid triggering the four termination conditions CMA, CR, ES, and NOBR, with C and T dominating
the training process for most of the time; (2) as b increases, the proportion of policy triggering T
also increases, indicating that a larger b is beneficial for the policy to approach the goal. This is
consistent with the analysis of Fig. 12.
Additionally, Table 11 presents the immediate reward at the last step of the completed trajectory
and the error between the state and the goal. It is observed that only when b = 0.5 can the policy
reduce the error to a region where the reward change rate exceeds 1. When b is too small, the reward
remains in the error range where drde < 1, which is not conducive to the policy quickly approaching
the goal. When b = 0.25, the policy does not even reduce the error to the dr
                                                                          de > 1 error range. When
b is too large, the reward remains in the error range where dr
                                                             de <  1, which  is not conducive to the
policy continuously approaching the goal. When b = 2 and b = 4, although the policy can reduce
the error to the dr
                  de < 1 error range, the slow change in reward with error makes it difficult for the
policy to learn, thus preventing the policy from continuously reducing the error to trigger RT.
In summary, When b < 1, it is beneficial for the policy to learn the ability to continuously approach
the goal in the error-small interval, but it is not conducive to the policy acquiring the ability to
quickly approach the goal in the error-large interval. Conversely, when b > 1, it is beneficial for
the policy to acquire the ability to quickly approach the goal in the error-large interval, but it is
not conducive to the policy acquiring the ability to continuously approach the goal in the error-small
interval. Therefore, the selection of b should be carefully considered based on the task requirements,
balancing the trade-off between the speed and accuracy of achieving goals.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   0.5       0.625       0.75        0.875                                0.5         0.625       0.75       0.875                                         0.5         0.625          0.75         0.875                                  0.5         0.625         0.75         0.875
                                                                                100                                                                                                                                                         0.8
      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.7
                                                                                 80                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5


                                                                                                                                              mean reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 success rate
                                                                                 60                                                                         150


                                                                   errorangle
 errorv
      40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                            200                                                                             0.3
                                                                                 40
      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                            250                                                                             0.1
                                                                                 20
          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
              0    1     2       3       4      5       6                             0   1       2       3       4      5      6                                 0.0            0.5           1.0           1.5           2.0                    0.0           0.5           1.0          1.5           2.0
                               episode                       1e5                                        episode                      1e5                                                episodes                           1e8                                         env steps                         1e8


(a) Errors in magnitude of (b) Errors in direction of (c) Cumulative reward dur- (d) Success rate during
velocity vector            velocity vector            ing training               training

Figure 14: Results of ablation study on wv , wd . Results come from experiments over 5 random
seeds.
Table 12: The Smoothness Measure of State and Action of Each Demonstration. As there is almost
                         i       i , i ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, we show the smoothness measure of D i in this
no difference between DE   and DE                                                         E
table. Optimal values are highlighted in bold, and sub-optimal values are underlined.
                                                                                                              state                                                                                                                                         action
 Demonstration
                                 θ                      ϕ                  ψ                        χ                     µ                    h                             p                           v                      p                            nz                          δpla
  0
                  s1         0.25±0.05              0.06±0.03          0.23±0.12                0.23±0.12             0.04±0.05            1.47±1.31                     0.64±0.47                   0.15±0.09              0.46±0.23                   0.006±0.005                 0.0015±0.0016
 DE
                  s2         0.14±0.09              1.93±2.14          0.36±0.16                0.31±0.16             0.08±0.06            2.24±1.64                    30.65±45.14                  0.20±0.12              2.11±2.21                    0.03±0.07                  0.0028±0.0026
  1
                  s1         0.20±0.14              0.31±0.49          0.57±0.31                0.56±0.28             0.19±0.14            4.46±3.08                     1.35±0.77                   0.31±0.17              1.44±0.64                    0.05±0.03                  0.0044±0.0035
 DE
                  s2         0.81±0.44              3.18±2.17          1.16±0.87                0.81±0.51             0.45±0.21            6.34±3.90                    16.00±23.16                  0.47±0.19              7.54±6.51                    0.47±0.54                   0.016±0.018
  2
                  s1         0.25±0.18              0.31±0.39          0.60±0.37                0.58±0.31             0.24±0.18            4.83±3.18                     1.43±0.83                   0.31±0.17              1.52±0.92                    0.05±0.03                  0.0043±0.0036
 DE
                  s2         0.82±0.38              3.34±2.02          1.30±1.07                0.83±0.46             0.52±0.23            6.95±3.94                    18.55±26.42                  0.48±0.20             10.98±11.65                   0.43±0.47                   0.016±0.015
  3
                  s1         0.28±0.20              0.39±0.65          0.60±0.39                0.58±0.31             0.27±0.18            4.83±3.11                     1.51±0.93                   0.31±0.18              1.55±0.99                    0.06±0.03                  0.0042±0.0038
 DE
                  s2         0.82±0.35              3.34±2.61          1.26±1.00                0.81±0.39             0.54±0.23            7.15±3.81                    20.15±27.62                  0.49±0.19             11.94±13.64                   0.48±0.48                   0.018±0.021


L.4               A BLATION S TUDY ON THE S ETTING OF wv AND wd .

In the experimental process, we discovered that Eq. 1 can be further refined by breaking down the
                                                             ∥⃗
                                                              v −⃗
                                                                 v ∥           ∥⃗
                                                                                v −⃗v ∥
term −( ∥ζ(stσ)−g∥ )b into two separate components: −(wv ( t σv g t )b + wd ( t σd g d )b ), where ∥.∥t
calculates the difference in magnitude of two velocity vectors, and ∥.∥d calculates the difference in
the direction of two velocity vectors,σv , σd are normalization factors for velocity and direction such
     ∥⃗
      v −⃗v ∥            ∥⃗
                          v −⃗
                             v ∥
that t σv g t ∈ [0, 1], t σd g d ∈ [0, 1], wv ∈ [0, 1], wd ∈ [0, 1], wv + wd = 1.0 are weight factors
for velocity and direction. After the decomposition, we can balance the importance of the velocity
direction and the magnitude by adjusting the weights wv and wd .
To analyze the impact of wv and wd on policy training, we conduct training with different values
of wv and wd and present the corresponding results in Fig. 14. From Fig. 14a, it is evident that the
smaller the value of wv , the larger the error in velocity magnitude at the end of episode, indicating
a positive correlation between the increase in reward weight wv and the reduction in error for the
relatively simple control of velocity magnitude.
Fig. 14b shows that when wd is set to 0.5, 0.625, and 0.75, the resulting policies have similar errors
in velocity direction, but the larger the value of wd , the faster the error decreases during training,
suggesting that a higher wd is more beneficial for the policy to reduce the error in velocity direction.
However, when wd is set to the highest value of 0.875, the error in velocity direction is the largest.
This is because the policy is unable to reduce the error in velocity magnitude to within 10, which
prevents the policy from triggering RT and limits its ability to decrease the error in velocity direction.
Fig. 14c and 14d illustrate the trends in cumulative reward and success rate. It can be observed that
appropriately increasing wd is beneficial for enhancing the policy’s capability to obtain cumulative
reward and to speed up the increase in success rate. However, an excessively large wd affects the
error in velocity magnitude, which is detrimental to the improvement of cumulative reward and
further restricts the increase in success rate.

M                 S TATE AND ACTION S MOOTHNESS OF D EMONSTRATIONS
Two metrics are introduced to measure the smoothness of states and actions. Taking the pitch angle θ
as an example, the formulas for these two metrics are given in the following. And the other variables
of state and action are the same. The first metric is inspired by Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT),


                                                                                                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and is calculated as
                                                         n
                                                     2 X
                                       sθ1 (τ ) =           M i fi ,                              (23)
                                                    nfs i=1
where fs is the sampling frequency, Mi and fi are the amplitude and frequency of the ith frequency
component Mysore et al. (2021). Larger values on this metric indicate the presence of larger high-
frequency signal components, thus less smoothness the signal is. The second metric is calculated by
accumulating the change of variable over the entire trajectory, and is calculated as
                                                   |τ |−1
                                                    X
                                      sθ2 (τ ) =            |θi+1 − θi |.                         (24)
                                                    i=1

The larger this value, the greater the oscillation of variable between two consecutive timestamps.
                        0
Table 12 shows that DE     has nearly the smallest s1 and s2 values among all demonstration sets. This
is because the derivative term of the PID controller explicitly suppresses oscillations in the control
                                           0
variables. When IRPO starts updating DE       with the policy trained by RL, both smoothness metrics s1
and s2 begin to increase. This is because we do not include terms explicitly in the reward function to
penalize oscillations, and the inadequately trained RL policy is unable to achieve goals at the fastest
speed, resulting in some degree of oscillation. However, there is little difference between s1 and s2
         1    2          3
across DE  , DE , and DE   . This indicates that the policies trained with VVC-Gym’s reward function
do not exhibit significant differences in the smoothness of states and actions.

N    S UGGESTIONS FOR T RANSFERRING M ODELS T RAINED BY VVC-G YM TO
     R EAL W ORLD UAV S
We suggest the followings when transferring models trained by VVC-Gym to real world UAVs:

       • VVC-Gym employs an open-source UAV model Simulator (2022), so we need to consider
         the differences between the UAV model in the environment and real-world UAVs.
       • We have not yet incorporated environmental dynamic factors into VVC-Gym, such as
         changes in wind, air temperature, and humidity. Before deploying the model to real-world
         UAVs, it is necessary to thoroughly evaluate the robustness of the model.
       • It is necessary to consider the computational capabilities of the onboard computer to ensure
         that it can complete the model’s inference within the physical time of an environment step.

O    S OCIETAL I MPACTS
We open-source VVC-Gym and its accompanying demonstrations. They can be utilized to train
control policies for fixed-wing UAVs. However, it is important to note that VVC-Gym’s design does
not account for specific hardware-related requirements, such as the need to avoid (1) bang-bang
control to minimize hardware wear and tear, and (2) prolonged overload beyond a certain threshold
to ensure the structural integrity of the aircraft within acceptable limits.


                                                      24
