Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING TASK B ELIEF S IMILARITY WITH L ATENT
DYNAMICS FOR M ETA -R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Menglong Zhang, Fuyuan Qian, Quanying Liu∗
 Southern University of Science and Technology
 {zhangml2022, qianfy2023}@mail.sustech.edu.cn
 liuqy@sustech.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT

             Meta-reinforcement learning requires utilizing prior task distribution information
             obtained during exploration to rapidly adapt to unknown tasks. The efficiency of
             an agent’s exploration hinges on accurately identifying the current task. Recent
             Bayes-Adaptive Deep RL approaches often rely on reconstructing the environ-
             ment’s reward signal, which is challenging in sparse reward settings, leading to
             suboptimal exploitation. Inspired by bisimulation metrics, which robustly extracts
             behavioral similarity in continuous MDPs, we propose SimBelief—a novel meta-
             RL framework via measuring similarity of task belief in Bayes-Adaptive MDP
             (BAMDP). SimBelief effectively extracts common features of similar task dis-
             tributions, enabling efficient task identification and exploration in sparse reward
             environments. We introduce latent task belief metric to learn the common struc-
             ture of similar tasks and incorporate it into the specific task belief. By learning
             the latent dynamics across task distributions, we connect shared latent task be-
             lief features with specific task features, facilitating rapid task identification and
             adaptation. Our method outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on sparse reward
             MuJoCo and panda-gym tasks.


1       I NTRODUCTION

In meta-reinforcement learning, an agent is required to efficiently                          Latent Space
explore the environment to gather information relevant to the current              MDP i                    MDP j
task and use that information to adapt to new, unseen tasks (Duan
                                                                                                MDP
et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017; Gupta et al., 2018b; Humplik et al.,
2019). However, in real-world scenarios, there are many distrac-                              MDP k
tions, and irrelevant information can cause the agent to engage in
erroneous exploration behaviors, leading to the learning of a sub-
                                                                                          Real Environment
optimal policy. This challenge is exacerbated when the exploration
space is vast, and rewards are sparse. Humans, on the other hand,
have the ability to generalize across similar tasks by quickly identi-           Task i                      Task k

fying common patterns, such as recognizing that both opening a win-
                                                                                                Task j
dow and a drawer involve a pulling action. These shared structures
can be abstracted and applied to new tasks through certain transfor-
mations, enabling rapid adaptation by leveraging prior knowledge.       Figure 1: Learning shared
This process involves identifying similar features and relationships    structures among tasks in the
between tasks, with the underlying task belief facilitating effective   latent space as task beliefs
knowledge transfer (Figure 1).                                          enables the agent to rapidly
Common approaches to task belief modeling include posterior sam- adapt to new tasks.
pling (Thompson, 1933; Osband et al., 2013; Rakelly et al., 2019)
and Bayes-Adaptive Markov Decision Processes (BAMDPs) (Duff, 2002; Ghavamzadeh et al.,
2015), where BAMDPs provide a structured framework for learning and adapting to new tasks
by integrating prior information (Zintgraf et al., 2019). Previous works have addressed the issue of
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


uninformative rewards in meta-RL by using intrinsic rewards (Zhang et al., 2021c) to extract task-
relevant information or exploration bonuses (Zintgraf et al., 2021) to enhance performance in hard
exploration tasks. However, they often neglect the potential common structures shared across tasks.
To efficiently learn the structural relationships embedded within task belief and address the chal-
lenges of effective task identification and rapid adaptation, it is necessary to develop methods
that can efficiently recognize tasks with similar structures. This requires exploring strategies be-
yond BAMDP-based approaches, which may involve leveraging hierarchical reinforcement learning
(Frans et al., 2018), or task embeddings (Liu et al., 2021; Lan et al., 2019) that can capture the
underlying structure of tasks and facilitate transfer learning across related tasks.
In this work, we propose SimBelief (Learning Similarity of Task Belief for Meta-RL) as a meta-RL
framework under BAMDP to measure the difference of tasks in similar distributions by learning the
dynamics and transferring capability in latent space. This results in a task belief similarity, which
quantifies the representational relationships between any two random tasks in the learned latent
space. However, directly reconstructing and exploring the environment in the latent space may
lose crucial detailed information (Yarats et al., 2021; Kemertas & Aumentado-Armstrong, 2021;
Hafner et al., 2019), which is important for accurately reconstructing the specific task and ensuring
convergence to the Bayesian optimal policy(Zintgraf et al., 2019; Choshen & Tamar, 2023).
Therefore, we combine the task belief similarity learned in the latent space, which provides an
overall understanding of the task distribution and the relationships between tasks, with the belief of
the specific task currently being learned, significantly enhancing the agent’s adaptability to unknown
environments. Compared to related meta-RL methods, our approach effectively learns dynamics in
the latent space and leverages the learned latent representations to quickly discern relationships
between tasks. This enables the agent to utilize prior knowledge from tasks, recognize the current
environment, and accelerate exploration and adaptation to unseen tasks.
Our main contributions are as follows:

       • We propose a task representation method for context-based meta-reinforcement learning al-
         gorithms in BAMDP, which enhances the agent’s ability to recognize and adapt to unknown
         tasks by learning task belief similarity through latent reward model, transition model, and
         inverse dynamics model.
       • In scenarios with sparse or uninformative reward signals, our algorithm more effectively
         extracts latent task space representations compared to other baselines and achieves state-
         of-the-art performance on sparse reward MuJoCo and panda-gym tasks.
       • Our algorithm demonstrates stronger adaptability and generalization capabilities to out-of-
         distribution (OOD) tasks.
       • We theoretically validate the effectiveness of the latent task belief metric in Bayes-Adaptive
         Markov Decision Processes (BAMDPs).


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

In meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL), we consider a distribution p(T ) over a space of tasks T ,
where each task is modeled as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP; (Cassandra
et al., 1994)) defined as T = (S, A, O, P, R, ρ0 , γ, H). Here, S and A represent the shared state and
action spaces across all tasks, while O denotes the task-specific observation space. The transition
function P (s′ | s, a), reward function R(r | s, a), and initial state distribution ρ0 define the task-
specific dynamics.
For context-based methods, the agent interacts with the environment over a horizon of H time steps
in each episode of each task and utilizes a task-specific context τt = (o1:t , a1:t−1 , r1:t−1 ) to infer
the hidden task dynamics. The objective is to learn a policy π(at | τt ) that can rapidly adapt to
new tasks by leveraging the learned task belief encoded in the context. The full horizon comprises
N task episodes, referred to as a meta-episode, each with its own set of T time steps, and the task
context is updated as the agent gathers more observations. The objective in meta-RL is to maximize

                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the expected return:                            "H                          #
                                                 X
                             J(π) = ET ∼p(T )           E(ot ,at ,rt )∼π [rt ] .                    (1)
                                                  t=1

To address the multi-task adaptation problem in POMDPs, it is essential to avoid local optima and
balance exploration with exploitation. Utilizing the framework of Bayes-Adaptive Markov Decision
Processes (BAMDPs; (Duff, 2002)), we can represent uncertainty over task-relevant information in
a belief space. By leveraging the current belief, we can reconstruct the dynamics model to better
handle uncertainty, enabling more effective adaptation to the current task. The BAMDP is defined
as M + = (S + , A, ρ+       +    +   +
                       0 , P , R , H ), where the hyper-state space S
                                                                          +
                                                                             = S × B combines the
state space S with the task belief space B, representing the posterior over MDPs based on past
experiences. P + is the transition function, ρ+                                               +
                                              0 is the initial hyper-state distribution, and R is the
                                                   +
reward function. The total decision horizon is H = N × H. The goal is to learn a meta-policy
π + (at | s+
           t ) that maximizes cumulative reward by balancing exploration of task uncertainty and
exploitation of the current belief.

2.2   B ISIMULATION METRICS IN RL

Bisimulation metrics provide a way to measure state similarity in reinforcement learning (RL) based
on behavioral equivalence, focusing on transitions and rewards rather than raw state features. The
concept originated in model checking (Givan et al., 2003). In RL, bisimulation aggregates states that
lead to similar future outcomes. This allows for more efficient learning. Approximate bisimulation
metrics (Ferns et al., 2004; Castro, 2020) extended this idea to high-dimensional environments,
allowing RL agents to better generalize, reduce state space complexity, and improve exploration.
These metrics are particularly useful in tasks with sparse rewards or partial observability (Guo et al.,
2022).
Definition 1 (π-Bisimulation Metric (Castro, 2020)). Given two states si and sj from the state space
S, the distance between these states can be evaluated using the π-bisimulation metric dπ (si , sj ),
which measures behavioral similarity. We define the metric dπ (si , sj ) as:
                           dπ (si , sj ) = |Rsπi − Rsπj | + γW1 (dπ )(Psπi , Psπj )                 (2)
where Rsπi and Rsπj represent the reward functions under policy , P π denotes the transition distribu-
tions, and W1 is the Wasserstein distance between the distributions.

2.3   U NINFORMATIVE R EWARDS IN M ETA -R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Uninformative rewards provide insufficient feedback for agents to quickly learn effective strategies
(Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). This issue can impede exploration, slow
convergence, and lead to suboptimal policies. To address this challenge, methods such as intrinsic
motivation and curiosity-driven exploration have been employed to encourage agents to explore state
spaces even when extrinsic rewards are minimal (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018). Reward
shaping techniques modify the reward function to offer more informative feedback, thereby accel-
erating learning (Ng et al., 1999). Balancing the exploration-exploitation trade-off is also crucial
for efficient learning (Sutton, 2018). Enhancing meta-RL agents’ ability to learn from uninforma-
tive rewards can significantly improve their performance across complex, real-world environments
by incorporating advanced exploration strategies and reward augmentation methods (Gupta et al.,
2018b).
In this work, we learn the dynamics of multiple tasks in a latent space and use a task belief metric
to measure the differences between similar tasks. By extracting similar structures within the latent
space and representing these structures as task belief similarity, we map them to the current real
and unknown environment to assist the agent in exploration. This approach aims to achieve rapid
adaptation to multiple tasks in environments with uninformative rewards.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we provide a detailed introduction to SimBelief (Figure 2), an effective off-policy
meta-RL approach for online adaptation within the BAMDP framework. First, we propose a latent


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


task belief metric to quantify the relationships between different tasks in the latent space in section
3.1. Then, we explain how task belief similarity is learned within the learned latent dynamics in
section 3.2. We also describe the overall algorithmic process of SimBelief in detail in section 3.3.
Finally, we theoretically prove the conditions under which the policy can transfer between tasks in
the latent space in section 3.4.

3.1      LATENT TASK BELIEF METRIC

Previous work (Zhang et al., 2021b) learns an environment encoder to capture the relationships
between Block MDPs (Du et al., 2019) for multi-task generalization. In (Zhang et al., 2021c), in-
formation gain is used as an intrinsic reward for exploration. However, in these approaches, the
agent needs to know the current task information (i.e., task ID) during training. In contrast, in
context-based meta-RL, these approaches limit adaptability to out-of-distribution tasks, as the agent
must infer the task being executed from historical information and reason about the current task
distribution during adaptation. Including task ID during training can partially constrain the agent’s
reasoning capabilities. In real-world scenarios, relying solely on the environment’s inherent reward
signal or manually designed intrinsic rewards often fails to effectively capture the common struc-
ture of tasks (Zheng et al., 2020). Therefore, learning the structural similarities between tasks and
leveraging belief to facilitate rapid transfer across similar tasks is more advantageous in complex
environments, especially those with sparse reward signals. To measure the relationships between
tasks and make it applicable within the BAMDP, we define the latent task belief metric.
Definition 2 (Latent Task Belief Metric). Given two latent task beliefs bi and bj , with corresponding
samples zi and zj identified by their latent representations, let dπ denote the metric that evaluates
the distance between these two task beliefs. We define dπ (zi , zj ) as follows:
           dπ (zi , zj ) = Riπ (s+           π +                      π +            π +

                                 i , ai ) − Rj (sj , aj ) + W2 (dπ ) Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj )
                                        ′  +    π + ′        +
                           + Iiπ (s+
                                   i , s i ) − Ij (sj , s j )                                                   (3)
                                                                 1

where s+                                                                           π +
       i = (g(si ), zi ) is the augmented state corresponding to the task i, ri = Ri (si , ai ) is the
               ′+         π +      1                                      π + ′+
reward model, s i = Ti (si , ai ) is the transition model, and ai = Ii (si , s i ) is the inverse
dynamics model.

Here, we map s to a latent compressed space as g(s), and learn the task dynamics in the compressed
space. Latent dynamic space can be defined as S + = G(S) × Z. In Figure 2, zl represents the sam-
ple from latent task belief bl in the latent space and captures the similarity between different tasks.2
All task distributions share a common latent dynamic space, with different tasks distinguished by
different zl , where zl contains the dynamic similarity information between any two tasks. We em-
ploy the inverse dynamics model to predict a, as it not only helps retain information relevant to
what the agent can control but also enhances the agent’s reasoning capability (see Appendix G.2).
Unlike in Definition 1, here we use the dynamic model to measure task belief similarity to enhance
exploration efficiency in unknown environments, while preserving the agent’s control information
in sparse reward settings. This approach is more effective for identifying similar tasks.

3.2      L EARNING TASK B ELIEF S IMILARITY IN L ATENT S PACE

Our goal is to use the latent task belief metric to capture the similarity information between any
two tasks, which is embedded within the task belief. This enables SimBelief to achieve rapid task
reasoning and adaptation. From the replay buffer D, we randomly sample trajectories τ from two
tasks (i.e., task i and task j) in the task set M . The trajectory is then fed into the context encoder qϕ
to obtain historical information hi and hj , which serve as prior knowledge for the tasks and are input
into the latent space. The latent space primarily consists of three components: (1) a state encoder gθ
that maps the original state space to the latent state space S + , (2) a belief similarity learner ψl that
maps h to the latent task belief bl , and (3) a latent dynamics model pθ conditioned on the learned
latent task belief (Figure 2).
   1 ′
   s represents the state at the next time step.
   For simplicity, in the latent task belief metric, zi , zj and zli , zlj are used interchangeably to represent the
   2

same meaning.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            Context                                                        𝑎𝑎𝑡𝑡      Real Envs
                        𝒯𝒯𝑖𝑖 (𝒔𝒔𝑡𝑡 , 𝒂𝒂𝑡𝑡 , 𝒓𝒓𝑡𝑡 , 𝒔𝒔𝑡𝑡+1 ) Encoder                                                        𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖    Dynamics
                 Replay                                                       𝑖𝑖          𝑗𝑗       𝜓𝜓𝑟𝑟                                                   ℒ𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉
                                                                          ℎ           ℎ                                                  𝑝𝑝𝜙𝜙
                 Buffer 𝒯𝒯𝑗𝑗 (𝒔𝒔𝑡𝑡 , 𝒂𝒂𝑡𝑡 , 𝒓𝒓𝑡𝑡 , 𝒔𝒔𝑡𝑡+1 )   𝑞𝑞𝜙𝜙                                         𝑏𝑏𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖~𝑧𝑧𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖
                   𝓓𝓓
                                                                                                                            𝐷𝐷𝐾𝐾𝐾𝐾
                            𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖
                                                                      Belief Similarity
                                                                          Learner                                                       𝑏𝑏𝑖𝑖~ 𝑧𝑧 𝑖𝑖      𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖
                            𝑔𝑔𝜃𝜃                         𝑗𝑗
                                                      𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑙                                                 𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑖
                                                                              𝜓𝜓𝑙𝑙


                                                                                                           ~
                                                     ~
                                                                                                                        𝑖𝑖
                                     𝑔𝑔( 𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖 )       𝑗𝑗
                                                     𝑧𝑧𝑙𝑙                                                  𝑧𝑧𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑖 𝑔𝑔( 𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡 )                    𝜋𝜋
                                                              Latent Dynamics 𝑝𝑝𝜃𝜃

                     𝑎𝑎𝑡𝑡                    Reward                     Transition
                                                                                                          Inverse
                                                                                                          Dynamic                           ℒ𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟
                                             Model                      Model
                                                                                                          Model
                     𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡                           𝑅𝑅𝑙𝑙                       𝑇𝑇𝑙𝑙                           𝐼𝐼𝑙𝑙                         ℒ𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏



Figure 2: SimBelief architecture. Our framework consists of three components: learning latent task
belief similarity, reconstructing the specific task, and the policy. In the compressed state space, ψl
learns the latent task belief bil through latent dynamics shared among all tasks in the distribution. In
the real environment, we reconstruct the dynamics of the specific task using ψr to obtain the specific
task belief bir . The policy π is conditioned on the state and the combined belief bi , which integrates
bir and bil . In this paper, we use l and r to denote the latent space and real space, respectively, and i
and j to represent task i and task j, respectively.

To obtain the latent dynamic representation of all tasks conditioned on zl , we reconstruct the latent
dynamics pθ ((s′+ , r, a) | zl ), which includes the reward model Rl , the transition model Tl , and
the inverse dynamics model Il through one-step predictions. The learning objective for the latent
dynamics can be expressed as:
                             Ep(M ) Eψl (zl |h) log pθ ((s′+ , r, a) | zl ) .

                                                                                                   (4)
This objective enables the model to capture task-specific latent dynamics by maximizing the likeli-
hood of predicting the next augmented state s′+ , reward r, and action a given the latent task belief
zl .
We aim to learn the similarity relationship between any two tasks using the latent task belief metric
and the latent dynamics learned through Equation 4. This similarity relationship is obtained by
optimizing the belief similarity learner ψl . The learning objective for task belief similarity using ψl
is defined as follows:

 Lbisim (ψl ) =∥ψl (hi ) − ψl (hj )∥1 − R̂(s+               +                      +                  +
                                             i , ai ) − R̂(sj , aj ) − W2 T̂ (· | si , ai ), T̂ (· | sj , aj )

                  ˆ | s+ , s′+ ) − I(·
                − I(·              ˆ | s+ , s′+ )                                                   ,                                                               (5)
                       i    i           j    j
                                                                                               1

where the gradients of dynamics model are stopped, and bil = ψl (hi ). We use the 2-Wasserstein
metric because the W2 metric has a convenient closed-form solution (Zhang et al., 2021a). During
training, through Equation 4 and 5, zli , sampled from bil , is optimized to encode both the latent
dynamic information required to reconstruct task i and the similarity information between task i and
any other task in the task set M . Through this approach, we can utilize ψl to identify contextual
information at the current timestep and represent the similarity between any tasks through its output
bl .

3.3   S IM B ELIEF A LGORITHM

We now proceed to describe how the learned task belief similarity (Section 3.2) can be leveraged
to enhance the exploration capability and convergence efficiency of meta-RL. The algorithm pseu-
docode can be found in Appendix C.
Reconstructing the specific task. In the BAMDP framework (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2015; Zintgraf
et al., 2019), even with extremely sparse rewards, it is necessary to construct the specific task’s
reward model in the original state space using a variational auto-encoder (VAE, (Kingma, 2013))
. This is because reconstructing the specific task in the latent state space may result in the loss of
crucial information, as the latent space is solely used for learning task belief similarity. Additionally,


                                                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


along the temporal dimension, we only reconstruct the past history, as we use a one-step prediction
approach in the latent space. This approach effectively captures local information about the task
distribution, enhancing the agent’s reasoning ability for future predictions (see the upper part of
Figure 2). The objective is to maximise
                LVAE (ϕ) = Eqϕ (zr |τ:t ) [log pϕ (τ:t | zr )] − DKL (qϕ (zr | τ:t ) ∥ p(zr )) ,      (6)
where qϕ generates the specific task belief zr for the current timestep using only the information
from the historical trajectory τ:t . We consider qϕ as the forward reasoning process to infer the task
belief zr , corresponding to zr ∼ ψr (br | h)qϕ (h | τ:t ) in the Algorithm 1.
Integrating latent task belief for effective online exploration. The learned latent task belief zl ∼
bl enables the agent to quickly recall the similarities between different tasks during interactions with
the environment, enhancing the efficiency of reasoning and exploration. This is the primary reason
why SimBelief achieves robust adaptation to OOD tasks (Figure 4). Since the latent state space is
an abstraction of the original task, the latent task belief may overlook the specific task information
required by the agent during exploration in the real environment. Therefore, we choose to project the
two distributions into a joint space B, and then use a Gaussian mixture of the two distributions br =
(µψr (h), σψr (h)) and bl = (µψl (h), σψl (h)), combined with the real environment’s augmented state
derived from st , as the input to the policy π. The formulation of the Gaussian mixture distribution b
is given by:
                             b = wr · N (zr | µr , σr2 ) + wl · N (zl | µl , σl2 ),                   (7)
where N (z | µr , σr2 ) and N (z | µl , σl2 ) are Gaussian distributions with means µr and µl , and
variances σr2 and σl2 , respectively. The weights wr and wl satisfy wr + wl = 1 and are non-negative
(see Appendix G.3).
In the early stages of training, the latent task belief enhances the agent’s ability to identify tasks
and explore efficiently in the real environment, providing a high-level understanding of the overall
task distribution (see Appendix F.2). However, for the algorithm to converge stably, it need to
incorporate finer-grained information about specific tasks, which is captured in the specific task
belief br . Therefore, we minimize the discrepancy between the latent belief bl and the specific task
belief br when training ψl . This is achieved by introducing a KL divergence term between the two
beliefs, serving as a regularization for the latent task belief. Combined with Equation 5, the overall
optimization objective of ψl can be written as:
                      J (ψl ) = Ep(M ) [Lbisim (ψl ) + DKL (q̂ϕ (zr | τ:t ) ∥ p(zl ))] ,              (8)
where the gradient of q̂ϕ is stopped, and p(zl ) represents the distribution of zl ∼ ψl (bl | h).
SimBelief utilizes Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) to optimize the policy, where
the optimization of latent dynamics and latent task similarity is conducted jointly with policy opti-
mization to ensure convergence to near Bayes-optimal policy. To enhance the consistency between
latent dynamics and real environment exploration, without introducing perturbations that could dis-
rupt belief similarity in the latent space, we use the loss of Q-function as the objective to train the
offset (∆µ, ∆σ) of bl = (µψl (h) + ∆µ, σψl (h) + ∆σ) (see Appendix G.4). The loss of SAC after
integrating latent dynamic information is
                       J (π) = E(s,a)∼D [α log (π(a | (s, b))) − Qθ ((s, b), a)] ,                    (9)
where (s, b) is the augmented state in the real environment under the BAMDP framework.

3.4   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

Based on the latent task belief metric dπ (zi , zj ) defined in Definition 2, we can establish the follow-
ing theorems regarding the difference in task dynamics between two tasks in the latent space within
BAMDP.
Theorem 1 (Value difference bound). Given two tasks Mi and Mj in the latent space with states
s+    +     +            π
 i , sj ∈ S , and let V be the value function of policy π, the value difference bound between the
tasks can be given by:
                                    |V π (s+      π +
                                           i ) − V (sj )| ≤ dπ (zi , zj ),                           (10)
where dπ (zi , zj ) is the latent task belief metric.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                SimBelief (Ours)   PEARL         MetaCURE        VariBAD        HyperX      RL2


Figure 3: Meta-testing performance on sparse reward MuJoCo and panda-gym tasks over 3 random
seeds. Our algorithm, SimBelief, demonstrates superior online adaptation capabilities compared to
other algorithms.
This theorem demonstrates that tasks with similar latent task beliefs zi and zj will have similar value
function under the same policy π.
Theorem 2 (Latent transfer bound). Let Q∗Mj be the optimal Q-function for task Mj . The difference
between Q∗Mj and the Q-function of the policy π learned from task Mi , applied to task Mj , is
bounded as follows:
                                                                                 Rmax
                 Q∗Mj − [QπMi ]Mj          ≤ ϵR + γ (ϵT + ϵI + ∥zi − zj ∥1 )            .         (11)
                                      ∞                                        2(1 − γ)

This extended transfer bound theorem provides a formal bound on how well a policy π trained on
task Mi will transfer to task Mj . ϵR , ϵT , and ϵI are approximation errors for rewards, transitions,
and inverse dynamics. All proofs are provided in Appendix B.

4   E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate SimBelief on sparse-reward tasks in MuJoCo (Finn et al., 2017; Rakelly
et al., 2019) and the more challenging panda-gym (Gallouédec et al., 2021) environment. We aim to
address the following questions: 1. Can SimBelief achieve fast online adaptation in sparse reward
tasks? 2. Can SimBelief leverage learned latent belief similarity representations to enhance out-of-
distribution generalization? 3. What is the impact of latent task representations on rapid exploration?
4. How does the latent space correspond to the real environment?
Environments and baselines: We conducted experiments on six complex sparse reward tasks, in-
cluding Point-Robot-Sparse, Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, Walker-Rand-Params, Panda-Reach, Panda-Push,
and Panda-Pick-And-Place (see Appendix E). While MuJoCo tasks are commonly used by current
meta-learning algorithms, panda-gym simulates real-world robotic arm movements with extremely
sparse rewards, making it a better benchmark for evaluating an algorithm’s ability to handle real-
world tasks. We compared SimBelief against PEARL (Rakelly et al., 2019), which is based on
posterior sampling, and MetaCURE (Zhang et al., 2021c), which learns a separate policy, as well as
VariBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019), HyperX (Zintgraf et al., 2021), and RL2 (Duan et al., 2016), which
are based on the BAMDP framework (see Appendix D).
Online Adaptation Performance. During the training phase, we performed meta-testing by calcu-
lating the meta-episode average return and success rate across different tasks to evaluate the algo-
rithm’s online performance. As shown in Figure 3, SimBelief consistently performed well across all
tasks and exhibited superior adaptation capabilities compared to other algorithms. BAMDP-based
algorithms often require more interactions with the environment to converge to a Bayes-optimal


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              SimBelief (Ours)   PEARL       MetaCURE        VariBAD      HyperX        RL2

Figure 4: Average test performance for the first 5 rollouts on out-of-distribution tasks (Cheetah-
Vel-Sparse and Point-Robot-Sparse) shows that as the task distribution gradually deviates from the
training distribution, SimBelief demonstrates more efficient and robust adaptation compared to other
algorithms, while still maintaining a high return.


policy, whereas our algorithm, by integrating task belief similarity in the latent space, significantly
improved the agent’s ability to effectively extract task-relevant information in sparse reward envi-
ronments, thus accelerating convergence. In sparse reward tasks like those in panda-gym, the per-
formance of Varibad, HyperX, and RL2 illustrates that overly relying on the environment’s reward
signal while neglecting task similarity information makes it difficult to achieve online adaptation in
more complex scenarios. Additionally, SimBelief demonstrated more stable performance compared
to posterior sampling-based algorithms like PEARL and MetaCURE, indicating that SimBelief ac-
curately learned the common structure of the task distribution.
Out-of-distribution Task Inference and Adaptation. We evaluated the algorithm’s reasoning and
generalization capabilities on out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks. In Figure 4, we show the agent’s out-
of-domain adaptation and generalization performance on the Cheetah-Vel-Sparse (top) and Point-
Robot-Sparse (bottom) tasks. The leftmost column represents the task range used during the training
phase, where the agent was trained by generating task goals within this range. During the testing
phase, we adjusted the velocity range for Cheetah-Vel-Sparse and the semi-circle radius for Point-
Robot-Sparse to assess the agent’s robustness and task inference capabilities within five episodes.
The results indicate that SimBelief exhibits stable out-of-distribution generalization, demonstrating
that learned latent belief similarity representations can be leveraged to enhance out-of-distribution
task inference ability. The latent task belief similarity we proposed also equips the agent with strong
task transferability.
Exploration Performance. We visualized the exploration and adaptation process of the agent in
the Point-Robot-Sparse environment over two episodes, as shown in Figure 5. The test target ap-
peared within a semicircle with a radius of 1.2, and five positions on the semicircle were randomly
selected as the agent’s targets. Compared to other algorithms, SimBelief successfully identified the
randomly appearing target location within the semicircle and controlled the robot to reach the tar-
get point within two episodes. Moreover, in the out-of-distribution setting, SimBelief demonstrated
more efficient learning of a near Bayes-optimal policy compared to BAMDP-based algorithms like
HyperX. The latent task belief enabled the agent to efficiently analogize and identify tasks, leading
to more effective exploration.
Task Belief Visualization. We use t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) to visualize SimBelief’s
latent task belief and specific task belief (Figure 6), aim to illustrate how the task common structure
learned in the latent space contributes to effective reconstruction of the real environment. This vi-
sualization reveals the underlying reason for SimBelief’s ability to achieve rapid out-of-distribution
generalization. The latent space, as an abstraction and holistic representation of the task distri-


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        SimBelief                                          HyperX            MetaCURE


    Episode 1
    Episode 2


Figure 5: Exploration and adaptation performance in the 5 random out-of-distribution (radius =
1.2) tasks of Point-Robot-Sparse. SimBelief is capable of robustly learning a near Bayes-optimal
policy.
                           SimBelief-specific task belief   SimBelief-latent task belief            HyperX      MetaCURE
     Cheetah-Vel-Sparse
      Point-Robot-Sparse


Figure 6: t-SNE visualization of task beliefs learned by the algorithm on 10 randomly sampled
OOD tasks. The velocity range for Cheetah-Vel-Sparse is set to 3-4, and the semicircle radius for
Point-Robot-Sparse is 1.1. SimBelief demonstrates a more distinct representation in the latent space,
enhancing the specific task belief to represent similar tasks in the real environment.
bution, enables efficient transfer of essential task information. This, in turn, allows the agent to
leverage prior knowledge for identifying and reasoning quickly about unknown environments.
The mechanism of SimBelief for rapid adaptation. SimBelief, through the latent task belief,
essentially learns the transfer relationships between knowledge across different tasks. In extremely
sparse reward scenarios, once the agent succeeds in one task, this prior knowledge of success can
be quickly propagated to other similar tasks via the latent task belief, enabling the agent to rapidly
adapt to similar types of tasks. The latent task belief acts as a bridge, facilitating the generalization
of past successes to new, related tasks, significantly reducing exploration time and computational
resources. A more detailed discussion is provided in Appendix F.


5              R ELATED W ORKS

Task representation in reinforcement learning focuses on how agents encode and utilize task in-
formation to enhance learning efficiency and generalization. Meta-reinforcement learning enables
agents to quickly adapt to new tasks by learning task priors; for instance, (Finn et al., 2017) intro-
duced Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) for rapid adaptation with minimal updates, while


                                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Rakelly et al., 2019) proposed PEARL to learn latent task representations for fast probabilistic adap-
tation. (Zintgraf et al., 2019; Dorfman et al., 2021) learn a latent variable model of task distribution
for efficient Bayes-adaptive RL, and (Gupta et al., 2018a) explored unsupervised meta-learning with-
out explicit task labels. Yuan & Lu (2022); Choshen & Tamar (2023) apply contrastive learning to
enhance encoder representation. (Lee et al., 2023) decomposes complex tasks into subtasks to han-
dle non-parametric task variability. In multi-task RL, (Teh et al., 2017) introduced Distral to learn
shared policies across tasks with task-specific adaptations. Contextual task representations have
also been explored: (Sodhani et al., 2021) use metadata to learn interpretable representations, and
(Hausman et al., 2018) learned embedding spaces for transferable skills. These studies underscore
the importance of efficient task representation to improve RL performance and generalization.
Exploration with task inference. Integrating exploration with task inference in reinforcement
learning enables agents to learn efficient policies by understanding task structures. Information-
theoretic approaches encourage exploration by maximizing the entropy of state visitation distribu-
tions, promoting diverse behaviors (Liu & Abbeel, 2021). (Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020) propose
a type of intrinsic reward which encourages the agent to take actions that lead to significant changes
in its learned state representation. (Wan et al., 2023) introduce DEIR, a method that enhances ex-
ploration efficiency and robustness by using discriminative model-based episodic intrinsic rewards.
(Yang et al., 2023) propose an unsupervised skill discovery method through contrastive learning
among behaviors. (Rana et al., 2023) propose a low-level residual policy for skill adaptation en-
abling downstream RL agents to adapt to unseen tasks Planning-based methods enable agents to
plan exploratory actions that maximize information gain by learning world models (Sekar et al.,
2020). (Xie et al., 2020) leverage the idea of partial amortization for fast adaptation at test time.
Bisimulation for control. Bisimulation has been effectively applied in various control tasks,
demonstrating its value in reducing computational burdens without sacrificing policy performance
(Zhang et al., 2021a). (Zhang et al., 2021b) propose a method for learning state abstractions
that generalize across tasks, improving sample efficiency and performance in multi-task and meta-
reinforcement learning by leveraging shared dynamics in complex environments. (Gelada et al.,
2019) has leveraged bisimulation for efficient exploration by ensuring the agent treats bisimilar
states similarly, reducing sample complexity. (Hansen-Estruch et al., 2022) propose a form of state
abstraction that captures functional equivariance for goal-conditioned RL. (Kemertas & Aumentado-
Armstrong, 2021) generalize value function approximation bounds for on-policy bisimulation met-
rics to non-optimal policies. These studies highlight the increasing applicability of bisimulation
in reinforcement learning and control tasks. They offer a variety of solutions that reduce sample
complexity, guide exploration, and enhance learning performance, particularly in goal-conditioned
settings and beyond.


6   C ONCLUSION

We present SimBelief, a meta-RL framework aimed at improving the agent’s ability to quickly adapt
and generalize in real-world sparse reward tasks. At the core of SimBelief is the latent task belief
metric, which learns the similarity between the dynamics of various tasks in a shared latent space
and represents this similarity as task belief similarity. This helps the agent efficiently capture the
common structure of the task distribution, facilitating the recognition and reasoning about unknown
tasks. By combining the latent task belief with the specific task belief learned through interactions
in the real environment, SimBelief demonstrates strong adaptation and generalization capabilities
during exploration, particularly on out-of-distribution tasks. It overcomes the slow convergence and
inefficiency issues inherent in BAMDP. We believe that SimBelief will inspire future research on
agent generalization, providing a powerful tool for enabling agents to more efficiently tackle the
challenges and complexities of real-world environments.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work wasfunded in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (62472206), Shen-
zhen Excellent Youth Project (RCYX20231211090405003), Shenzhen Science and Technology In-
novation Committee (2022410129, KJZD20230923115221044, KCXFZ20201221173400001).


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018.
Anthony R Cassandra, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Michael L Littman. Acting optimally in partially
  observable stochastic domains. In Aaai, volume 94, pp. 1023–1028, 1994.
Pablo Samuel Castro. Scalable methods for computing state similarity in deterministic markov
  decision processes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34,
  pp. 10069–10076, 2020.
Era Choshen and Aviv Tamar. Contrabar: Contrastive bayes-adaptive deep rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6005–6027. PMLR, 2023.
Ron Dorfman, Idan Shenfeld, and Aviv Tamar. Offline meta reinforcement learning–identifiability
  challenges and effective data collection strategies. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:4607–4618, 2021.
Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient rl with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1665–1674. PMLR, 2019.
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rlˆ2: Fast
  reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779, 2016.
Michael O’Gordon Duff. Optimal Learning: Computational procedures for Bayes-adaptive Markov
 decision processes. University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2002.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Daniel Mankowitz, and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12901, 2019.
Norm Ferns, Prakash Panangaden, and Doina Precup. Metrics for finite markov decision processes.
  In UAI, volume 4, pp. 162–169, 2004.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Kevin Frans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. Meta learning shared
  hierarchies. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Quentin Gallouédec, Nicolas Cazin, Emmanuel Dellandréa, and Liming Chen. panda-gym: Open-
  source goal-conditioned environments for robotic learning. In 4th Robot Learning Workshop:
  Self-Supervised and Lifelong Learning@ NeurIPS 2021, 2021.
Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, Jacob Buckman, Ofir Nachum, and Marc G Bellemare. Deepmdp:
  Learning continuous latent space models for representation learning. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 2170–2179. PMLR, 2019.
Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Shie Mannor, Joelle Pineau, Aviv Tamar, et al. Bayesian reinforcement
 learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 8(5-6):359–483, 2015.
Robert Givan, Thomas Dean, and Matthew Greig. Equivalence notions and model minimization in
  markov decision processes. Artificial intelligence, 147(1-2):163–223, 2003.
Yijie Guo, Qiucheng Wu, and Honglak Lee. Learning action translator for meta reinforcement
  learning on sparse-reward tasks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 6792–6800, 2022.
Abhishek Gupta, Benjamin Eysenbach, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised meta-
  learning for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.04640, 2018a.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Abhishek Gupta, Russell Mendonca, YuXuan Liu, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Meta-
  reinforcement learning of structured exploration strategies. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 31, 2018b.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.

Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Amy Zhang, Ashvin Nair, Patrick Yin, and Sergey Levine. Bisimula-
  tion makes analogies in goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 8407–8426. PMLR, 2022.

Karol Hausman, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Ziyu Wang, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Learning an embedding space for transferable robot skills. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2018.

Jan Humplik, Alexandre Galashov, Leonard Hasenclever, Pedro A Ortega, Yee Whye Teh, and
  Nicolas Heess. Meta reinforcement learning as task inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06424,
  2019.

Nan Jiang. Notes on state abstractions, 2018.

Mete Kemertas and Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong. Towards robust bisimulation metric learning.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4764–4777, 2021.

Diederik P Kingma. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Lin Lan, Zhenguo Li, Xiaohong Guan, and Pinghui Wang. Meta reinforcement learning with task
  embedding and shared policy. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2794–2800, 2019.

Suyoung Lee, Myungsik Cho, and Youngchul Sung. Parameterizing non-parametric meta-
  reinforcement learning tasks via subtask decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 36:43356–43383, 2023.

Evan Z Liu, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Decoupling exploration and ex-
  ploitation for meta-reinforcement learning without sacrifices. In International conference on ma-
  chine learning, pp. 6925–6935. PMLR, 2021.

Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18459–18473, 2021.

Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
  Theory and application to reward shaping. In Icml, volume 99, pp. 278–287, 1999.

Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (more) efficient reinforcement learning via
  posterior sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.

Roberta Raileanu and Tim Rocktäschel.        Ride: Rewarding impact-driven exploration for
  procedurally-generated environments. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkg-TJBFPB.

Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Deirdre Quillen. Efficient off-policy
  meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 5331–5340. PMLR, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Krishan Rana, Ming Xu, Brendan Tidd, Michael Milford, and Niko Sünderhauf. Residual skill
  policies: Learning an adaptable skill-based action space for reinforcement learning for robotics.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 2095–2104. PMLR, 2023.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.
Shagun Sodhani, Amy Zhang, and Joelle Pineau. Multi-task reinforcement learning with context-
  based representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9767–9779. PMLR,
  2021.
Richard S Sutton. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. A Bradford Book, 2018.
Yee Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech M Czarnecki, John Quan, James Kirkpatrick, Raia Hadsell, Nicolas
  Heess, and Razvan Pascanu. Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.
William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of
 the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3-4):285–294, 1933.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Shanchuan Wan, Yujin Tang, Yingtao Tian, and Tomoyuki Kaneko. Deir: efficient and robust ex-
  ploration through discriminative-model-based episodic intrinsic rewards. In Proceedings of the
  Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4289–4298, 2023.
Kevin Xie, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Danijar Hafner, Animesh Garg, and Florian Shkurti. Latent skill
  planning for exploration and transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13897, 2020.
Rushuai Yang, Chenjia Bai, Hongyi Guo, Siyuan Li, Bin Zhao, Zhen Wang, Peng Liu, and Xuelong
  Li. Behavior contrastive learning for unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 39183–39204. PMLR, 2023.
Denis Yarats, Amy Zhang, Ilya Kostrikov, Brandon Amos, Joelle Pineau, and Rob Fergus. Improv-
  ing sample efficiency in model-free reinforcement learning from images. In Proceedings of the
  aaai conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 10674–10681, 2021.
Haoqi Yuan and Zongqing Lu. Robust task representations for offline meta-reinforcement learning
  via contrastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 25747–25759.
  PMLR, 2022.
Amy Zhang, Rowan Thomas McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learn-
 ing invariant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.
Amy Zhang, Shagun Sodhani, Khimya Khetarpal, and Joelle Pineau. Learning robust state abstrac-
 tions for hidden-parameter block mdps. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
 tions, 2021b.
Jin Zhang, Jianhao Wang, Hao Hu, Tong Chen, Yingfeng Chen, Changjie Fan, and Chongjie Zhang.
   Metacure: Meta reinforcement learning with empowerment-driven exploration. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12600–12610. PMLR, 2021c.
Zeyu Zheng, Junhyuk Oh, Matteo Hessel, Zhongwen Xu, Manuel Kroiss, Hado Van Hasselt, David
  Silver, and Satinder Singh. What can learned intrinsic rewards capture? In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 11436–11446. PMLR, 2020.
Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Maximilian Igl, Sebastian Schulze, Yarin Gal, Katja Hofmann,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08348, 2019.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Luisa M Zintgraf, Leo Feng, Cong Lu, Maximilian Igl, Kristian Hartikainen, Katja Hofmann, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Exploration in approximate hyper-state space for meta reinforcement learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12991–13001. PMLR, 2021.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    T HEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we introduce the theoretical background and the rationale behind the design of the
latent task belief metric.
Definition 3 (Bisimulation Relation (Givan et al., 2003)). Given an MDP M, an equivalence re-
lation E ⊆ S × S is a bisimulation relation if whenever (s, t) ∈ E, the following properties hold,
where SE is the state space S partitioned into equivalence classes defined by E:
                                         ∀a ∈ A, R(s, a) = R(t, a)                                          (12)
                                                                                    X
          ∀a ∈ A, ∀c ∈ SE , P(s, a)(c) = P(t, a)(c), whereP(s, a)(c) =                      P(s, a)(s′ )    (13)
                                                                                    s′ ∈c
Definition 4 (Diffuse Metric). A diffuse metric measures the distance between two points by consid-
ering not only the shortest path but also the distribution of multiple paths between the points. The
diffuse metric satisfies the following properties:
1. Non-negativity: For any two points x and y, d(x, y) ≥ 0, and d(x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y.
2. Symmetry: For any two points x and y, d(x, y) = d(y, x).
3. Triangle inequality: For any three points x, y, and z, d(x, z) ≤ d(x, y) + d(y, z).
These properties ensure that the diffuse metric behaves as a valid distance measure across the space.
To prove that the metric dπ (zi , zj ) in Defination 2 is valid, we show it satisfies three key properties:
non-negativity, symmetry, and the triangle inequality.

Proof. Each term in the metric dπ (zi , zj ) is non-negative: |Riπ (s+            π +
                                                                      i , ai ) − Rj (sj , aj )| is the abso-
                                                                 +              +
lute difference in rewards, which is non-negative. W2 (Tiπ (si , ai ), Tjπ (sj , aj )) is the Wasserstein
distance, which is non-negative. ∥Iiπ (s+      +        π + +
                                          i , si+1 ) − Ij (sj , sj+1 )∥1 is an L1 -norm, which is non-
negative. Thus, dπ (zi , zj ) ≥ 0. Additionally, all three types of distances satisfy symmetry, hence
dπ (zi , zj ) = dπ (zj , zi ).
To derive the triangle inequality for latent task belief metric, we need to verify that for any three task
beliefs zi , zj , and zk , the following holds:
                                    dπ (zi , zk ) ≤ dπ (zi , zj ) + dπ (zj , zk )
Expand the distance dπ (zi , zj ) and dπ (zj , zk )
                                                                                        π + ′+        π + ′+
dπ (zi , zj ) = |Riπ (s+         π +                     π +            π +
                       i , ai )−Rj (sj , aj )|+W2 (dπ )(Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj ))+∥Ii (si , si )−Ij (sj , sj )∥1
and similarly,
                                                                                        π + ′+        π + ′+
dπ (zj , zk ) = |Rjπ (s+         π +                     π +            π +
                       j , aj )−Rk (sk , ak )|+W2 (dπ )(Tj (sj , aj ), Tk (sk , ak ))+∥Ij (sj , sj )−Ik (sk , sk )∥1

Expand the distance dπ (zi , zk )
                                                                                        π + ′+        π + ′+
dπ (zi , zk ) = |Riπ (s+         π +                     π +            π +
                       i , ai )−Rk (sk , ak )|+W2 (dπ )(Ti (si , ai ), Tk (sk , ak ))+∥Ii (si , si )−Ik (sk , sk )∥1
To prove the triangle inequality, we need to show that:
     |Riπ (s+           π +               π +             π +               π +             π +
            i , ai ) − Rk (sk , ak )| ≤ |Ri (si , ai ) − Rj (sj , aj )| + |Rj (sj , aj ) − Rk (sk , ak )|
This follows directly from the standard triangle inequality for absolute values. Similarly, for the
Wasserstein distance term:
W2 (dπ )(Tiπ (s+          π +                       π +            π +                     π +            π +
               i , ai ), Tk (sk , ak )) ≤ W2 (dπ )(Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj ))+W2 (dπ )(Tj (sj , aj ), Tk (sk , ak ))
This holds due to the triangle inequality for the Wasserstein distance (Villani et al., 2009). Finally,
for the inverse dynamics term:
            ′+     π + ′+             π + ′+          π + ′+             π + ′+          π + ′+
∥Iiπ (s+
       i , si ) − Ik (sk , sk )∥1 ≤ ∥Ii (si , si ) − Ij (sj , sj )∥1 + ∥Ij (sj , sj ) − Ik (sk , sk )∥1
This also follows directly from the standard triangle inequality for norms. Since each of the three
components satisfies the triangle inequality, we can conclude that the latent task belief metricdπ also
satisfies the triangle inequality:
                                    dπ (zi , zk ) ≤ dπ (zi , zj ) + dπ (zj , zk )



                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    T HEOREMS AND P ROOFS

Lemma 1. Let S + = G(S) × Z be the latent dynamics space, and π is the improving policy. The
F function is defined as follows:
         F(d, π)(zi , zj ) =|Riπ (s+           π +                       π +            π +
                                   i , ai ) − Rj (sj , aj )| + W2 (dπ )(Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj ))
                              + ∥Iiπ (s+    +        π + +
                                       i , si+1 ) − Ij (sj , sj+1 )∥1 ,                                  (14)

where s+                    +
        i = (g(si ), zi ), sj = (g(sj ), zj ) are the augmented states corresponding to task i and task
j, and zi , zj represent different task beliefs in latent space S + . Then, there exists a unique least
fixed point d˜ such that F(d)˜ = d.
                                 ˜


Proof. To prove that F has a unique least fixed point, we need to establish that F is monotonic and
continuous, ensuring the conditions for a least fixed-point result.
We first show that F is monotonic. Suppose d ≤ d′ , meaning d(zi , zj ) ≤ d′ (zi , zj ) for all zi , zj in
latent space. Then, by the definition of F, we have:
                                                              ′
               W2 (dπ )(Tiπ (s+          π +                       π +            π +
                              i , ai ), Tj (sj , aj )) ≤ W2 (dπ )(Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj )).


Since the Wasserstein distance is non-decreasing in d, it follows that F(d, π) ≤ F(d′ , π). Addition-
ally, the reward difference and inverse dynamics term remain unchanged under ordering, confirming
that F is indeed monotonic.
Next, we show that F is continuous with respect to the pointwise supremum of an ω-chain {dn }.
Consider the sequence {dn } forming an increasing chain in M, meaning dn (zi , zj ) converges to
d∞ (zi , zj ). By the properties of the Wasserstein metric and L1 norm, limits commute with these
operations, leading to:
         G                                                            G
  F π(        dn )(zi , zj ) =|Riπ (s+           π +
                                     i , ai ) − Rj (sj , aj )| + W2 (   dn )(Tiπ (s+          π +
                                                                                   i , ai ), Tj (sj , aj ))
       n∈N                                                        n∈N

                            + ∥Iiπ (s+    +        π + +
                                     i , si+1 ) − Ij (sj , sj+1 )∥1
                            = |Riπ (s+           π +                           π +            π +
                                     i , ai ) − Rj (sj , aj )| + sup W2 (dn )(Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj ))
                                                                 n∈N

                            + ∥Iiπ (s+    +        π + +
                                     i , si+1 ) − Ij (sj , sj+1 )∥1
                            = sup(|Riπ (s+           π +                       π +            π +
                                         i , ai ) − Rj (sj , aj )| + W2 (dn )(Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj ))
                              n∈N

                            + ∥Iiπ (s+    +        π + +
                                     i , si+1 ) − Ij (sj , sj+1 )∥1 )
                                 G
                            =(        F π (dn ))(zi , zj )                                               (15)
                                n∈N


This guarantees that F is continuous. The policy π in the above equations is fixed. As the policy
updates, it can converge to a fixed point.
Since M is a complete partial order (ω-CPO) and F is a monotonic and continuous operator, the
fixed-point theorem (Ferns et al., 2004) ensures the existence of a least fixed point d˜ such that
F(d)˜ = d.
         ˜



Theorem 1 (Value difference bound). Given two tasks Mi and Mj in the latent space with states
s+    +     +          π
 i , sj ∈ S , and let V be the value function of policy π, the value difference bound between the
tasks can be given by:
                                     |V π (s+      π +
                                            i ) − V (sj )| ≤ dπ (zi , zj ),                              (16)

where dπ (zi , zj ) is the latent task belief metric.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We will use the standard value function update:
                                                X
                        Vnπ (s) = Rπ (s, a) + γ     P π (s′ | s, a)Vn−1
                                                                    π
                                                                        (s′ )
                                                          s′ ∈S

with V0π (s) = 0, and our task difference metric dπ (zi , zj ), and prove this by induction, showing
that for all n ∈ N and states s+    +    +
                               i , sj ∈ S :


                                     |Vnπ (s+      π +         n
                                            i ) − Vn (sj )| ≤ dπ (zi , zj ).
The base case holds trivially:
                      0 = V0π (s+       π +
                                i ) − V0 (sj ) = 0,               so assume this holds for n.

Now, for n + 1:
                                                                    +                 +                                        +                   +
                                                      X                                                        X
  π
|Vn+1 (s+    π     +        π +
        i )−Vn+1 (sj )| = |Ri (si , ai )+γ                   Tiπ (s′ i | s+        π ′       π +
                                                                          i , ai )Vn (s i )−Rj (sj , aj )−γ             Tjπ (s′ j | s+        π ′
                                                                                                                                     j , aj )Vn (s j )|.
                                                   s′ ∈S +                                                    s′ ∈S +

We decompose this into rewards and transition dynamics:
                                       X                 +

                                                                       π ′+        π ′+               π ′+
≤ |Riπ (s+         π +
         i , ai )−Rj (sj , aj )|+γ               Tiπ (s′ i | s+                              +
                                                              i , ai )Vn (s i ) − Tj (s j | sj , aj )Vn (s j )  .
                                      s′ ∈S +


Using the Lipschitz property of the value function, we can bound the transition dynamics difference:
                                                                         π + ′+           π + ′+
≤ |Riπ (s+           π +                  π +            π +

         i , ai ) − Rj (sj , aj )| + γW2 Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj ) + Ii (si , s i ) − Ij (sj , s j ) .
                                                                                                                    1


By the definition of the latent task belief metric dπ (zi , zj ), we know:
                                                                                  π + ′+           π + ′+
dπ (zi , zj ) = |Riπ (s+         π +               π +            π +

                       i , ai )−Rj (sj , aj )|+W2 Ti (si , ai ), Tj (sj , aj ) + Ii (si , s i ) − Ij (sj , s j )                  .
                                                                                                                              1

We assume that z contains sufficient information about the task differences at the current time step,
and we disregard the effect of the discount factor γ during the experiments. Thus, we have:
                                 π
                               |Vn+1 (s+      π     +       n+1
                                       i ) − Vn+1 (sj )| ≤ dπ   (zi , zj ).



Lemma 2. Let g be an (ϵR , ϵT , ϵI )-approximate bisimulation abstraction of M . The states in the
real space are mapped to the latent dynamics space S + through g. For any two states in the real
space, s1 and s2 , if their representations in the latent space are identical, i.e., g(s1 ) = g(s2 ), then
                                        |R(s1 , a) − R(s2 , a)| ≤ ϵR ,

                                       ∥T (s1 , a) − T (s2 , a)∥1 ≤ ϵT ,
                                                  ′                ′
                                       ∥I(s1 , s1 ) − I(s2 , s2 )∥1 ≤ ϵI .

Proof. The proof follows a similar process to Lemma 3 in (Jiang, 2018). Here, we have added a
representation constraint on the inverse dynamics.

Theorem 2 (Latent transfer bound). Let Q∗Mj be the optimal Q-function for task Mj . The difference
between Q∗Mj and the Q-function of the policy π learned from task Mi , applied to task Mj , is
bounded as follows:
                                                                                            Rmax
                  Q∗Mj − [QπMi ]Mj              ≤ ϵR + γ (ϵT + ϵI + ∥zi − zj ∥1 )                  .              (17)
                                         ∞                                                2(1 − γ)

                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. ∥zi − zj ∥1 is the distance between the latent task beliefs of task Mi and task Mj . In the
real state space, the augmented state is still conditioned on zl (Section 3.3 ).
We aim to bound the difference between the Q-function Q∗Mj (the optimal Q-function for task Mj )
and [QπMi ]Mj (the Q-function for policy π learned on task Mi , but applied to task Mj ). This
difference is given by:
                                    ∥Q∗Mj − [QπMi ]Mj ∥∞ .

The Q-function for any task satisfies the Bellman equation:
                                                          h             i
                                                                 ′ ′
                       Q(s, a) = R(s, a) + γEs′ ∼T (s,a) max′
                                                              Q(s , a )   .
                                                                                    a


Using this, we decompose the Q-function difference:
                                                                    1
                            ∥Q∗Mj − [QπMi ]Mj ∥∞ ≤                     ∥Q∗ − TM
                                                                              π
                                                                                  QπMi ∥∞ .
                                                                  1 − γ Mj      j



                                                                                                      +
       π
Here, TM j
           QπMi = RMj (s+ , a) + γEs′ ∼TMj (s+ ,a),a∼IMj (s+ ,s′ + ) [QπMi (s′ , a′ )].
According to Lemma 2,
          sup                TMi (s+              +
                                   i , a) − TMj (sj , a) 1
s+   +   +
 i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )

≤             sup                   TMi (s+              +                +              +
                                          i , a) − TMi (sj , a) 1 + TMi (sj , a) − TMj (sj , a) 1
    s+   +   +
     i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )

≤             sup                TMi (s+              +
                                       i , a) − TMi (sj , a) 1 +                              sup                 TMi (s+              +
                                                                                                                        j , a) − TMj (sj , a) 1
    s+   +   +
     i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )                                                    s+   +   +
                                                                                  i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )

= ϵT + TMi (s+              +
             j , a) − TMj (sj , a) 1 ,                                                                                          (18)



          sup               |RMi (s+              +
                                   i , a) − RMj (sj , a)|
s+   +   +
 i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )

                                 |RMi (s+              +                +              +

≤             sup                       i , a) − RMi (sj , a)| + |RMi (sj , a) − RMj (sj , a)|
    s+   +   +
     i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )

≤             sup               |RMi (s+              +
                                       i , a) − RMi (sj , a)| +                             sup               |RMi (s+              +
                                                                                                                     j , a) − RMj (sj , a)|
    s+   +   +
     i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )                                                   s+   +   +
                                                                                 i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )

= ϵR + |RMi (s+              +
              j , a) − RMj (sj , a)|,                                                                                           (19)


                                          ′                         ′
          sup                IMi (s+     +          +     +
                                   i , si ) − IMj (sj , sj )
s+   +   +                                                                  1
 i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )
                                                      ′                     ′                             ′                 ′

≤             sup                   IMi (s+     +          +     +
                                          i , si ) − IMi (sj , sj )                     + IMi (s+     +          +     +
                                                                                                j , sj ) − IMj (sj , sj )
    s+   +   +                                                                      1                                               1
     i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )

                                              ′                         ′                                                       ′                 ′
≤             sup                IMi (s+     +          +     +
                                       i , si ) − IMi (sj , sj )                    +              sup               IMi (s+     +          +     +
                                                                                                                           j , sj ) − IMj (sj , sj )
    s+   +   +                                                                  1        s+   +   +                                                    1
     i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )                                                             i ,sj ∈S , g(si )=g(sj )

                        ′                         ′
= ϵI + IMi (s+     +          +     +
             j , sj ) − IMj (sj , sj )                        ,                                                                 (20)
                                                          1



                                                                                                              ′                 ′
 TMi (s+              +                 +              +               +     +          +     +
       i , a) − TMj (sj , a) 1 + |RMi (si , a) − RMj (sj , a)| + IMi (si , si ) − IMj (sj , sj )
                                                                                                                                            1
≤ ϵR + ϵT + ϵI + ∥zi − zj ∥1 ,                                                                                                  (21)


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


∥Q∗Mj − TM
         π
           j
             QπMi ∥∞
                   ′                          ′
 = (TMj Q∗Mj )(sj+ , a) − (T [Q∗Mj ]Mi )(si+ , a)
            ′                  ′                        ′                 ′
                                     ∗                                          ∗
 = RMj (sj+ , a) + γ⟨TMj (sj+ , a), VM j
                                         ⟩ − RMi (si+ , a) − γ⟨TMi (si+ , a), [VM  ] ⟩
                                                                                  j Mi

                       ′                      ′
                           ∗                         ∗
 ≤ ϵR + γ ⟨TMj (sj+ , a), VM j
                               ⟩ − ⟨TMi (si+ , a), [VM  ] ⟩
                                                       j Mi

                       ′                      ′                                  ′                 ′
                           ∗                         ∗
 ≤ ϵR + γ ⟨TMj (sj+ , a), VM j
                               ⟩ − ⟨TMi (si+ , a), [VM  ] ⟩ + γ|IMi (s+
                                                       j Mi
                                                                            +          +     +
                                                                      j , sj ) − IMj (sj , sj )|

                                   ∗           Rmax
 ≤ ϵR + γ(ϵT + ϵI + ∥zi − zj ∥1 )∥VM   −               1∥∞
                                     j
                                              2(1 − γ)
                                     Rmax
 ≤ ϵR + γ(ϵT + ϵI + ∥zi − zj ∥1 )            .
                                    2(1 − γ)

We get the final bound:
                                                                                Rmax
                 Q∗Mj − [QπMi ]Mj         ≤ ϵR + γ (ϵT + ϵI + ∥zi − zj ∥1 )            .
                                      ∞                                       2(1 − γ)



C    S IM B ELIEF P SEUDO - CODE

Algorithm 1 SimBelief algorithm
Input:Task distribution p(M )
Initialise: context encoder qϕ , real envs dynamics pϕ , actor πθ , critic Qω , replay buffer D, belief
similarity learner ψl , latent dynamics pθ , state encoder g, distribution offset (∆µ, ∆σ)
 1: while not done do
 2:      Sample tasks Mtrain = {Mi }N      i=1 from p(M )
 3:      Collect trajectories with πθ and add to buffer D                              ▷ Data collection
 4:      for step in SAC training steps do                                               ▷ Training step
 5:          Sample training tasks Mtrain from p(M )
 6:          Sample batches from D
 7:          Infer specific task beliefs zr ∼ ψr (br | h)qϕ (h | τ:t )
 8:          Infer latent task beliefs zl ∼ ψl (bl | h)qϕ (h | τ:t )
 9:          Permute zli to get zlj
10:          s+                  +
              i = (g(s), zi ), sj = (g(s), zj )
11:          Update latent dynamics pθ and state encoder g using Eq. 4
12:          Update belief similarity learner ψl using Eq. 8
13:          Update distribution offset (∆µ, ∆σ) using Eq. 9
14:          Integrate bil with bir to obtain bi
15:          Update (θ, ω) with SAC algorithm                                             ▷ SAC update
16:      end for
17:      for step in VAE training steps do
18:          Sample τ:T ∼ B with trajectory length T
19:          Decode only the past trajectories and update qϕ , ψr and pϕ using Eq. 6 ▷ VAE update
20:      end for
21: end while


D    C ONTEXT- BASED M ETA -RL BASELINES
In this section, we provide a detailed overview of the baseline methods compared in our experiments,
highlighting their core methodologies and design principles.
PEARL (Rakelly et al., 2019) (Probabilistic Embeddings for Actor-Critic RL) is an off-policy meta-
reinforcement learning algorithm designed to enhance both meta-training sample efficiency and


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rapid adaptation to new tasks. By disentangling task inference from control, PEARL employs a
probabilistic latent context variable that enables structured exploration and efficient posterior sam-
pling. This design allows the policy to reason about task uncertainty and adapt quickly in sparse
reward or dynamic environments. Built upon the Soft Actor-Critic framework, PEARL achieves
better sample efficiency compared to on-policy meta-RL methods.
MetaCURE (Zhang et al., 2021c) (Meta-RL with Efficient Uncertainty Reduction Exploration) is an
off-policy meta-RL framework designed to address the challenges of sparse-reward environments. It
explicitly separates exploration and exploitation by learning distinct policies for each, enhancing the
efficiency of task inference and adaptation. The exploration policy is driven by an empowerment-
based intrinsic reward that maximizes information gain about the task, enabling efficient collection
of task-relevant experiences. MetaCURE leverages a shared probabilistic task inference mechanism,
which improves sample efficiency by integrating exploration and exploitation processes. Compared
to MetaCURE, SimBelief does not require knowledge of task IDs during the training phase. Instead,
it learns the common structure of tasks to enable reasoning, resulting in stronger online adaptation
capabilities.
VariBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019) (Variational Bayes-Adaptive Deep RL) is a meta-reinforcement
learning framework that approximates Bayes-optimal policies by leveraging variational inference
and latent task embeddings. The algorithm learns a posterior belief over tasks using a variational
auto-encoder and conditions its policy on this belief to balance exploration and exploitation in un-
certain environments. VariBAD is notable for its ability to perform structured online exploration by
integrating task uncertainty directly into action selection. Unlike traditional methods that rely on
computationally intractable posterior sampling or explicit planning, VariBAD offers a tractable and
flexible approach to Bayes-adaptive policies.
HyperX (Zintgraf et al., 2021) (Hyper-State Exploration) is a meta-reinforcement learning method
that addresses sparse reward environments by leveraging exploration bonuses to meta-learn approxi-
mately Bayes-optimal task-adaptation strategies. It integrates two exploration bonuses during meta-
training: (1) a bonus based on hyper-states (combining environment states and task beliefs) to en-
courage diverse task-exploration strategies, and (2) a reconstruction error bonus to incentivize the
agent to collect data where task beliefs are inaccurate. By exploring hyper-states, HyperX efficiently
gathers data for belief inference and optimally trades off exploration and exploitation in sparse or
complex environments.
RL2 (Duan et al., 2016) reformulates the reinforcement learning process as a meta-learning problem,
embedding task-specific learning within the hidden state of a recurrent neural network (RNN). By
leveraging a “slow” reinforcement learning algorithm to optimize the RNN’s weights, RL2 enables
the network to store and process information about task dynamics across episodes. This design al-
lows the agent to efficiently adapt to unseen tasks by utilizing its historical trajectory data, including
observations, actions, rewards, and termination flags. RL2 demonstrates competitive performance
in solving multi-armed bandits and tabular MDPs, achieving results comparable to theoretically op-
timal algorithms. Additionally, its scalability to high-dimensional tasks, such as visual navigation in
dynamic environments, highlights its potential as a versatile and efficient meta-RL framework.


E    E NVIRONMENTS AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS



         Table 1: Adaptation length and goal settings for environments used for evaluation

                         # of adaptation    Max steps
 Environment                                             Goal type         Goal range           Goal radius
                             episodes      per episode
 Cheetah-Vel-Sparse            2              200        Velocity             [0,3]                 0.5
 Point-Robot-Sparse            2               60        Position    Semicircle with radius 1      0.3
 Walker-Rand-Params            2              200        Velocity              1.5                  0.5
 Panda-Reach                   3               50        Position               /                  0.05
 Panda-Push                    3               50        Position               /                  0.05
 Panda-Pick-And-Place          3               50        Position               /                  0.05



                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Panda-Reach                       Panda-Push                   Panda-Pick-And-Place

Figure 7: Panda-gym tasks. The Panda-Reach task involves controlling the Panda robotic arm to
move its gripper to a randomly generated target position within a defined workspace, the Panda-
Push task requires pushing a cube from its initial position to a randomly generated target position on
a table, and the Panda-Pick-And-Place task focuses on picking up a cube and placing it at a randomly
generated target location above the table.

Table 1 summarizes key settings for the environments used in this work, including the number of
adaptation episodes, the maximum number of steps allowed per episode, the type of goal (whether
velocity or position-based), the goal range, and the goal radius. The specific environments are
described as follows:
Cheetah-Vel-Sparse. The Cheetah-Vel-Sparse environment involves controlling a half-cheetah
robot to achieve and maintain a target velocity, which is randomly sampled from a uniform distribu-
tion over the range [0, 3]. At each time step, the robot receives a reward based on how closely its
current velocity matches the target velocity, with a sparse reward system in place. Specifically, if the
difference between the current velocity and the target velocity is within a specified tolerance (goal
radius of 0.5), the robot receives a reward; otherwise, the reward is zero. Additionally, a control
cost is applied to penalize large actions. The observation space includes the robot’s joint positions,
velocities, and body orientation, while the action space consists of motor torques controlling the
robot’s movements. The sparse reward encourages the agent to achieve the target velocity while
minimizing control effort.
Point-Robot-Sparse. The Point-Robot-Sparse environment requires a point robot to navigate to-
wards a goal randomly placed along a unit half-circle. The goal position is sampled at the beginning
of each episode, and the robot receives rewards only when it reaches within a goal radius of 0.3 units
from the target. The observation space consists of the robot’s current position, and the action space
allows movement in both x and y directions. The reward system is sparse, meaning that rewards are
only given when the robot is within the specified goal radius, encouraging the robot to explore and
move efficiently towards the target. The sparse reward structure makes the task more challenging, as
the robot receives feedback only when it approaches the target, requiring it to learn how to navigate
effectively with limited guidance.
Walker-Rand-Params.           The Walker-Rand-Params environment involves controlling a bipedal
walker robot, with the added complexity of randomized physical parameters such as body mass, leg
strength, and joint properties. These parameters are randomized at the start of each episode, requir-
ing the robot to adapt to various physical configurations in order to move forward. The observation
space includes the walker’s joint angles, positions, and velocities, while the action space consists
of motor commands applied to the walker’s joints. The reward system is primarily based on how
closely the walker’s velocity matches a target velocity of 1.5 units per time step. If the deviation
from the target velocity exceeds 0.5 units, the reward is set to 0. For smaller deviations, the reward
is given as 0.8 - distance from the target velocity. Additionally, a small control cost proportional to
the sum of the squared motor actions is subtracted from the reward to penalize large actions.
Panda-Reach.        The Panda-Reach task involves controlling the Panda robotic arm’s gripper to
reach a target position, randomly generated within a 30cm × 30cm × 30cm workspace. The task
is considered successful when the distance between the gripper and the target is less than 5 cm.
The observation space for this task includes the position and velocity of the gripper (6 coordinates),
augmented by two additional vectors representing the desired goal (target position) and the achieved
goal (current gripper position). The action space comprises three movement coordinates (x, y, z)
for controlling the gripper. The gripper remains closed throughout the task, and its movement along


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


these axes determines the success of the task. A sparse reward function is used, with a reward of 0
if the target is reached, and -1 otherwise.
Panda-Push. The Panda-Push task requires the robot to push a cube (side length of 4 cm) placed
on a table to a target position. Both the target position and the initial position of the cube are
randomly generated within a 20cm×20cm area around the neutral position of the robot. The gripper
remains closed during the task, and the objective is to move the cube to within 5 cm of the target
position. The observation space includes the gripper’s position and velocity (6 coordinates), along
with the cube’s position, orientation, and velocity (12 coordinates). The action space consists of
three movement coordinates (x, y, z) for controlling the gripper’s movement. As in the Panda-Reach
task, a sparse reward function is used, providing a reward of 0 if the task is completed successfully,
and -1 otherwise.
Panda-Pick-And-Place. The Panda-Pick-And-Place task involves the robot picking up a cube
(side length of 4 cm) and placing it at a target location, which is randomly generated within a
20cm × 20cm × 10cm volume above the table. The task is completed when the cube is placed
within 5 cm of the target position. The observation space for this task includes the gripper’s position
and velocity (6 coordinates), the cube’s position, orientation, and velocity (12 coordinates), and the
opening state of the gripper (1 coordinate). The action space is expanded to include three movement
coordinates (x, y, z) for controlling the gripper and an additional coordinate for controlling the
gripper’s opening and closing. A sparse reward function is employed, rewarding the robot with 0 for
completing the task and -1 otherwise (Figure 7).
All experiments were conducted using an Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU, the source code is available at:
https://github.com/mlzhang-pr/SimBelief.


              Table 2: Hyperparameter settings for SimBelief in different environments

 Parameter                    Cheetah-Vel-Sparse                                          Panda-Push
                                                   Point-Robot-Sparse   Panda-Reach
 Name                         Walker-Rand-Params                                      Panda-Pick-And-Place
 Number of Tasks                       120                 100               100                60
 Number of Training Tasks              100                  80               80                 50
 Number of Evaluation Tasks             20                  20                20                10
 Number of Episodes                      2                   2                3                  3
 Number of Iterations                 1000                2000              1000              4000
 RL Updates per Iteration             2000                1000              1000              1000
 Batch Size                            256                 256               256               256
 Policy Buffer Size                    1e6                 1e6               1e6               1e6
 VAE Buffer Size                       1e5                 5e4               5e4               5e4
 Policy Layers                   [128, 128, 128]       [128, 128]        [128, 128]      [128, 128, 128]
 Actor Learning Rate                 0.0003             0.00007           0.00007           0.00007
 Critic Learning Rate                0.0003             0.00007           0.00007           0.00007
 Discount Factor (γ)                   0.99                0.9               0.9               0.9
 Entropy Alpha                         0.2                0.01              0.01               0.01
 VAE Updates per Iteration              20                  25                25                25
 VAE Learning Rate                   0.0003              0.001             0.001              0.001
 KL Weight                             1.0                 0.1               0.1                0.1
 Task Embedding Size                    10                  10                5                  5



F     T HE M ECHANISM OF S IM B ELIEF FOR R APID A DAPTATION
In this section, we will explain, from the perspective of task belief representation, why SimBelief
can quickly converge to a near Bayes-optimal policy during the training phase and how it enables
adaptation to OOD tasks within a single episode in sparse reward environments.

F.1   T HE E VOLUTION OF TASK B ELIEF D URING THE T RAINING P HASE

During the training phase, the agent needs to explore complex environments to acquire relevant
information about the current task, which is represented by the specific task belief br . Other meta-
RL algorithms are limited to task-specific information while ignoring the similarities between tasks.
SimBelief’s latent dynamics can capture the unique structure shared among tasks and distinguish
these structures through the latent task belief bl . Specifically, during the learning process, SimBelief


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Cheetah-Vel-Sparse
      Point-Robot-Sparse
      Panda-Reach
      Panda-Push


                                             Specific task belief   Latent task belief   Mixture distribution



                                Figure 8: Visualization of different task beliefs during the training phase.

identifies the distribution of similar tasks via bl , and then uses br to fit the agent to the exact specific
task distribution, as illustrated in Figure 1. In Figure 8, we visualize the specific task belief, latent
task belief, and their mixed Gaussian distribution. During the early and middle stages of training,
the agent quickly identifies the distribution of the task being executed. After convergence, it can
accurately fit the specific task distribution.

F.2                        T HE C ORRELATION OF B ELIEFS B ETWEEN D IFFERENT TASKS D URING THE
                           A DAPTATION P HASE

We visualize the correlations of task beliefs across different tasks in Point-Robot-Sparse, Panda-
Reach, Panda-Push, and Panda-Pick-Place environments. In each environment, 20 tasks are ran-
domly generated, and the SimBelief agent’s rollouts are used to extract the specific task beliefs and
latent task beliefs. The cosine similarity between task beliefs across tasks is calculated, and the
correlation matrices are visualized. As shown in Figure 9, specific task belief primarily captures
the local information of task distributions (learning weaker correlations between tasks), while latent
task belief emphasizes global information (capturing stronger inter-task correlations). This illus-
trates the principle behind SimBelief’s ability to achieve rapid adaptation to OOD tasks in sparse
reward environments: latent task belief enhances the agent’s reasoning efficiency across tasks and


                                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


improves the efficiency of knowledge transfer. Theorem 2 demonstrates the transferability of tasks
in the latent space.

G     A BLATION S TUDY
G.1   L ATENT DYNAMICS A BLATION

To validate the effectiveness of our algorithm using the learned latent task belief, we froze the
overall latent dynamics and, similar to VariBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019), only used an external VAE
for environment reconstruction. Our algorithm demonstrated significant improvements across all six
tested tasks, with particularly notable gains in the more exploration-demanding tasks, Panda-Push
and Panda-Pick-And-Place (Figure 10).

G.2   T HE I MPACT OF I NVERSE DYNAMICS ON A DAPTATION A BILITY

To demonstrate the effectiveness of the inverse dynamics module in facilitating rapid learning of task
similarity, we conducted ablation experiments by removing the inverse dynamics module from the
latent space on Cheetah-Vel-Sparse (velocity range [4.0,5.0]) and Point-Robot-Sparse (radius=1.2)
tasks. The results show that the inverse dynamics module plays a critical role in enabling the agent’s
reasoning and generalization on OOD tasks (Figure 11).

G.3   A BLATION S TUDY ON wr AND wl

When combining bl and br , we apply a mixture of Gaussians to the two beliefs. To evaluate
the impact of different weights, we compared three weighting configurations on the Cheetah-Vel-
Sparse task: [wr , wl ] = [0.5, 0.5], [wr , wl ] = [0.25, 0.75], and [wr , wl ] = [0.75, 0.25]. Among
these, [wr , wl ] = [0.5, 0.5] achieved higher exploration efficiency during training and demonstrated
stronger adaptability to OOD tasks (Figure 12).

G.4   A BLATION S TUDY ON O FFSET (∆µ, ∆σ)

During the training phase, we use the offset (∆µ, ∆σ) applied to the latent task belief primarily
to improve the stability of the algorithm’s convergence in continuous control tasks (e.g., Cheetah-
Vel-Sparse). However, this does not have a significant impact on the overall performance of the
algorithm. Even without using the offset during training, SimBelief still outperforms other baselines
(Figure 13).

H     A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATIONS
In this section, we provide the task belief representations of SimBelief and other baselines on the
Walker-Rand-Param tasks (Figure 14), the adaptation performance on in-distribution tasks Panda-
Pick-And-Place and Walker-Rand-Params (Figure 15), and the exploration performance on the in-
distribution Point-Robot-Sparse task (Figure 16).


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Specific Task Belief Correlation   Latent Task Belief Correlation


   Point-Robot-Sparse


                        Specific Task Belief Correlation    Latent Task Belief Correlation
    Panda-Reach


                        Specific Task Belief Correlation    Latent Task Belief Correlation
    Panda-Push


                         Specific Task Belief Correlation   Latent Task Belief Correlation
    Panda-Pick-Place


Figure 9: The correlation matrix of task beliefs across different tasks. Specific task belief focuses
more on local information between tasks, while latent task belief captures the global characteristics
of task distributions.
                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  SimBelief                     SimBelief w/o Latent Task Belief



                   Figure 10: Ablation study on SimBlief’s latent task belief.


                                 SimBelief                     SimBelief w/o inverse dynamic


        Figure 11: Ablation study on SimBlief’s inverse dynamic module in latent space.


Figure 12: The performance of different Gaussian mixture weights on the Cheetah-Vel-Sparse task.


                                              SimBelief         SimBelief w/o offset


                         Figure 13: Ablation study on offset (∆µ, ∆σ).

                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         SimBelief-specific task belief    SimBelief-latent task belief               HyperX                  MetaCURE


                                 VariBAD                             PEARL                             RL2
    Point-Robot-Sparse


Figure 14: The task belief representation of all experimental algorithms for 10 random in-
distribution Walker-Rand-Param tasks.


                                        SimBelief (Ours)      PEARL                       MetaCURE      VariBAD   HyperX            RL2

Figure 15: Average test performance for the first 5 rollouts on randomly generated tasks of Panda-
Pick-And-Place and Walker-Rand-Params.



                                       SimBelief                                             HyperX                        MetaCURE
   Episode 1
   Episode 2


Figure 16: Exploration and adaptation performance in the 5 random in-distribution (radius = 1.0)
tasks of Point-Robot-Sparse.


                                                                                             27
