Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CSA: DATA - EFFICIENT M APPING OF U NIMODAL
F EATURES TO M ULTIMODAL F EATURES
 Po-han Li, Sandeep Chinchali & Ufuk Topcu
 The University of Texas at Austin
 {pohanli,sandeepc,utopcu}@utexas.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Multimodal encoders like CLIP excel in tasks such as zero-shot image classifica-
             tion and cross-modal retrieval. However, they require excessive training data. We
             propose canonical similarity analysis (CSA), which uses two unimodal encoders
             to replicate multimodal encoders using limited data. CSA maps unimodal features
             into a multimodal space, using a new similarity score to retain only the multimodal
             information. CSA only involves the inference of unimodal encoders and a cubic-
             complexity matrix decomposition, eliminating the need for extensive GPU-based
             model training. Experiments show that CSA outperforms CLIP while requiring
             50,000× fewer multimodal data pairs to bridge the modalities given pre-trained
             unimodal encoders on ImageNet classification and misinformative news caption
             detection. CSA surpasses the state-of-the-art method to map unimodal features to
             multimodal features. We also demonstrate the ability of CSA with modalities be-
             yond image and text, paving the way for future modality pairs with limited paired
             multimodal data but abundant unpaired unimodal data, such as LiDAR and text.
             1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multimodal encoders like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) excel in various zero-shot multimodal tasks,
such as image classification and cross-modal retrieval. Despite the huge success, they demand exces-
sive training data. For example, OpenAI trained the original CLIP model on 400 million image-text
pairs using 592 V100 GPUs, and the training size of the new CLIP models (Ilharco et al., 2021) has
increased to 12 billion image-text pairs since then. In addition, more data do not guarantee better
performance. CLIP relies on Internet data, which are often of poor quality (Sharma et al., 2018).
Incorrectly captioned data may lead to specific failure modes in similar instances (Northcutt et al.,
2021; Vasudevan et al., 2022). In this work, we focus on learning a multimodal encoder with limited
data that is robust to noisy data.
Our conjecture is that unimodal encoders such as DINO (Oquab et al., 2023) and GTR (Ni et al.,
2022) can serve as the building blocks of multimodal encoders. Unimodal encoders only need uni-
modal data, which are easier to obtain than paired multimodal data. They also require significantly
less data than multimodal models, and advanced unimodal encoders are already well-developed. We
distill the unimodal knowledge in these models to accelerate the learning of multimodal encoders.
We map their unimodal features into a multimodal feature space, similar to how CLIP encodes
images and text jointly to a shared feature space. In addition, this process should be data-efficient.
We propose canonical similarity analysis (CSA) to verify our conjecture. It replicates a multimodal
encoder such as CLIP with two unimodal encoders, as shown in Figure 1. CSA maps features from
unimodal encoders to a multimodal space. It removes redundant information from unimodal features
and employs a novel similarity function to replicate CLIP similarity score for multimodal data, e.g.
images and captions. CSA operates by inference of unimodal encoders and solving an optimization
problem, essentially a matrix decomposition without training of neural networks. CSA supports all
zero-shot tasks that CLIP is capable of while requiring significantly fewer training data.

    1
        Project Page: https://d31003.github.io/CSA-Project-Website/


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Multimodal                                   Unimodal           Multimodal                   Downstream
                     Data                                       Features            Features                      Tasks

                                                                                                                 Classification
                                                       Image
                                                      Encoder
                                                                                                                 Cross-modal
                                                                                              Weighted
                                                                                                                   Retrieval
                                                                                               Cosine
                                                                            CSA               Similarity
                                                                     (matrix projection)
                                                                                           (=CLIP similarity)
                                                                                                                  Mislabeled
                                                                                                                 Data Detection
                “Julian Castro at his announcement
                in San Antonio, Tex., on Saturday.”    Text                                                      Misinformation
     “A man brushes the mouth of a                    Encoder                                                      Detection
            sarcophagus.”

                                                                                                        Frozen Weights

Figure 1: Canonical similarity analysis (CSA) replicates the CLIP multimodal similarity scores with two
unimodal encoders. CSA uses two unimodal encoders to encode data into unimodal features. Then, it projects
the unimodal features to a joint multimodal feature space. The weighted cosine similarity in this feature space
replicates the CLIP similarity, enabling various downstream tasks, e.g., cross-modal retrieval. CSA is a robust
and data-efficient method that learns even when data are misaligned.

Contributions. Our contributions are threefold: (1) We propose CSA which replicates the CLIP
model using two unimodal encoders while demanding less computation and data (Section 4). (2)
Our theoretical analysis characterizes the trade-off of obtaining informative embeddings and distin-
guishing multimodal data pairs, considering various hyperparameters of CSA (Section 5). (3) We
tested CSA on tasks such as image classification, cross-modal retrieval, and misinformative captions
detection (Section 6). The experimental results show that CSA outperforms or matches CLIP while
requiring 50,000× fewer paired multimodal data that are used to train the multimodal mapping
function given pre-trained unimodal encoders (see Table 1). CSA outperforms the state-of-the-art
method that employs unimodal models with the same amount of training data as 18% in ImageNet
classification and 23% in image-to-text retrieval.
CSA works across all modalities beyond images and text. We additionally demonstrate its capability
with audio and text, paving the way for new modality pairs, such as LiDAR and text Yang et al.
(2023). In the future, we envision that new modality pairs will have limited paired multimodal
data but sufficient unimodal data, where CSA can efficiently map unimodal features to multimodal
features.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Unimodal Encoders. Unimodal encoders encode unimodal data to fixed-dimensional features. In
computer vision, encoders, e.g., CosPlace (Berton et al., 2022), ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), and
Dino (Caron et al., 2021; Oquab et al., 2023), are trained with augmented data with random cropping
and blurring with contrastive loss (van den Oord et al., 2019). In natural language processing, one
common data augmentation method is to randomly mask words or tokens, used in the universal
sentence encoder (Cer et al., 2018), Bert (Devlin et al., 2019), and GTR (Ni et al., 2022).
Multimodal Encoders. Multimodal encoders project multimodal data points into a feature space
shared between modalities. Thus, multimodal features enable training for downstream models
(Shridhar et al., 2021; Li et al., 2024b; Goel & Narasimhan, 2024). Another common usage is
to directly take the inner product of features of data from different modalities, e.g., an image and
a sentence, as a similarity metric. This metric enables downstream tasks such as zero-shot image
classification and cross-modal data retrieval. The CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021) is the mile-
stone of multimodal encoders, which bridges the gap between language and vision. CLIP inspires
encoders for other modalities, such as audio and inertial measurement units. Such encoders include
ImageBind (Girdhar et al., 2023), AudioCLIP (Guzhov et al., 2022) and CLAP (Wu* et al., 2023).
Previous work also studied cross-modal retrieval on multi-label images (Ranjan et al., 2015), while
ours focuses on a more generic multimodal setting with pre-trained unimodal encoders. Although
ImageBind encodes 6 modalities, it lacks training data for all possible modality pairs, resulting in
suboptimal performance for pairs such as audio and inertial measurement units.


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Neural Networks with CCA. Previous works have shown that training losses inspired by canonical
correlation analysis (CCA) (Hardoon et al., 2004) are useful in multimodal or multi-distribution
tasks (Sun et al., 2019; Lyu & Fu, 2020; 2023). Although taking a crucial step of introducing CCA
to deep learning, these works focus on training deep neural networks from scratch instead of using
existing foundation encoder models, as in this work. Other works use techniques similar to CCA,
such as principal component analysis (PCA), to process the output features of encoders (Li et al.,
2024a; Omama et al., 2024). In this work, we focus on using CCA to map unimodal features to
a multimodal feature space without any model training, which significantly reduces the size of the
required training dataset.
Combining multiple unimodal Encoders. The closest work to ours is ASIF (Norelli et al., 2023),
which also uses multiple unimodal encoders to bridge the multimodal gap. ASIF calculates the
similarity of a pair of multimodal data based on the unimodal similarity of the given data pair and a
pre-selected, multimodal anchor dataset, similar to Moschella et al. (2023). It creates a linear kernel
space by the anchor set. However, ASIF demands a huge anchor set to achieve similar performance
to CLIP, while our proposed method, CSA, constantly outperforms ASIF in all tasks.

3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Given two datasets of size N , X 1 = {x11 , x12 , ..., x1N }, X 2 = {x21 , x22 , ..., x2N }, from two modalities
m1 , m2 (such as vision and language), we want to find two feature extractors (encoders) E1 , E2
that map the data to the same-dimensional feature space. The encoders generated feature pairs
E1 (x1i ), E2 (x2i ) are close, and the feature pairs from different pairs of data E1 (x1i ), E2 (x2j ) are far.
Note that the two sets of data are paired, which means that they are sophisticatedly related (such as
an image and its corresponding caption), although of different modalities. Previous works trained
multimodal encoder pairs to achieve this goal by minimizing the following loss:
 L(X 1 , X 2 ;E1 , E2 ) :=                                     (Multimodal Contrastive Loss)
                                                                                                        
                    N                                 X (E1 (x1i ) + E2 (x2i ))⊤ (E1 (x1j ) + E2 (x2j ))
              −1 X 
                         2(E1 (x1i ))⊤ (E2 (x2i ))) −                                                    ,
              2N i=1                                                      2N − 2
                                                       j̸=i
                                                                                               (1)
where the first term encourages similar features for the same pair of data, and the second term
encourages the opposite. Variants of this loss are commonly used in contrastive learning (van den
Oord et al., 2019), such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021).
From Unimodal to Multimodal. Training a multimodal encoder to learn a multimodal feature
space is time-consuming and data-inefficient. The original CLIP model learns from Internet-scale
datasets (400 million images) and requires 500 A100 Nvidia GPUs. Instead of training end-to-end
multimodal encoders, we leverage existing unimodal encoders to accelerate the multimodal learning
process. That is, given unimodal encoders that encode data into unimodal feature spaces, we directly
find two mapping functions that map each unimodal feature space to a multimodal space.
Mathematically, we use two unimodal encoders E1 , E2 that capture only unimodal latent informa-
                                                                          1    2
tion and individually encode data x1i , x2i into features ẑi1 , ẑi2 ∈ Rq , Rq . Because these features
ẑi , ẑi come from different encoders, their dimensions need not be the same (q 1 ̸= q 2 ), which com-
  1 2

plicates the discovery of the mapping functions. The dimensions of the features are significantly
smaller than those of the raw data xi . Hence, we utilize unimodal encoders to significantly reduce
the dimension of the data and the complexity of the problem. Our ultimate goal is to efficiently find
two mapping functions A, B that map the feature spaces to a multimodal one while preserving the
contrastiveness property characterized in Equation 1.

4    C ANONICAL S IMILARITY A NALYSIS (CSA)
The problem in Section 3 is easier to state than to solve. First, unimodal encoders have completely
different architectures (e.g., transformers vs. U-net), losses, and output dimensions. Second, map-
ping data from various-dimensional feature spaces to a multimodal one means that we need to dis-
card latent information from the higher-dimensional space. The challenge lies in determining what


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


information to discard to maintain the contrastiveness property. Also, we do not want to preserve
all information as there might be some modality-specific information that we wish not to preserve
through the mapping, such as words that cannot be expressed in images or punctuation.
We thus propose canonical similarity analysis (CSA). We observe that all downstream tasks use
cosine similarity to obtain the similarity of multimodal data points. It inspires us to use correlation
coefficients, the cosine similarity between centered vectors, to approximate this similarity and build
the mapping functions from unimodality to multimodality. Precisely, we find the pairs of bases in
each unimodal feature space that maximize the correlation coefficients. We use CCA to find such
bases. Then, instead of directly using an inner product, we use a weighted cosine similarity score to
evaluate the similarity of the multimodal data. We discard information from low-correlated bases,
as they might not be relevant to the multimodal feature space, and we weight the contributions of
the bases to the similarity score based on their correlation coefficients.

4.1    C ANONICAL C ORRELATION A NALYSIS

Recall the previous notation of two sets of data X 1 = {x11 , x12 , ..., x1N }, X 2 = {x21 , x22 , ..., x2N }.
We use two unimodal encoders E1 , E2 to encode and normalize the data into zero-meaned latent
features {ẑi1 , ẑi2 }N
                       i=1 . To find the bases that maximize the correlation coefficients, we use CCA to
map the two feature spaces to a multimodal feature space of dimension r = min(q 1 , q 2 ):
                                                            ⊤
      ∗   ∗                                        1     2
    A ,B =               arg max          Tr AẐ BẐ                        (Formulation of CCA)
                    A∈Rr×q1 , B∈Rr×q2                                                                      (2)
                                 s.t. (AẐ 1 )(AẐ 1 )⊤ = (BẐ 2 )(BẐ 2 )⊤ = Ir ,
                  1               2
where Ẑ 1 ∈ Rq ×N , Ẑ 2 ∈ Rq ×N are the matrices consisting of column feature vectors ẑ, Ir ∈
Rr×r is the identity matrix, and Tr is the trace function. The objective of Equation 2 can be viewed
as the sum of the correlation coefficients of the bases, and the identity constraints normalize the
vectors so that covariance becomes correlation. In summary, CCA finds the bases of the two given
matrices such that the projected vectors have the highest correlation coefficients ρi for i = 1, ..., r.
Solving CCA is similar to principal component analysis (PCA), which is essentially a singular value
decomposition (SVD) of time complexity O(q 1 q 2 r). Therefore, it possesses the beneficial property
of removing noise from the data, which we later detailed in the theoretical analysis. Weenink (2003)
gives the analytical solution:
                                      −1/2        −1/2
                      A∗ , B∗ = U Σẑ1       , V Σẑ2    ,       (Analytical Solution of CCA)                      (3)
                                                                                         −1/2               −1/2
where U ⊤ P V are the resulting SVD matrices of the rank-r matrix = Σẑ1                        Ẑ 1 Ẑ 2⊤ Σẑ2     ∈
   1    2
 q ×q
R      . The correlation coefficients ρ of Equation 2 are the diagonal entries of P in descending
order ρ1 ≥ ρ2 ≥ ... ≥ ρr like the descending principal components of PCA.

4.2    C ANONICAL S IMILARITY A NALYSIS

We now define CSA. For any pair of multimodal data {x1j , x2j }, with slight abuse of the notation of
original data and features, we define the similarity as:
                                               Ps           ∗ 1      ∗ 2
                                                 i=1 ρi (A ẑj )i (B ẑj )i
      S(x1j , x2j ; s) = S(ẑj1 , ẑj2 ; s) =     ∗ 1             ∗ 2         , (Canonical Similarity) (4)
                                              ∥(A ẑj )1:s ∥2 ∥(B ẑj )1:s ∥2
where (·)1:s denotes the 1st to s-th row vector, (·)i denotes the i-th entry, and s is a pre-defined
hyperparameter. Note that Equation 4 is the weighted cosine similarity of the first s dimensions
of the transformed data matrix. The weights determine how much each dimension influences the
overall similarity score, depending on their level of correlation. We chose the hyperparameter s
so that CSA preserves the information of dimensions with correlations greater than ρs . As stated
earlier, the feature space might contain modal-specific information that cannot be mapped to the
other modality. Thus, we only take into account meaningful bases. We choose CCA with linear
correlation instead of complicated kernel CCA because most contrastive learning loss functions
only contain the linear inner product of the feature vectors, which is also the case in Equation 2.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.3   T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

Similar to standard machine learning models, CSA consists of both training and inference phases.
We split the multimodal data into training and test sets, just like in standard machine learning. CSA
performs all optimizations on the training set, and the test set is not known a priori and is used only
for evaluation. During the training phase, or also called the fitting phase, CSA obtains the training
set of encoded features from the unimodal encoders and then solves Equation 2. Note that CSA
does not train any encoders, so it does not require GPUs. The resulting correlation coefficients ρ
determines the value of s in Equation 4:
                                     s = arg min ρi         s.t. ρi ≥ const.                                 (5)
                                              i
Note that const here is an empirical constant threshold to optimize performance in our experience.
Finally, for any multimodal downstream task, CSA uses Equation 4 to evaluate the similarity be-
tween any pair of multimodal data. We later show the experimental results of CSA and compare the
results with the state-of-the-art methods.

5     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF CSA
In this section, we characterize the trade-off of obtaining informative embeddings and distinguishing
multimodal data pairs caused by selecting the appropriate s in Equation 4. We start with the linear
setting, but the conclusion holds for a more general setting.
Assumptions. We follow the assumption of data generation as per Joshi et al. (2024) and analyze
the effect of CSA based on the theoretical results of contrastive losses (Ji et al., 2023; Tian, 2022;
Nakada et al., 2023). Suppose that the N pairs of data {x1i , x2i }N                         1    2
                                                                   i=1 from two modalities m , m are
generated as follows:
                                x1i = T 1 zi + ϵ1i , x2i = T 2 zi + ϵ2i .                           (6)
Here, zi ∈ R is the shared unobservable latent feature of the two modalities, and T 1 ∈
                q
   1              2
Rp ×q , T 2 ∈ Rp ×q are the linear mapping functions of the latent vectors to the observable data.
Without loss of generality, we assume that both the latent feature vectors and noise for each modality
are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples from any distribution.
Optimal Linear Encoders of Contrastive Loss. Previous work (Ji et al., 2023) gives the analytical
solution of a unimodal linear encoder Ei trained on linear contrastive loss with norm regularization:
                                                                                                 
                            N                                               ′                 ′
            ′           −1 X                      ′      X (Ek xki + Ek xik )⊤ (Ek xkj + Ek xjk )
  L(X k , X k ; Ek ) :=         2(Ek xki )⊤ (Ek xik ) −                                          
                        2N i=1                                             2N − 2
                                                                  j̸=i

                       λ
                      + ∥Ek Ek⊤ ∥2F ,             for k = 1, 2,          (Unimodal Contrastive Loss)
                       2
                                                                                                   (7)
               ′
where X k , X k are two sets of original and augmented (e.g., random masked, Gaussian blurred, etc.)
data from the same modality, and λ is a hyperparameter weighting the regularization term. Note that
this contrastive loss function is similar to Equation 1, but the second modality is the augmented data
now. For simplicity, we assume that all unimodal data are augmented with complementary random
masking with probability 0.5, so the optimal linear encoder is:
                                                     q
                                                                 !⊤
                                                    X
                      Eklinear = arg min L = C          ui σi e⊤
                                                               i    , for k = 1, 2.                (8)
                                  E∈Rq×pk               i=1
In Equation 8, C > 0 is a positive constant related to λ in Equation 7. ei is the i-th standard vector
basis, and σi is the i-th largest eigenvalue of matrix:
                                                     1
                             OffDiag(X i X i⊤ ) −       X i (1 − IN )X i⊤ ,                        (9)
                                                  N −1
where OffDiag denotes the function that makes all diagonal entries 0, and 1 is a square matrix of
ones. From Equation 3, 6, and 8, the solution of CSA in linear setting is:
A∗ ẑi1 = A∗ E1linear x1i = A∗ E1linear (T 1 zi + ϵ1i ), B∗ ẑi2 = B∗ E2linear x2i = B∗ E2linear (T 2 zi + ϵ2i ).
                                                                                                           (10)


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 SNR ( higher is better)                                 p = 0.6698                               original
      10                                                                           1.0                                            shuffled
                                  min ( higher is better)                                             p = 0.0035 p = 0.0010
                                                                                                                              p = 0.0003


                                                                Similarity score
 dB    0                                                                           0.5
                                                                                   0.0
      10
                                                                                   0.5
      20                                                                           1.0
           0          10          20          30           40                                1           11         21            31
               Selected dimension for similarity score s                                  Selected dimension for similarity score s
       (a) SNR and λmin vs. selected dimension.                              (b) p-value (lower is better) of similarity scores.

Figure 2: Trade-off of canonical similarity analysis: (a) When s is low, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the
data is high, and the minimum singular value λmin is large. It preserves the distance between contrastive data.
(b) When s is low, the p-value is large, and the original and shuffled distributions are alike, so the similarity
score is meaningless. (a) shows the desirable properties when s is low and (b) shows the opposite.

Sensitivity to Noise. The noise in Equation 6 affects the unimodal linear encoders E1linear , E2linear
from the second term of Equation 9. It hinders the unimodal encoders in finding the inverse of
T 1 , T 2 but in encoding the noise. The noise then propagates and affects the covariance matrices
of ẑ and the decomposed orthogonal matrices U and V in Equation 3,. Hence, we rely on the
hyperparameter s to prevent noise from dominating. When s increases, we include the less correlated
dimensions caused by noise in the canonical similarity metric in Equation 4.
Distinguish Contrastive Data Pairs. In Equation 7, similar sample pairs, i.e., the augmented and
original data, stay close to each other, while dissimilar ones, i.e., augmented data from different data
points, are far apart. However, in the objective of CCA Equation 2, we focus only on maximizing
the correlation coefficients of similar samples while ignoring dissimilar ones.
We now analyze how CSA distinguishes contrastive latent feature pairs from the two unimodal
encoders. Given two data pairs (x1a , x2a ) and (x1b , x2b ), we assume that the predicted latent feature
pairs (ẑa1 , ẑb1 ), (ẑa2 , ẑb2 ) are distant because the unimodal encoders are trained for it. The distance
between latent features preserved in the matrix transformations is bounded as follows:

   λmin (A∗ )λmin (E1linear )∥x1a − x1b ∥2 ≤ λmin (A∗ E1linear )∥x1a − x1b ∥2 ≤ ∥A∗ (ẑa1 − ẑb1 )∥2 ,
                                                                                                                                         (11)
   λmin (B∗ )λmin (E2linear )∥x2a − x2b ∥2 ≤ λmin (B∗ E2linear )∥x2a − x2b ∥2 ≤ ∥B∗ (ẑa1 − ẑb1 )∥2 ,

where λmin (·) denotes the minimum singular value, which is the opposite of the Lipschitz constant
of a matrix. From Equation 11, we can see that the distance between the CSA features (right-hand
side) is lower bounded by the distance of the original data with a constant of minimum singular
values (left-hand side). Thus, we know how the hyperparameter s selecting the dimension of CSA
affects the distance between dissimilar data pairs. When the hyperparameter s decreases, CSA takes
into account fewer dimensions per Equation 4. That is, λmin (A∗1:s ) = ρs is effectively larger, which
ultimately results in more distant features in the CSA space, and vice versa. In summary, a smaller
s preserves distance in the CSA space, which distinguishes contrastive data pairs.
Trade-off of Canonical Similarity Analysis. Previous results show that a smaller s leads to less
noisy but more contrastive similarity scores, which is desirable. However, s = 1 is not desirable
because it loses much information about the true latent features, and most vectors will have identical
similarity scores. In practice, we do not know the dimension of the latent feature q and can only
use CSA to project the encoded features of two modalities to a dimension that is less noisy, but also
contains enough information about the true shared latent feature z.
Numerical Experiments. We validate the trade-off through numerical experiments following Equa-
tion 6. Figure 2a shows that if we only account for a few dimensions (s is low), the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) of the data is then high, and the minimum singular value λmin is large, which preserves
the distance between contrastive data. Note that Figure 2a shows the values in decibels (dB). Fig-
ure 2b compares paired data (x1i , x2i ) and randomly shuffled data (x1i , x2j ), i ̸= j. High Wilcoxon
p-values mean that the two distributions of similarity scores from Equation 4 are alike. In this case,
the canonical similarity score is meaningless, and larger s is more desirable. The intrinsic trade-off


                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Method                  Train images    Train text    Parameter   Feature dimension q, r
                CLIP                        2B            2B           1.3B            q = 1280
                GTR                          ✗            2B           335M             q = 768
              DINOv2                      142M             ✗           1.1B            q = 1536
       CSA (ours on ImageNet)              35k             1k            ✗              r = 700
      CSA (ours on Leafy Spurge)           800             2             ✗              r = 250
       CSA (ours on Flickr30k)              5k            25k            ✗              r = 200
       CSA (ours on COSMOS)                41k            41k            ✗              r = 750

Table 1: Comparison of methods: CSA utilizes two unimodal encoders to match the performance of CLIP
while requiring significantly less data. We show the CLIP parameters of only one encoder for a fair comparison
to other unimodal encoders.


                       (a) ImageNet.                                    (b) Leafy Spurge.

Figure 3: Image classification: CSA (blue) is highly data-efficient, requiring only 35, 000 training samples
to match the performance of CLIP in ImageNet and 360 samples in Leafy Spurge.

           Method        mAP@5         Precision@1     Precision@5         Method       Precision@1
          CSA (ours)      36.6%           59.3%           43.4%           CSA (ours)       44.7%
            CLIP          73.8%           92.9%           77.2%             CLIP           79.5%
            ASIF          14.6%           25.6%           20.0%             ASIF            0.1%
                         (a) Image-to-text retrieval                      (b) Text-to-image retrieval

Table 2: Cross-modal retrieval on Flickr30k: CSA exhibits lower performance compared to the multimodal
baseline, CLIP. However, it outperforms the unimodal baseline, ASIF, in both retrieval scenarios.

in selecting s is now clear. When s is too small, we do not have meaningful similarity scores that
distinguish unpaired data, but when s is too large, we have noisy and closer clusters of features.


6    E XPERIMENTS

Baselines. We compared CSA with another baseline, ASIF (Norelli et al., 2023). It has the same
setting as CSA, which uses two unimodal encoders to calculate the similarity of a multimodal data
pair. Unlike CSA, which solves an optimization problem, ASIF infers multimodal similarity by the
unimodal distance between data points. ASIF is the only fair baseline for CSA. We trained CSA
and ASIF with the same training set and unimodal encoders and evaluated all the methods in the test
set. We also compared CSA with the state-of-the-art multimodal encoder model from OpenCLIP
(Ilharco et al., 2021; Cherti et al., 2022), acknowledging their incomparable training set and model
parameters, shown in Table 1. In addition to encoder models, we compared the performance of
LLaVA2-13B (Touvron et al., 2023), a multimodal large language model, and prompted it to solve
the specified tasks from the provided image and text. The unimodal encoders of CSA and ASIF are
GTR (Ni et al., 2022) and DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) here. Section A shows the detailed settings.
Image Classification. We first examined CSA’s ability of image classification on ImageNet and
Leafy Spurge. All methods input an image and all possible captions “This is an image of label” and
select the most similar caption as the predicted label. In Figure 3a, CSA requires only 35,000 training
samples to match the performance of CLIP and consistently outperforms ASIF, which needs millions
of data points to achieve a similar performance to CLIP. Since CLIP is zero-shot, its performance
is independent of the amount of data. Leafy Spurge challenges the capability of methods with


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (a) Results for a training size of 5000.                (b) Results for a training size of 35000.

Figure 4: Detecting mislabeled ImageNet images: CSA (blue) outperforms CLIP, ASIF, and LLaVA with a
higher AUC. (a) and (b) illustrate the results for CSA and ASIF across 2 training set sizes, showing the superior
performance of CSA with limited and noisy training data.

extremely limited data. This dataset includes only 800 training images and 100 test images of plants
with binary classes: leafy spurge and others. The images are out-of-distribution for any encoders,
as this dataset was newly published in 2024 and captured using drones. Figure 3b shows that while
the performance of CSA fluctuates, it consistently outperforms CLIP and ASIF in this challenging
scenario, demonstrating CSA’s effectiveness with limited out-of-distribution data.
Table 1 shows the size of the training set and the number of parameters of the neural network
encoders. Notably, CSA surpasses CLIP by utilizing two unimodal model encoders trained on 2
billion text samples and 142 million images, along with only 35,000 multimodal data points. This is
50,000× less unimodal data compared to the CLIP training set. We also visualize the image features
of CSA and CLIP in Section H.
Cross-modal Retrieval. We examined CSA and the other baselines on a cross-modal retrieval
dataset, Flickr30k (Young et al., 2014), which contains 15,000 images, each paired with 5 textual
descriptions. This dataset is common for evaluating the performance of image-to-text and text-to-
image retrieval. For image-to-text retrieval, the task is to find the corresponding caption from a set
of possible candidates (the so-called reference set) given a query image and vice versa. We retrieved
the most similar images or text from the reference set according to the similarity scores of all meth-
ods and showed the results in Table 2. For image-to-text retrieval, we show mean average precision
(mAP), precision@1, and precision@5. For text-to-image retrieval, we only evaluated performance
using precision@1 since there is only one correct image. From Table 2, CSA exhibits lower perfor-
mance compared to the multimodal baseline, CLIP. However, it outperforms the unimodal baseline,
ASIF, in both retrieval scenarios. Notably, ASIF completely fails in the text-to-image retrieval task.
Detecting Mislabeled ImageNet Images. We again show CSA’s superiority with limited and noisy
data. Previous works show that ImageNet is imperfect and contains incorrectly labeled images,
leading to several failure modes of downstream models (Vasudevan et al., 2022). Trained with the
original incorrect ImageNet dataset, all methods detect if the input image and the label align. We
use human-evaluated labels from (Northcutt et al., 2021) to define incorrectly labeled images.
All methods input an image and caption “This is an image of label” and output if the image and
caption align or not (true or false). LLaVA answers questions about whether the given image and
caption align. CSA, CLIP, and ASIF output true if the calculated similarity score of the image and
caption pair is greater than a threshold. We enumerated the thresholds to obtain several true and
false positive rates and show the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves in Figure 4. In the
legend, we listed the area under the curve (AUC), where a higher value indicates better performance.
In Figure 4, CSA outperforms all other baselines, even LLaVA, given 5,000 image-label pairs. We
also see that when the size of the training data increases from 5,000 to 35,000, the performance
of CSA and ASIF increases as well. We emphasize that the comparison of AUC does not directly
compare accuracy. As shown in Figure 4b, the true positive rate of CSA outperforms LLaVA by
nearly 10% under the same false positive rate.
Note that the training sets of CSA and ASIF contain mislabeled ImageNet images, which are 11%
of the training data in both dataset sizes. It shows CSA ’s robustness to noisy data and efficiency in
learning from just 5,000 pairs. Similarly, the CLIP encoders’ training set also contains mislabeled


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       “Julian Castro at his announcement in     “Toronto Raptors arrive at Disney Campus in
          San Antonio, Tex., on Saturday.”                Black Lives Matter Buses.”


       “Julian Castro at his announcement in
        San Antonio, Tex., on Saturday. Mr.       “A photograph shows buses purchased
       Castro, the former secretary of housing       by Black Lives Matter to transport
      and urban development, would be one of                members to riots.”
         the youngest presidents if elected.”

            Accurate Caption                          Misinformative Caption

                               (a) Illustrative examples.                                      (b) Results.

Figure 5: Detecting misinformative news captions: (a) We consider the retrieved captions misinformative if
they do not align with the images and the corresponding captions. (b) CSA (blue) outperforms CLIP, ASIF, and
LLaVA with a higher AUC. The orange cross is the supervised learning method from the original COSMOS
paper trained with labels of object locations, which is the only method that outperforms CSA.

ImageNet images, making the comparison fair. We later demonstrate CSA ’s robustness with even
noisier training data.
Detecting Misinformative Captions. Detecting mislabeled images is easy since text captions differ
only in labels. We considered a much harder task to detect misinformation news captions from the
COSMOS dataset (Aneja et al., 2023). The task involves determining whether a Google-retrieved
caption aligns with news images and its original captions, as shown in Figure 5a. The benchmark
considers the retrieved captions misinformative if they do not align with the images and the corre-
sponding captions simultaneously. The ultimate goal of the task is to identify and prevent the spread
of misinformative news captions on the Internet.
We evaluated the similarities between the image and its retrieved caption, as well as between the
two captions, and identified misinformation when both similarity scores fell below the respective
thresholds. Figure 5b shows all the ROC curves and their AUC. Again, CSA outperforms CLIP
with two unimodal encoders. The supervised learning method from the original COSMOS paper is
the only method that performs better than CSA, although trained with supervised labels of object
locations. Note that the LLaVA agent completely fails this task with a false positive rate of 100%,
as it always thinks that the retrieved captions align with the given images and the original captions.
Robustness to noisy data. To test CSA’s robustness, we
randomly shuffled a percentage of the training labels of
ImageNet and evaluated the resulting test accuracy. Fig-
ure 6 shows that CSA constantly outperforms ASIF and
achieves 70% accuracy even if 50% of the training labels
are incorrect. When all the data are shuffled, both CSA
and ASIF degrade to 0% accuracy.
Towards more modalities and ablation study. We show
additional results in the Appendix to provide a compre-
hensive study to CSA. To show that CSA generalizes to
other modalities, we tested it on audio and text data in
Section B, text-to-LiDAR retrieval in Section F, and text- Figure 6: Robustness to noisy ImageNet
to-timeseries in Section G. See Section C for the corre- data: CSA remains performant even when
lation coefficients of multimodal data and the results of the training labels, comprising a total of
CSA with various s in Equation 4 in Section D and uni- 35,000 samples, are partially shuffled.
modal encoders in Section E. We visualized and examined the CSA embeddings in Section H and
Section I. Lastly, we present the ablation study of CLIP encoder architectures in Section J.
Limitations. CSA is suitable for bimodal data, similar to CLIP, unlike Imagebind (Girdhar et al.,
2023) is capable of 6 modalities. Like ASIF, CSA is based on unimodal encoders. If the unimodal
encoders are not foundation models but trained on limited datasets like MNIST, the performance of
CSA degrades. Once the encoded features are obtained, CSA is just SVD. In our case, the underlying


                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


implementation of CSA is NumPy, which is efficient in handling large matrix operations parallelly
on multiple CPUs. Also, solving SVD with NumPy takes more time and is computationally efficient
than training models on GPUs for datasets of the same size. There are tricks to speed up SVD
approximately. For instance, GPU libraries like CuPy Okuta et al. (2017), and randomized SVD
algorithms compute approximate results faster than full SVD. Lastly, for a given hyperparameter s,
we only need to obtain the first s singular values, which can also speed up the computation.
Summary. CSA always outperforms the unimodal baseline, ASIF, and matches or exceeds CLIP’s
performance, except in cross-modal retrieval. This exception likely arises because cross-modal re-
trieval involves comparing thousands of similarity score pairs between the query data and the refer-
ence set, unlike the other tasks that compare against certain captions. It highlights the trade-off of
CSA discussed in Section 5. CSA encounters a trade-off between distinguishability and informative-
ness, i.e., to maintain the distant features. Retrieval tasks require a more curated balance between
these aspects, and other tasks benefit from greater distinguishability of similarity scores.
We conclude that CSA is a robust and data-efficient method to replicate the CLIP similarity score
using two unimodal encoders. In Table 1, the amount of data required compared to CLIP underscores
that unimodal encoders are significantly more efficient to train. A small amount of multimodal data
suffices to learn the mapping of unimodal features to a multimodal space, even if the training data
are unprocessed by humans (COSMOS) or incorrectly labeled (ImageNet).

7   C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS
In this work, we proposed CSA, which maps two unimodal feature spaces from pre-trained encoders
to a multimodal feature space. CSA is extremely data-efficient. We characterize the intrinsic trade-
off of CSA, and CSA shows competitive performance compared to CLIP models in image classifi-
cation, mislabeled data detection, text-to-LiDAR retrieval, and misinformation detection tasks with
limited data. CSA also outperforms the state-of-the-art method in the same setting.
Future work includes extending CSA to more than 2 modality pairs, just as generalized CCA (Horst,
1961) extends CCA to more sources. In addition, understanding the relationship between the size
of the training set and its performance is crucial. If we can fine-tune the unimodal encoders, which
loss function will result in the most suitable feature space for CSA remains an open problem. Lastly,
CSA essentially finds a mapping function between two feature spaces, which need not be modality
features. We aim to test CSA on mapping intramodal data, such as multi-view images of an object.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
For the theoretical analysis of this work, we state all assumptions made in the assumptions para-
graph. For all the hyperparameters and detailed settings of the experiments, please refer to Appendix
Section A. Lastly, we put the core code of CSA in the supplementary details. The code includes dat-
aloaders, execution code, and links to download all the datasets and models used. We will provide
an example configuration file after publication, as it contains non-anonymous directory paths.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation grants No. 2133481 and
No. 2148186, NASA 80NSSC21M0071, the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under Grant No.
N00014-22-1-2254, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) contract FA8750-
23-C-1018, and DARPA ANSR: RTXCW2231110. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation. We also thank Mohammad Omama and Sai Shankar
Narasimhan for their valuable feedback and discussions on the paper.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I. Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon,
  Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, Matt Sharifi, Neil Zeghidour,
  and Christian Frank. Musiclm: Generating music from text, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2301.11325.
Shivangi Aneja, Chris Bregler, and Matthias Nießner. Cosmos: catching out-of-context im-
  age misuse with self-supervised learning. In AAAI, 2023. ISBN 978-1-57735-880-0. doi:
  10.1609/aaai.v37i12.26648. URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i12.26648.
Gabriele Berton, Carlo Masone, and Barbara Caputo. Rethinking visual geo-localization for large-
  scale applications. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng yi Kong, Nan Hua, Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St. John, Noah Con-
  stant, Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Brian Strope, and
  Ray Kurzweil. Universal sentence encoder, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.
  11175.
James Chapman and Hao-Ting Wang. Cca-zoo: A collection of regularized, deep learning based,
  kernel, and probabilistic cca methods in a scikit-learn style framework. Journal of Open Source
  Software, 6(68):3823, 2021.
Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gor-
 don, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for
 contrastive language-image learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07143, 2022.
Maximilian Christ, Nils Braun, Julius Neuffer, and Andreas W Kempa-Liehr. Time series feature
 extraction on basis of scalable hypothesis tests (tsfresh–a python package). Neurocomputing, 307:
 72–77, 2018.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2019.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recogni-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Gabriel Ilharco, Alex Fang, Jonathan Hayase, Georgios Smyrnis, Thao
  Nguyen, Ryan Marten, Mitchell Wortsman, Dhruba Ghosh, Jieyu Zhang, Eyal Orgad, Rahim En-
  tezari, Giannis Daras, Sarah Pratt, Vivek Ramanujan, Yonatan Bitton, Kalyani Marathe, Stephen
  Mussmann, Richard Vencu, Mehdi Cherti, Ranjay Krishna, Pang Wei Koh, Olga Saukh, Alexan-
  der Ratner, Shuran Song, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Romain Beaumont, Sewoong Oh,
  Alex Dimakis, Jenia Jitsev, Yair Carmon, Vaishaal Shankar, and Ludwig Schmidt. Datacomp:
  In search of the next generation of multimodal datasets, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2304.14108.
Rohit Girdhar, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Zhuang Liu, Mannat Singh, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Armand
  Joulin, and Ishan Misra. Imagebind: One embedding space to bind them all, 2023.
Harsh Goel and Sai Shankar Narasimhan. Improving end-to-end autonomous driving with synthetic
  data from latent diffusion models. In First Vision and Language for Autonomous Driving and
  Robotics Workshop, 2024.
Andrey Guzhov, Federico Raue, Jörn Hees, and Andreas Dengel. Audioclip: Extending clip to
  image, text and audio. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
  cessing (ICASSP), pp. 976–980, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David R. Hardoon, Sandor Szedmak, and John Shawe-Taylor. Canonical correlation analysis: An
  overview with application to learning methods. Neural Computation, 16(12):2639–2664, 2004.
Paul Horst. Generalized canonical correlations and their application to experimental data. Journal
  of clinical psychology, 14, 1961.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, 2021.
Wenlong Ji, Zhun Deng, Ryumei Nakada, James Zou, and Linjun Zhang. The power of contrast for
 feature learning: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(330):1–78,
 2023.
Siddharth Joshi, Arnav Jain, Ali Payani, and Baharan Mirzasoleiman. Data-efficient contrastive
  language-image pretraining: Prioritizing data quality over quantity. In International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2024.
Po-han Li, Sravan Kumar Ankireddy, Ruihan Philip Zhao, Hossein Nourkhiz Mahjoub, Ehsan
  Moradi Pari, Ufuk Topcu, Sandeep Chinchali, and Hyeji Kim. Task-aware distributed source cod-
  ing under dynamic bandwidth. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Po-han Li, Oyku Selin Toprak, Aditya Narayanan, Ufuk Topcu, and Sandeep Chinchali. Online
  foundation model selection in robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08570, 2024b.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning, 2023.
Qi Lyu and Xiao Fu. Nonlinear multiview analysis: Identifiability and neural network-assisted
  implementation. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 68:2697–2712, 2020. URL https:
  //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9064884/.
Qi Lyu and Xiao Fu. Finite-sample analysis of deep CCA-based unsupervised post-nonlinear mul-
  timodal learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 34(11):9568–
  9574, 2023. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9747934/.
Luca Moschella, Valentino Maiorca, Marco Fumero, Antonio Norelli, Francesco Locatello, and
  Emanuele Rodolà. Relative representations enable zero-shot latent space communication. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=SrC-nwieGJ.
Ryumei Nakada, Halil Ibrahim Gulluk, Zhun Deng, Wenlong Ji, James Zou, and Linjun Zhang.
  Understanding multimodal contrastive learning and incorporating unpaired data. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 4348–4380. PMLR, 2023.
Jianmo Ni, Chen Qu, Jing Lu, Zhuyun Dai, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Ji Ma, Vincent Zhao,
   Yi Luan, Keith Hall, Ming-Wei Chang, and Yinfei Yang. Large dual encoders are gener-
   alizable retrievers. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
   ral Language Processing, December 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.669. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.669.
Antonio Norelli, Marco Fumero, Valentino Maiorca, Luca Moschella, Emanuele Rodolà, and
  Francesco Locatello. ASIF: Coupled data turns unimodal models to multimodal without training.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=XjOj3ZmWEl.
Curtis G. Northcutt, Anish Athalye, and Jonas Mueller. Pervasive label errors in test sets destabilize
  machine learning benchmarks. In Proceedings of the 35th Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, December 2021.
Ryosuke Okuta, Yuya Unno, Daisuke Nishino, Shohei Hido, and Crissman Loomis. Cupy: A
  numpy-compatible library for nvidia gpu calculations. In Proceedings of Workshop on Machine
  Learning Systems (LearningSys) in The Thirty-first Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017. URL http://learningsys.org/nips17/assets/
  papers/paper_16.pdf.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mohammad Omama, Po-han Li, and Sandeep P Chinchali. Exploiting distribution constraints for
 scalable and efficient image retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07022, 2024.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mahmoud Assran, Nico-
 las Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael
 Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Hervé Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Ar-
 mand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision,
 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763, 2021.
Viresh Ranjan, Nikhil Rasiwasia, and CV Jawahar. Multi-label cross-modal retrieval. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2015.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A
  cleaned, hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings
  of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. doi:
  10.18653/v1/P18-1238. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1238.
Mohammad Shokoohi-Yekta, Bing Hu, Hongxia Jin, Jun Wang, and Eamonn Keogh. Generalizing
 dtw to the multi-dimensional case requires an adaptive approach. Data mining and knowledge
 discovery, 31:1–31, 2017.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2021.
Sai Shubodh, Mohammad Omama, Husain Zaidi, Udit Singh Parihar, and Madhava Krishna. Lip-
  loc: Lidar image pretraining for cross-modal localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 948–957, 2024.
Krishna Srinivasan, Karthik Raman, Jiecao Chen, Michael Bendersky, and Marc Najork. Wit:
  Wikipedia-based image text dataset for multimodal multilingual machine learning. In Proceed-
  ings of the 44th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information
  retrieval, pp. 2443–2449, 2021.
Zhongkai Sun, Prathusha Sarma, William Sethares, and Yingyu Liang. Learning relationships be-
  tween text, audio, and video via deep canonical correlation for multimodal language analysis,
  2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.05544.
Yuandong Tian. Understanding deep contrastive learning via coordinate-wise optimization. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 9(86):2579–2605, 2008. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/
  vandermaaten08a.html.
Vijay Vasudevan, Benjamin Caine, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Sara Fridovich-Keil, and Rebecca
  Roelofs. When does dough become a bagel? analyzing the remaining mistakes on imagenet.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:6720–6734, 2022.
David Weenink. Canonical correlation analysis. In Proceedings of the Institute of Phonetic Sciences
  of the University of Amsterdam, volume 25, pp. 81–99. University of Amsterdam, 2003.
Yusong Wu*, Ke Chen*, Tianyu Zhang*, Yuchen Hui*, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo
  Dubnov. Large-scale contrastive language-audio pretraining with feature fusion and keyword-
  to-caption augmentation. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), 2023.
Senqiao Yang, Jiaming Liu, Ray Zhang, Mingjie Pan, Zoey Guo, Xiaoqi Li, Zehui Chen, Peng
  Gao, Yandong Guo, and Shanghang Zhang. Lidar-llm: Exploring the potential of large language
  models for 3d lidar understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14074, 2023.
Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia Hockenmaier. From image descriptions to visual
  denotations: New similarity metrics for semantic inference over event descriptions. Transactions
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2:67–78, 2014.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendices
A    A DDITIONAL DETAILS ON THE EXPERIMENTS

We run all inferences of LLAVA and encoder models on an NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPU, and solving
Equation 2 with 35,000 multimodal feature vectors on a 64 core Xeon Gold 6226R CPU machine
takes less than 10 minutes. The implementation of CCA is from CCA Zoo Chapman & Wang (2021).
Multimodal Encoders. The multimodal image-text encoder used throughout the experiments is
laion/CLIP-ViT-bigG-14-laion2B-39B-b160k from Huggingface. The multimodal audio-text en-
coder used is laion/larger clap general from Huggingface (Wu* et al., 2023).
Unimodal Encoders. We use several unimodal encoders and show the difference in performance in
Section E. To encode images, we tested DINOv2-Giant (Oquab et al., 2023) and the unimodal part
of the multimodal encoders previously mentioned. To encode text, we tested GTR-t5-large (Ni et al.,
2022) and the unimodal part of the multimodal encoders mentioned above. To show CSA’s ability
to combine unimodal models, we never tried using the paired unimodal encoders of a multimodal
encoder in our experiments, i.e., using CLIP to encode both images and text.
Flickr30k. We trained ASIF and CSA on the Flickr validation set, which includes 145,000 images
and 5 captions for each image. We then validated the models on a test set of 5,000 images and
25,000 captions.
COSMOS. We trained ASIF and CSA on the COSMOS validation set, which includes 41,006
image-caption pairs. We then validated the models using a test set of 1,700 image-caption pairs,
with half of the captions labeled as misinformation by human annotators.


B    T OWARDS MORE MODALITIES —AUDIO AND TEXT


Figure 7: Classification of YouTube audio and genre tags: CSA (blue) performs as well as CLAP, the CLIP-
inspired multimodal audio and text encoder, and outperforms ASIF in classifying genre tags of YouTube audio.


We now show CSA’s generalization ability to more modalities with MusicCaps (Agostinelli et al.,
2023). We use GTR and CLAP to encode YouTube audio along with the tagged genre descriptions
of the audio. We conducted a classification task in which the models input the audio and a tag and
output if the audio aligns with the caption. Similar to the mislabeled ImageNet experiment, we
show the ROC curves and compare the AUC in Figure 7. We trained ASIF and CSA for 3, 777 data
points and tested all methods on 1, 625 data points. We randomly sampled a tag for each data point
during both training and inference. In Figure 7, we see that CSA performs as well as CLAP, the
CLIP-inspired multimodal audio and text encoder, and outperforms ASIF. Thus, we conclude that
CSA extends its capabilities beyond image and text, effectively handling audio and text as well.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Correlation coefficients of COSMOS image and caption features under CSA: The data are
inherently noisy, as indicated by the correlation coefficients of the unimodal feature spaces, which concentrate
on 0.2 to 0.4. The unimodal encoders here are GTR and DINOv2.


C    C ORRELATION OF F EATURE S PACES

To take a deeper look into unimodal feature spaces, we show the correlation coefficients of COSMOS
image and caption features under CSA in Figure 8. The data are inherently noisy, as indicated by
the correlation coefficients of the unimodal feature spaces, which concentrate on 0.2 to 0.4. This
distribution of correlation coefficients highlights that, despite the fact that the original multimodal
data are noisy and show complex correlations, CSA can effectively map them to a multimodal space
where the similarity score remains meaningful for the zero-shot downstream tasks.


D     S ENSITIVITY TO H YPERPARAMETER s

        Method       s       mAP      Precision@1       Precision@5       Method       s    Precision@1
         CSA        10       9.5%        18.1%             13.4%           CSA        10       15.2%
         CSA        50      32.7%        53.9%             40.0%           CSA        50       41.2%
         CSA       100      36.0%        58.3%             42.9%           CSA       100       43.8%
         CSA       200      36.6%        59.3%             43.4%           CSA       200       44.7%
         CSA       500      31.8%        56.3%             38.3%           CSA       500       41.7%
         CSA       750      27.3%        50.2%             33.6%           CSA       750       40.1%
         CLIP       ✗       73.8%        92.9%             77.2%           CLIP       ✗        79.5%
         ASIF       ✗       14.6%        25.6%             20.0%           ASIF       ✗         0.1%
                         (a) Image-to-text retrieval.                      (b) Text-to-image retrieval.

Table 3: Cross-modal retrieval on Flickr30k under different s: CSA achieves optimal performance at
s = 200, and its performance degrades with increases and decreases in s, illustrating the trade-off characterized
in Section 5.


Retrieval tasks: We show CSA’s sensitivity to the hyperparameter s in terms of the end perfor-
mance. In Table 3, CSA achieves optimal performance in s = 200, and its performance degrades
with increases and decreases in s, illustrating the trade-off characterized in Section 5. However,
for tasks other than retrieval, we find that a larger s improves performance in image classification,
mislabeling detection, and misinformation caption detection. This phenomenon is likely due to the
trade-off between distinguishability and informative embedding features, namely the distance be-
tween features. Although retrieval tasks require a more curated balance between these aspects, other
tasks benefit from greater distinguishability of similarity scores.
Detection tasks: Table 4 shows the sensitivity to hyperparameter s of CSA on ImageNet mislabeled
data and COSMOS misinformative news captions detection. The relation between hyperparameter
s and the AUC performance is different from retrieval tasks (Flickr30k and KITTI), as shown in
Table 3. In detection tasks, the AUC increases as hyperparameter s increases. We explained this
phenomenon in the theoretical analysis with the perspective of feature distinguishability above.


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             (a) Results for a training size of 5000.        (b) Results for a training size of 35000.

Figure 9: Detecting mislabeled ImageNet images (cont’d): CSA (blue) outperforms CLIP, ASIF, and
LLaVA with a higher AUC. (a) and (b) illustrate the results for CSA and ASIF across various training set
sizes, showing the superior performance of CSA with limited noisy training data. The unimodal encoders are
GTR and CLIP (image) here.


Figure 10: Detecting misinformative COSMOS captions (cont’d): CSA (blue) outperforms CLIP, ASIF,
and LLaVA with a higher AUC. The supervised-learning method from the original COSMOS paper is the
orange cross. It is the only method that outperforms CSA, though trained with supervised labels of object
locations. The unimodal encoders are GTR and CLIP (image) here.



E    S ENSITIVITY TO U NIMODAL E NCODERS

We change the unimodal encoders of ASIF and CSA to showcase their generalization ability to
different unimodal encoders. Figure 9 shows the results on the detection of mislabeled ImageNet
data with other encoders, and Figure 10 shows the results on the detection of misinformative captions
with other encoders. CSA again outperforms ASIF and CLIP while outperforming the results of the
combination of GTR and DINOv2 in Section 6.


F    T EXT- TO -L I DAR R ETRIEVAL

Settings: We additionally test CSA’s capability on new, unexplored modality pairs. The KITTI
dataset, designed for place recognition in autonomous vehicles, contains RGB and LiDAR images
captured in Karlsruhe, Germany. To add a text modality, we use LLaVA Liu et al. (2023) to generate
descriptive captions for the images with a prompt ‘‘Describe the static objects and the numbers of
objects in the image within 20 words.” In place recognition, autonomous vehicles utilize local RGB,
LiDAR, and text captions to locate themselves within a city by retrieving the nearest landmark from
a reference set. The landmarks act as the reference data, while the vehicles’ local observations serve
as query data, resulting in trimodal data for this task. We used Lip-loc Shubodh et al. (2024), and the
image-LiDAR encoder, to encode the LiDAR data and GTR Ni et al. (2022) to encode the captions.
The train set contains 5,000 cross-modal instances, and the test set contains 6,000 instances. The


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


retrieval task here is to locate the vehicle at any landmark within 20 meters. We set this distance
threshold per Shubodh et al. (2024).
Results: We conducted retrieval on KITTI, augmented with textual captions. Figure 11 shows that
CSA achieves the same performance as LiDAR-to-LiDAR retrieval, showcasing CSA’s capability of
bridging multimodal data. Notably, we are the first to perform text-to-LiDAR retrieval, only made
possible by CSA, which maps LiDAR and text embeddings into a shared feature space.


                        Reference modality
                                 LiDAR (Lip-loc)
               LiDAR (Lip-loc)


                                    32.4                             Method        s   AUC (ImageNet)       AUC (COSMOS)
       Query modality


                                                                      CLIP        ✗         0.66                 0.68
                                                                      ASIF        ✗         0.50                 0.64
                                                                                  10        0.54                 0.65
                                                                                  25        0.59                 0.66
               Text (GTR)


                                                                                  50        0.62                 0.68
                                    32.8
                                                                      CSA
                                                                                 100        0.65                 0.69
                                                                                 500        0.72                 0.70
                                                                                 700        0.73                 0.70

                                                                   Table 4: Sensitivity to s on detection tasks: As analyzed
Figure 11: Text-to-LiDAR retrieval on                              in the appendix of the main paper, the AUC increases as s
KITTI: The figure shows the Recall@5 re-                           increases. This trend holds for all detection tasks, which is
trieval rate on KITTI. The cross-modal re-                         different from the trend of retrieval.
trieval result from the LiDAR query is di-
rectly from Lip-loc, while the other with text
is from CSA. CSA matches the performance
of Lip-loc, which is trained on KITTI.


G     T EXT- TO -T IMESERIES C LASSIFICATION

Setting: We now demonstrate the effect of CSA on more modality pairs. We conducted a classi-
fication of handwritten alphabets. One modality is the 3-dimensional time series of movement of
pens on a pad Shokoohi-Yekta et al. (2017). The other modality is either the images of alphabets or
the text of “Alphabet X.” We leveraged tsfresh Christ et al. (2018) to extract statistical features from
time series. We re-used the same image and text encoder as the main experiments in the paper for
the other modalities. Note that tsfresh is not a contrastive-learning encoder but a statistical feature
extractor, hence we also demonstrated CSA’s ability to adapt any form of encoder.
Results: The classification task is similar to that one of ImageNet. We calculated the AUC of
multiple classification tasks (an alphabet each) and showed the average AUC under the “ovr (one-
vs-rest)” setting. From Table 5, we see that CSA constantly outperforms ASIF by 0.1× of the
performance. Notably, we are the first in the community to conduct multimodal classification with
multivariate time series, so there are no comparable baselines.


                                            Method   Modality 1     Modality 2     AUC (one-vs-rest)
                                                     time series     image              0.50
                                             ASIF
                                                     time series      text              0.50
                                                     time series     image              0.58
                                             CSA
                                                     time series      text              0.54

Table 5: Multimodal time series classification: We further demonstrated CSA’s performance on multimodal
time series classification, which is first in the community.


                                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) t-SNE embeddings of CLIP.               (b) t-SNE embeddings of CSA.

Figure 12: t-SNE visualization of embeddings: (a) shows the t-SNE visualization of CLIP image embed-
dings, and (b) shows the t-SNE visualization of CSA’s embeddings. Both exhibit strong clustering of embed-
dings, with colors representing their respective classes.


H    V ISUALIZATION OF CSA E MBEDDINGS

In Figure 12, we showed the t-SNE van der Maaten & Hinton (2008) visualization of ImageNet
embeddings. We selected 20 classes out of 1000 classes. Both CLIP and CSA have strong clustering
of embeddings, thus verifying that they have similar performance on image classification.


I   L INEAR C LASSIFICATION OF E MBEDDINGS


Figure 13: Classification of SVM with ImageNet embeddings: Trained linear SVMs enhance classification
performance, providing a 10% improvement over zero-shot cross-modal classification. Additionally, CLIP with
SVM outperforms CSA with SVM by 5%.

We used linear support vector machines (SVMs) to classify CLIP’s and CSA’s image embeddings.
Note that linear classification on image embeddings is fundamentally different from cross-modal
classification with text embeddings. This experiment has nothing to do with cross-modal feature
space but provides us insight into the clustering of the unimodal embeddings of CLIP and CSA.
The results are shown in Figure 13. While CSA outperforms CLIP with SVM when limited to 5k
training samples, CLIP with SVM achieves 5% higher classification performance than CSA with
SVM when trained on 35k samples, and 10% higher than CLIP without SVM.


J   A BLATION S TUDY ON E NCODER A RCHITECTURES

To further ablate the effect of CSA from the disparity of the unimodal encoder’s architecture vs. the
multimodal one’s. We ran CSA with two different CLIP encoders with the same architecture but
different train sets, hence having different feature spaces.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  (a) ImageNet classification.         (b) Detecting mislabeled ImageNet images.

Figure 14: CSA enhances performance across different encoder architectures: (a) and (b) demonstrate
that CSA’s success in image classification and mislabeled data detection is due to the method itself, not the
architecture of the unimodal encoders.


Setting: All encoders are from the OpenCLIP library, and we choose 2 CLIP encoders with the
same backbone (ViT-L/14) and trained on DataComp-1B Gadre et al. (2023) and WIT Srinivasan
et al. (2021), respectively. The latter is the original model from OpenAI and the text encoder in the
ablation study. Note that the models used here are smaller than the ones used in the main paper (ViT-
G/14) as there are no multiple ViT-G/14 CLIP models, and the results are not directly comparable.
The size of the train set here is 35,000 for detecting mislabeled images.
Results: We used the two encoders to re-run the classification and mislabel detection of ImageNet.
We show the results in Figure 14. We observe that CSA constantly outperforms CLIP even with the
same encoder architecture, which justifies that the success of CSA is due to its method rather than
the encoder architectures of the unimodal encoders.


                                                     20
