Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


MAD-TD: M ODEL -AUGMENTED DATA STABILIZES
H IGH U PDATE R ATIO RL
 Claas A Voelcker∗                 Marcel Hussing∗                        Eric Eaton
 University of Toronto             University of Pennsylvania             University of Pennsylvania
 Vector Institute

 Amir-massoud Farahmand                                  Igor Gilitschenski
 Polytechnique Montréal                                 University of Toronto
 Mila – Quebec AI Institute                              Vector Institute
 University of Toronto



                                             A BSTRACT
         Building deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents that find a good policy with
         few samples has proven notoriously challenging. To achieve sample efficiency,
         recent work has explored updating neural networks with large numbers of gradi-
         ent steps for every new sample. While such high update-to-data (UTD) ratios have
         shown strong empirical performance, they also introduce instability to the training
         process. Previous approaches need to rely on periodic neural network parameter
         resets to address this instability, but restarting the training process is infeasible
         in many real-world applications and requires tuning the resetting interval. In this
         paper, we focus on one of the core difficulties of stable training with limited sam-
         ples: the inability of learned value functions to generalize to unobserved on-policy
         actions. We mitigate this issue directly by augmenting the off-policy RL training
         process with a small amount of data generated from a learned world model. Our
         method, Model-Augmented Data for Temporal Difference learning (MAD-TD)
         uses small amounts of generated data to stabilize high UTD training and achieve
         competitive performance on the most challenging tasks in the DeepMind con-
         trol suite. Our experiments further highlight the importance of employing a good
         model to generate data, MAD-TD’s ability to combat value overestimation, and
         its practical stability gains for continued learning.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Instead of solely relying on data gathered by a target policy, off-policy reinforcement learning (RL)
aims to leverage experience gathered by past policies (Sutton & Barto, 2018) to fit a value function
for the target policy. Ideally, training over many iterations should help extract important information
from past data. However, recent work has shown that simply increasing the number of gradient
update steps, the replay ratio or update-to-data (UTD) ratio, can lead to highly unstable learn-
ing (Nikishin et al., 2022; D’Oro et al., 2023; Hussing et al., 2024; Nauman et al., 2024b).
Prior work has stabilized the learning by using double Q minimization to reduce overestimation
(Fujimoto et al., 2018), training ensemble methods to improve value estimation (Chen et al., 2020;
Hiraoka et al., 2022), introducing architectural regularization (Hussing et al., 2024; Nauman et al.,
2024b), or resetting networks periodically throughout the learning process (D’Oro et al., 2023;
Schwarzer et al., 2023; Nauman et al., 2024b). However, while useful, pessimistic underestima-
tion and architectural regularization are insufficient by themselves to combat the problem (Hussing
et al., 2024), and so most methods resort to either network resets or ensembles. Critic ensembles can
be expensive to train, and resetting has several important limitations: in real systems, re-executing a
random policy can be expensive or unsafe, the resetting interval needs to be carefully tuned (Hussing
et al., 2024), and when storing a full reset buffer is infeasible, resetting loses important information.
We narrow in on a key issue contributing to unstable training: wrong value function estimation on
unobserved on-policy actions (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996). Off-policy


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RL uses the values of states sampled under old policies with actions from the target policy to update
the value function. However, these state-action pairs themselves are not in the replay buffer and
hence their value estimate is not directly improved by training. Consequently, a learned function
which achieves low error on seen data is not guaranteed to generalize well to actions that differ from
past actions. This problem is related to overfitting (Li et al., 2023) and contributes to overestimation
(Thrun & Schwartz, 1993; Hasselt, 2010; Fujimoto et al., 2018). However, overfitting assumes that
train and test set are drawn from the same distribution, while we focus on the distribution shift
between data collection and target policy. Previous work has investigated the difficulty of off-policy
learning due to this shift (Maei et al., 2009; Sutton et al., 2016; Hasselt, 2010; Fujimoto et al., 2018),
yet there are no tractable mitigation strategies that work well in the high UTD regime with deep RL.
To corroborate our hypothesis that generalization to unobserved actions is a major obstacle for train-
ing at high UTDs, we examine the behavior of value functions on on-policy transitions. Our ex-
periments reveal that value functions generalize significantly worse to unobserved on-policy action
transitions than to validation data from the same distribution as the training set. Building on this, we
propose to improve on-policy value estimation by using model-generated on-policy data.
Previous investigations into model-based deep RL have focused on learning values fully in model
roll-outs (Buckman et al., 2018; Janner et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2020; Ghugare et al., 2023) and
the associated challenges (Zhao et al., 2023; Hansen et al., 2024). In contrast, we show that mixing
a small amount of model-generated on-policy data with real off-policy replay data is sufficient to
achieve stable learning in the high UTD regime. Our method, Model-Augmented Data for Temporal
Difference learning(MAD-TD), mitigates the generalization issues of the value function in the hard-
est tasks of the DeepMind control (DMC) benchmark (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020b) and achieves
strong and stable high UTD learning without resetting or redundant ensemble learning.
The main contributions of this work are twofold: First, we empirically show the existence of mis-
generalization from off-policy value estimation to on-policy predictions. We connect this issue to
the challenge of stable learning with high update ratios and highlight how increasing the update
ratio increases Q function overestimation. Second, we provide a new method called MAD-TD that
improves the value function accuracy on unobserved on-policy actions with model-generated data
and stabilizes training at high update ratios. This method proves to have equivalent performance to
or outperform previous strong baselines.


2     M ATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND

We consider a standard RL setting, the discounted infinite-horizon MDP (X , A, P, r, ρ, γ) with state
space X , action space A, a transition kernel P : X ×A → M(X ), a reward function r : X ×A → R,
starting state distribution ρ ∈ M(X ) and a discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1) (Puterman, 1994; Sutton &
Barto, 2018). For a space Y we use M(Y ) to denote the set of probability measures over the space.
Our goal is to learn a policy π : X → M(A) that maximizes the discounted sum of future rewards
                                            ∞
                                            X
                              ∗
                            π ∈ arg max           EP π [γ t r(xt , at )|x0 ∼ ρ] ,                      (1)
                                     π∈Π    t=0

where actions are sampled according to the policy and new states according to the transition kernel.

2.1   O FF - POLICY VALUE FUNCTION LEARNING

As an intermediate objective, many algorithms attempt to simplify the direct policy optimization
problem by first learning a policy value function Qπ , which is defined via a recursive equation
                    Qπ (x, a) = r(x, a) + γEx′ ∼P(·|x,a),a′ ∼π(·|x′ ) [Qπ (x′ , a′ )] .                (2)

The policy can then be incrementally improved by picking πk+1 (x) ∈ arg maxa∈A Qπk (x, a) at
every time step k. In practice, Qπ and π are often parameterized as neural networks and learned
from data. To increase the sample efficiency of the algorithm, it is common to store all collected
interaction data independent of the collection policy in a replay buffer D = {(xt , at , rt , xt+1 )Tt=0 }.
As the Q-value only depends on the policy via the policy evaluation at the next state, it is possible


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 Figure 1: A visualization of the core
                                                                 issue we investigate. Even if a replay
                                                                 buffer contains good coverage for two
                              Space covered under
                                                                 policies (πold and πnew ) starting from
                                         ...
                                                                 ρ = x0 , this does not guarantee that
                                                                 it contains a transition for executing
                                                                 an action under the new policy on a
                                                                 state visited under the old. However,
                                               ...
                                                                 this state-action pair’s value estimate is
                                    Space covered under
                                                                 used to update the value of state x0 via
                                                                 Equation 3, without being grounded in
                                                                 an observed transition.

to estimate Q-values from past interaction data by minimizing the fitted Q-learning objective
                       T                                       i 2
                   1 X                  h
      L Q̂ D, π =         Q̂(xt , at ) − rt + γ Q̂ (xt+1 , a′ )           with a′ ∼ π(·|xt+1 ) .       (3)
                  |D| t=0                                       sg


Here [·]sg denotes the stop gradient operation introduced to avoid the double sampling bias and all
data contained in the replay buffer is colored blue. However, the Q value at the next state xt+1 is
evaluated with an action a′ that is not guaranteed to be in the replay memory, as the target policy
can be different from the policy used to gather the sample. This means that we require the Q value
to generalize to potentially unseen actions. We provide a visualization of this issue in Figure 1.

3     I NVESTIGATING THE ROOT CAUSE OF UNSTABLE Q LEARNING

Minimizing Equation 3 finds the policy Q function over a replay buffer with sufficient coverage of
all states and actions that this policy visits. However, in most continuous control RL algorithms (Lil-
licrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018), this update is interleaved with policy
update steps . The data in D then necessarily becomes off-policy as training progresses.
This means that the number of actor and critic optimization steps needs to be balanced with gath-
ering new data. Obtaining new on-policy data is vital to continually improve policy performance
(Ostrovski et al., 2021), but performing more update steps before gathering new data ensures that
the existing data has been used effectively to improve the policy. The replay ratio (Fedus et al.,
2020) or update-to-data (UTD) ratio (Nikishin et al., 2022), which governs the number of gradient
steps per environment step, is therefore a vital hyperparameter.
Naively training with high UTD ratios can lead to collapse in off-policy deep RL (Nikishin et al.,
2022). We conjecture that one of the major causes of the instability of high UTD off-policy learning
are wrong Q values on unobserved actions. This is a well-known problem for off-policy TD learn-
ing (Baird, 1995; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996; Sutton et al., 2016; Ghosh & Bellemare, 2020). To
differentiate the problem from overfitting to the training distribution, we use the term misgeneral-
ization to highlight the importance of the distribution shift in causing the issue. Our experiments in
Subsection 3.2 show that generalization to on-policy actions is more difficult than generalization to
a validation dataset that follows the training distribution, and that higher UTDs exacerbate the issue.

3.1    ACTION DISTRIBUTION SHIFT CAN CAUSE OFF - POLICY Q VALUE DIVERGENCE

To highlight the role that on-policy actions play in stabilizing Q value learning, we show an analysis
the stability of Q learning with linear features. The core ideas follow Sutton et al. (2016) and are
also explored by Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1996); Sutton (1988). We assume that the Q function is
parameterized with fixed features and weights as Q(x, a) = ϕ(x, a)⊤ θ. Let X and A be the sizes of
the state and action space respectively. Let P ∈ RX·A×X be the matrix of transition probabilities
from state-action pairs to states. A policy can then be expressed as a mapping Π ∈ RX×X·A from
states to the likelihood of taking each action. R ∈ RX·A is the vector of rewards. Dπ ∈ RX·A×X·A
is a matrix where the main diagonal contains the discounted state-action occupancies of P π starting


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 dog walk                              dog walk – Q value                       dog walk – Reward                          dog walk – Q/Reward
               10.0                                           300                                     1000                                        100                           UTD 1
                           On-policy
                                                                                                                                                                                UTD 8
                           Val
                7.5                                           225                                      750                                         75                           UTD 16
Q value loss               Train

                5.0                                           150                                      500                                         50


                2.5                                            75                                      250                                         25


                0.0                                             0                                        0                                          0
                   0.0     0.5        1.0    1.5        2.0      0.0   0.5     1.0    1.5       2.0       0.0   0.5    1.0        1.5     2.0        0.0    0.5    1.0    1.5      2.0
                           Environment steps ×106                       Environment steps     ×106              Environment steps       ×106                Environment steps    ×106

                                                                                                                       1
                                  1


Figure 2: Left: the train, validation, and on-policy validation error of the Q function at UTD 1.
Right: the Q values and return curves of TD3 agents across different UTD 1, 8, and 16.


from ρ. If we assume access to a mixed replay buffer D = {Dπ1 , . . . , Dπn } gathered with
                                                                    S
different policies, the Q learning loss for a target policy Π can be written as
                                                                       n h
                                                                       X                                                            2 i
                                                          L(θ) =             Dπi Φ⊤ θ − [R + γP ΠΦ⊤ θ]sg                                      .                                  (4)
                                                                       i=1

The stability of learning with this loss can be analyzed using the gradient flow
                                                                       n
                                                                       X                                                   n
                                                                                                                           X
                                                        θ̇ = −2Φ             Dπi (I − γP Π) Φ⊤ θ + 2Φ                             D πi R .                                       (5)
                                                                       i=1                                                  i=1

This
Pn gradient     flow is guaranteed to to be stable around a fixed point θ∗ if the key matrix
         πi
  i=1  D    (I −  γP Π) is positive definite (Sutton, 1988). Details and a proof of the following state-
ment are provided in Appendix C. We can decompose the key matrix and see that the positive
definiteness depends on the difference in policy between the replay buffer and the target policy
                                       n
                                       X                                      n
                                                                              X                                        n
                                                                                                                       X
                                                   πi                                    πi
                                             D          (I − γP Π) =                 D        (I − γP Πi ) + γ                   Dπi P (Πi − Π) .                                (6)
                                       i=1                                    i=1                                          i=1
                                                                              |               {z                }      |                 {z                }
                                                                                     positive definite                            no guarantees

In general, we can provide no guarantees for the second term outside of the on-policy case (Πi = Π)
where it becomes 0. The stability depends on the difference between the target policy and the data-
collection policies. If the target policy takes actions which are not well covered under the training
policies, the remainder can be non positive definite. This also matches the intuition that learning
fails if we simply do not have sufficient evidence for the Q function of unobserved actions.
When using features, the eigenvalue conditions on the key matrix are only sufficient, not necessary,
as the features can allow for sufficient generalization between observed and unobserved state-action
pairs. In deep RL, the features ϕ are updated alongside with the weights, making it hard to provide
definitive mathematical statements on stability. With good function approximation, we could hope
that the learned value function generalizes correctly to unseen actions. In the next section we inves-
tigate this for a non-trivial task from the DMC suite and highlight that, while the value function does
not diverge irrecoverably, good generalization is not guaranteed either.

3.2                      E MPIRICAL Q VALUE ESTIMATION WITH OFF - POLICY DATA

In environments with large state-action space, ensuring coverage is difficult. To investigate whether
learning is stable nonetheless, we train a model-free TD3 agent on the dog walk environment (Tun-
yasuvunakool et al., 2020a). The architecture is presented in Subsection 4.1, and is regularized to
prevent catastrophic divergence (Hussing et al., 2024; Nauman et al., 2024a) and uses clipped dou-
ble Q learning (Fujimoto et al., 2018). This means it uses the most common techniques which are
designed to prevent misgeneralization and overestimation.
While training a TD3 agent (Fujimoto et al., 2018), we save transitions in a validation buffer with
a 5% probability. At regular intervals we compute the critic loss on this validation set. In addition,
we reset our simulator to each validation state and sample an action from the target policy. We then


                                                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


simulate the ground truth on-policy transition and compute the loss over these. This allows us to test
how well our value function generalizes to target policy state-action pairs (as depicted in Figure 1).
The results are presented in Figure 2 and show a gap both between the train and validation sets, as
well as the validation and the on-policy sets. While we use the on-policy state-actions to update
the Q value, these estimates are not actually consistent with the environment. Furthermore, the Q
value overestimation grows with increasing UTDs. This phenomenon was previously discussed in
the context of over-training on limited data (Hussing et al., 2024) .
The experiments show that the problem outlined in Subsection 3.1 is not merely a mathematical
curiosity, but that Q value generalization to out-of-replay-distribution actions is difficult in practice,
and becomes more difficult with increasing update ratios. Even though full divergence is not ob-
served as new data is continually added to the replay buffer, it takes a long time for the effects of
severe early overestimation to dissipate.

3.3   P REVIOUS ATTEMPTS TO COMBAT MISGENERALIZATION AND OVERESTIMATION

Prior strategies that deal with misgeneralization can be grouped into three major directions: archi-
tectural regularization to prevent divergence of the value function, pessimism or ensemble learning
to combat overestimation, and networks resets to restart learning. While all of these interventions
help to some degree, they each either do not solve the problem in full or cause additional issues. We
outline highly related work here and provide an additional related work section in Appendix B.
Architectural regularization Architecture changes (Hussing et al., 2024; Nauman et al., 2024a;b;
Lyle et al., 2024) and auxiliary feature learning losses (Schwarzer et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2023;
Ni et al., 2024; Voelcker et al., 2024) are largely reliable interventions, and have shown to pro-
vide improvements without much drawbacks in prior work. However, as Hussing et al. (2024) and
our experiment presented in Subsection 3.2 highlight, by themselves they can mitigate catastrophic
overestimation and divergence, but do not guarantee proper generalization.
Pessimism and ensembles To combat overestimation directly, the most prominent approach in
continuous action spaces is Clipped Double Q Learning (Fujimoto et al., 2018). Here, a Q value
estimate is obtained from two independent estimates Q̂1 and Q̂2 . If the error of the two critic
estimators is assumed to be independent noise on the true critic estimate then using the minimum
over both estimates is guaranteed to underestimate the true critic value in expectation. However, in
complex settings this assumption on the the error of the critic estimates may not hold.
Ensembles (Lan et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Hiraoka et al., 2022; Farebrother et al., 2023) or
online tuning of the rate of pessimism (Moskovitz et al., 2021) have been proposed to obtain tighter
lower bounds on the Q value. However, these strategies can be expensive as redundant models or
hyperparameter tuning are needed. As a simpler strategy, recent works have also employed clipping
to obtain an upper bound of the Q function to prevent divergence (Fujimoto et al., 2024).
Resetting Finally, network resets been shown to mitigate training problems (Nikishin et al., 2022;
D’Oro et al., 2023; Schwarzer et al., 2023; Nauman et al., 2024b) in high UTD regimes. However,
in cases where the agent fails to explore any useful parts of the state space within the reset interval,
restarting the learning process will not improve performance (Hussing et al., 2024). This makes
tuning the resetting interval both important and potentially difficult and no tuning recipes have been
presented. Resetting is also a potentially hazardous strategy in real-world applications, where re-
executing a random policy might be costly or infeasible due to safety constraints. Finally, it heavily
relies on the assumption that all past interaction data can be kept in the replay buffer.
Data generation Lu et al. (2024) attempts to combat failures of high UTD learning by supple-
menting a replay buffer with data generated from a trained diffusion model. This idea is inspired by
the hypothesis that failure to learn in high-UTD settings is caused by a lack of data (Nikishin et al.,
2022). The method, SynthER, improves learning accuracy on simple tasks in the DMC benchmark.
However, we demonstrate that simply adding more data is insufficient to combat misgeneralization
by comparing SynthER to MAD-TD in Appendix B and Subsection E.4.
All of these strategies are somewhat able to alleviate the problem of out-of-distribution value esti-
mation, yet none of them directly address the issue at the root. In the next chapter, we present an
alternate approach that aims to directly regularize the action value estimates under the target policy.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     M ITIGATION VIA MODEL - GENERATED SYNTHETIC DATA

As value functions misgeneralize due to lack of sufficient on-policy data, we propose to obtain
synthetic data from a learned model instead. However, model-based RL can also cause problems
such as compounding world model errors and optimistic exploitation of errors in the learned model.
By using both real and model-generated data, we can trade-off these issues: on-policy data improves
the value function and limits the impact of off-policy distribution shifts, while using only a limited
number of model-generated samples prevents model errors from deteriorating the value estimates.
Our approach builds on the TD3 algorithm (Fujimoto et al., 2018) and uses an update ratio of 8 by
default. Our critic is updated with both model-based and real data following the DYNA framework
(Sutton, 1990). More precisely, we replace a small fraction α of samples {x, a, r, x′ } in each batch
with samples from a learned model p̂ starting from the same state {x, π(x), r̂, x̂′ } with r̂, x̂′ ∼
p̂(·|x, π(x)). In our experiments, α is set to merely 5%. We found that this small amount provides
competitive performance across a wide range of values (compare Subsection E.3). We term this
approach Model-Augmented Data for Temporal Difference learning (MAD-TD).
Model vs Q function generalization We expect that a learned models will yield better general-
ization than the Q function for two reasons. First, the policy is updated each step to find an action
that maximizes the value function. This means we are effectively conducting an adversarial search
for overestimated values. The model’s reward and state estimation error on the other hand are inde-
pendent of this process. We test the adversarial robustness of our model-augmented value functions
in Subsection 5.3. Second, our experiment shows that value functions primarily diverge at the be-
ginning of training. In these cases, coverage is low and on-policy state-action pairs are often not
available. Obtaining a slightly wrong, yet converging value estimate can then be more useful than a
diverging one. Even as more data is gathered, new policies might not revisit old states with a high
likelihood. Therefore even as training continues we expect the model data to provide some benefit.

4.1   D ESIGN CHOICES AND TRAINING SETUP

Our model is based on the successful TD-MPC2 model (Hansen et al., 2024) combined with the
deterministic actor-critic algorithm TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018). We aim to reduce the complexity
of TD-MPC2 to the minimal necessary components to achieve strong learning in the DM Control
suite, and thus forgo added exploration noise, SAC, ensembled critics, and longer model rollout for
training or policy search. We outline several design choices here and refer to Section D for more
detail. We additionally ablate our version of the model against TD-MPC2 in Subsection E.5.
Encoder: Like TD-MPC2, we parameterize the state with a learned encoder ϕ : X → Z with a
SimNorm nonlinearity (Lavoie et al., 2023). This transformation groups a latent vector into groups
of k entries and applies a softmax transformation over each group. This bounds the norm of the
features, which has been shown aid with stable training (Hussing et al., 2024; Nauman et al., 2024a).
Critic representation and loss: We use the HL-Gauss transformation to represent the Q function
(Farebrother et al., 2024). The critic loss is the cross-entropy between the estimated Q function’s
categorical representation and the bootstrapped TD estimate. To stabilize learning, we initialize the
critic network towards predicting 0 for all states.
Model loss: The world model predicts the next state latent representation and the observed reward
from a given encoded state ϕ(x) and action a. The loss has three terms: the cross-entropy loss over
the SimNorm representation of the encoded next state, the MSE between the reward predictions, and
the cross-entropy between the next state critic estimate and the predicted state’s critic estimate. This
final term replaces the MuZero loss in TD-MPC2 with a simplified variant based on the IterVAML
loss (Farahmand, 2018). We provide the exact mathematical equations for the loss in Appendix D.
Training: We train the architecture by interleaving one environment step with one round of updates
with a varying number of gradient steps governed by the UTD parameter. For each update step, a
new mini-batch is sampled independently from a replay buffer of previously collected experience.
We found that varying the number of update steps only for the critic and actor while keeping the
update ratio for the model and encoder updates at 1 leads to significantly more stable learning.
Run-time policy improvement with MPC: Following the approach outlined by Hansen et al.
(2022), the learned model can also be used at planning time to obtain a better policy. Using the model

                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   dog run                               dog walk                                                     dog stand                                                   dog trot
                 1000                                    1000                                      1000                                                              1000


                  750                                     750                                       750                                                               750
Episode reward

                  500                                     500                                       500                                                               500


                  250                                     250                                       250                                                               250


                    0                                       0                                         0                                                                 0
                     0.0     0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0       0.0   0.5     1.0      1.5      2.0       0.0                     0.5       1.0       1.5         2.0       0.0          0.5           1.0      1.5         2.0
                             Environment steps ×106                Environment steps ×106                                      Environment steps ×106                                 Environment steps ×106


                                                            MAD-TD (mb UTD 1)             MAD-TD ( UTD 8)                                MAD-TD (UTD 16)
                                                            Model-free (UTD 1)            Model-free (UTD 8)                             Model-free (UTD 16)

                                                                                              1


Figure 3: Return curves for the dog tasks with differing UTD values. The return increases or remains
stable when training with MAD-TD. Without model data, the performance decreases under high
UTD. MPC is turned off in these runs to cleanly evaluate the impact of model data on critic learning.


for MPC at planning time exploits the same benefit of models as the critic learning improvement:
we obtain a model-corrected estimate of the value function and choose our policy accordingly. As
we only train our model for one step, we also conduct the MPC rollout for one step into the future.

5                       E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We conduct all of our experiments on the DeepMind Control suite (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020b).
Following Nauman et al. (2024b)’s recommendations we focus our main comparisons and ablations
on the two hardest settings, the humanoid and dog environments (which we will refer to as the
hard suite). In Subsection E.8 we furthermore show results for the metaworld benchmark (Yu et al.,
2019). Implementation details can be found in Appendix D. Unless stated otherwise we evaluate
MAD-TD with a UTD of 8 and use the same hyperparameters across all tasks.
Note that even though we refer to training MAD-TD without using model data for the critic as
“model-free”, the algorithm still benefits from the model through feature learning which has proven
to be a strong regularization technique in high UTD settings (Schwarzer et al., 2023). All main result
curves are aggregated across 10 seeds per task. We plot mean and bootstrapped confidence intervals
for the mean at the 95% certainty interval. For aggregated plots, we use the library provided by
Agarwal et al. (2021). Additional comparisons on more environments are presented in Appendix E.

5.1                        I MPACT OF USING MODEL - GENERATED DATA

We first repeat the experiment presented in Subsec-                                                                         10.0
                                                                                                                                       dog walk – model-free
                                                                                                                                                                            10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      dog walk – model-based
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   On-policy
tion 3.2 and show the results in Figure 4. Using                                                                                                                                                                   Val
                                                                                                                             7.5                                             7.5                                   Train
model-based data closes the gap between on-policy
                                                                                                             Q value loss


and validation loss. We also observe that the ini-                                                                           5.0                                             5.0
tial Q overestimation disappears, which is consistent
                                                                                                                             2.5                                             2.5
across all hard environments (see Subsection E.1).
This provides evidence that we are indeed able to                                                                            0.0                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                0.0     0.5       1.0    1.5         2.0        0.0         0.5       1.0     1.5        2.0
overcome the unseen action challenge.                                                                                                   Environment steps ×106                              Environment steps ×106
                                                                                                                                                                       1

Performance with and without model data at Figure 4: Mean loss values with and without
varying UTD ratios: In Figure 3 we present the generated data (see Figure 2) for UTD 1.
impact of using model-based data across different
UTD ratios. Humanoid results are found in Subsection E.2. As is directly evident, across the dog
tasks, we observe stagnating or deteriorating performance when increasing the update ratio, consis-
tent with reports in prior work. However, when using a small fixed amount of model generated data,
this trend is reversed across all tested environments, with performance improving or at least remain-
ing consistent. We find that with model-based data, training is stable across a range of UTDs, even
beyond those tested in recent high UTD work (Nauman et al., 2024b). We also note that we observe
only limited benefits from increasing the UTD ratio when properly mitigating misgeneralization,
except for the highly challenging dog run task.


                                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Comparison with baselines: As our method combines model-free and model-based updates, we
compare our method against both TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2024), a strong model-based baseline,
and BroNet (Nauman et al., 2024b), a recent algorithm proposed for high UTD learning. Since
Nauman et al. (2024b) and Hansen et al. (2024) trained with differing numbers of action repeats,
and we found that the performance does not cleanly translate between these regimes, we present our
method both with an action repeat value of 1 and 2. Some hyperparameters are adapted to the AR=1
setting (compare Table 2). The results are presented in aggregate in Figure 5, with per environment
curves show in Subsection E.6 for hard tasks and Subsection E.7 for a wider range of DMC tasks..
We find that our method performs on par or above previous methods, and strikingly it is able to
achieve higher returns faster than both TD-MPC2 and BRO.

5.2   P ERFORMANCE AND STABILITY IMPACT OF RESETTING

Resetting comparison: To investigate if our technique enables more              500


                                                                                       Per Timestep Average Regret
stable training, we set up an experiment to test the effects of resetting on
                                                                                375
our method. Figure 6 presents aggregate results comparing our approach
and BRO, both with and without resetting. Across all tasks we find that         250
resetting barely improves MAD-TDs performance with the tested hy-
perparameters. Benefits can only be observed on some seeds and can              125                  MAD-TD
most likely be attributed to restarting the exploration process (Hussing                             BRO
et al., 2024). However, the BRO algorithm is not able to achieve reliable         0
                                                                                  0.00 0.25   0.50   0.75  1.00
                                                                                                                                             6
performance without resets. These results highlight that mitigating the                Environment steps ×10

problems related to incorrect generalization of the value function stabi-                                                        1



lize training, and that these problems are likely a major cause of the fail- Figure 7: Mean average
ure of high UTD learning in the DMC tasks. Conjectured problems like regret (↓) on the hard
the primacy bias effect (Nikishin et al., 2022) need to be carefully investi- suite. Lower regret cor-
gated as we do not find evidence that a primacy bias impacts MAD-TD’s responds to faster, more
performance in the DMC environments. Our work of course does not stable training. MAD-
preclude the existence of phenomena such as loss of stability in different TD outperforms BRO.
environments, architectures, or training setups. More discussion on this can be found in Appendix B.
Continued training: To highlight the pitfalls of resets, we employ a common RL theory metric
the per timestep average regret
                                          1 XT −1 ∗
                                Reg(T ) =           (R − Rt ) ,
                                          T    t=0

where Rt denotes the approximate cumulative return in episode t and R∗ the optimal return. We use
the maximum return any of the algorithms achieved R̂∗ as a lower bound on the optimal return R∗ .
Regret quantifies how much better the algorithm could have performed throughout training. In other
words, in situations where continued learning is crucial, such as many safety critical applications,
regret might be a better measure of performance. It captures not only how good the final policy is,
but also how well the algorithm adapts over time, and minimizes mistakes. We present a comparison


                                     Median                          IQM                                                    Mean
 MAD-TD (AR=2, 2 mil)
    BRO (AR=2, 2 mil)
TD-MPC2 (AR=2, 2 mil)
 MAD-TD (AR=2, 1 mil)
    BRO (AR=2, 1 mil)
TD-MPC2 (AR=2, 1 mil)
 MAD-TD (AR=1, 1 mil)
    BRO (AR=1, 1 mil)
                               600       750   900   450     600           750   900                                 500   600       700   800
                                                            Scores

                                                1
Figure 5: Performance comparison on the hard tasks for MAD-TD, BRO, and TD-MPC, with vary-
ing number of steps and action repeat settings. MAD-TD is on par with all baselines, has higher
mean and IQM when trained for 2 million time steps and action repeat 2, and strongly outperforms
TD-MPC2 and BRO at 1 million time steps with action repeat 2.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   Median                                         IQM                                            Mean
      MAD-TD (AR=2, reset)
    MAD-TD (AR=2, no reset)
         BRO (AR=2, reset)
       BRO (AR=2, no reset)
    MAD-TD (AR=1, no reset)
         BRO (AR=1, reset)
       BRO (AR=1, no reset)
                                                      250          500        750                     400      600             800                       450      600        750
                                                                                                        Scores

                                                1
Figure 6: Resetting evaluation of MAD-TD and BRO.   Lighter color denotes performance with reset,
and darker without. While MAD-TD’s performance only increases slightly when adding resetting,
BRO is unable to achieve strong performance in and setting without resetting.

                                   dog run                                dog walk                                    dog stand                                  dog trot
                 1000                                    1000                                      1000                                        1000


                  750                                     750                                       750                                         750
Episode reward


                  500                                     500                                       500                                         500


                  250                                     250                                       250                                         250


                    0                                       0                                         0                                           0
                     0.0     0.5     1.0     1.5   2.0       0.0    0.5      1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0       0.0     0.5     1.0      1.5    2.0
                             Environment steps ×106                 Environment steps ×106                      Environment steps ×106                     Environment steps ×106



                                                      MAD-TD (model-based)            Model-free             MAD-TD (model-based, random actions)

                                                                                               1


Figure 8: Return curves for the dog tasks when using on-policy, random and no model-generated
data. When generating model-based data with random actions, performance of MAD-TD drops
close to the model-free baseline, highlighting the importance of on-policy actions.


of MAD-TD and the resetting-based BRO in Figure 7 using an action repeat of 1. The results show,
even though both algorithms are close in their final return, their training behavior differs vastly.
MAD-TD has lower regret showcasing its strength in continued deployment.

5.3                        F URTHER EXPERIMENTS AND ABLATIONS

To further test our approach, we present two additional experiments on the hard suite: changing the
action selection for the model data generation, and reducing the model performance. In addition, we
investigate the impact of using model based data on the smoothness of the learned value function.
Off-policy action selection in the model: To verify that the improvement in performance is due to
the off-policy correction provided by the model, we repeat the hard suite experiments with a UTD of
8 and 5% model data, but we chose actions randomly from a uniform distribution across the action
space. The results are presented in Figure 8. They highlight that random state-action pairs do not
provide the necessary correction and the performance deteriorates to that of the model-free baseline.
Smaller model networks: To study the effect of the modeling capacity on our method, we ablate
the size of the latent model by reducing the network size across the hard suite. The results are
presented in Figure 9. We see that reducing the network size has an immediate and monotonic impact
on the performance of our approach, suggesting that the model learning accuracy and prediction
capacity is indeed vital for our approach to function well. However, even with small models of 64
hidden units, we still see some benefits from training with the model predicted data.
Perturbation robustness of the model-corrected values: To motivate our method, we conjectured
that one problem with training actor-critic methods is that the actor conducts a quasi adversarial
search for overestimated values on the learned critic.1 To substantiate this claim, we used the iterated
projected gradient method Madry et al. (2018) to estimate the smoothness of the learned value
                  1
                      Quasi because the actor is not constrained to find an action close to the replay buffer sample.


                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          Median                                        IQM                                                 Mean
 MAD-TD [512,512]
 MAD-TD [256,256]
  MAD-TD [64,64]
  MAD-TD [16,16]
Model-free [512,512]
                                   700        800           900            640       720         800              880         600     660         720   780
                                                                                  Scores

Figure 9: Performance evaluation when reducing1 the model size of the latent model in MAD-TD.
The performance predictably drops with decreasing hidden layer size, however only strongly de-
creasing the model size below 64 reduces the performance below that of the model-free ablation.


functions on the humanoid environments at a UTD of 1 with and without model data. The results
in Figure 10 show that not using any model data leads to value functions with higher oscillations,
either across the whole training run (humanoid run), or in the middle of training (stand and walk).

6   C ONCLUSION
Our experiments allow us to conclude that wrong generalization of the value functions to unseen,
on-policy actions is indeed a major challenge that prevents stable off-policy RL, both in theory
and in practice. Model-Augmented Data for Temporal Difference learning (MAD-TD) is able to
leverage the learning abilities of latent self-prediction models to provide small, yet crucial amounts
of on-policy transitions which help stabilize learning across the hardest DeepMind Control suite
tasks. With a relatively simple model architecture and learning algorithm, this method proves to be
on par with, or even outperform other strong approaches, and does not rely on mechanisms such as
value function ensembles or resetting which were previously conjectured to be necessary for stable
learning in high UTD regimes. However, we highlight limitations of the approach in Appendix A.
Our work opens up exciting avenues for future work. The issue of poor generalization in off-policy
learning can likely be tackled with other approaches such as diffusion models (Lu et al., 2024) or
better pre-trained foundation models, and our presented experiments provide an important baseline
for such work. Furthermore, while we have purposefully kept our approach as simple as possible
to validate our hypothesis, many ideas from the model-based RL community such as uncertainty
quantification (Chua et al., 2018; Talvitie et al., 2024), multi-step corrections (Buckman et al., 2018;
Hafner et al., 2020), or policy gradient estimation (Amos et al., 2021) can be combined with our
approach. Our insight that surprisingly little data is necessary to achieve strong correction can likely
be leveraged in these other approaches as well to trade-off model errors and value function errors
more carefully. Finally, while we chose the data to roll out in our models at random, our insights
can likely be combined with ideas from the area of DYNA search control (Pan et al., 2019; 2020) to
select datapoints on which the correction has the most impact.

                               humanoid run                           humanoid walk                                      humanoid stand
                10.0                                      150.0                                          100


                    7.5                                   112.5                                           75
              MSE


                    5.0                                    75.0                                           50


                    2.5                                    37.5                                           25


                    0.0                                     0.0                                            0
                       0.0   0.5    1.0     1.5     2.0        0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5       2.0         0.0         0.5    1.0   1.5    2.0
                             Environment steps ×106                  Environment steps ×106                             Environment steps ×106



                                                           MAD-TD (model-based)             Model-free

                                                                            1


Figure 10: Magnitude of the difference between Q(x, π(x)) and Q(x, ã), where ã is an adversarial
perturbation of π(x). We see larger perturbation for the runs without model correction data.


                                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the members of the TISL and AdAge labs at the University of Toronto for enlightening
discussions. We acknowledge the great help of Evgenii Opryshko, Taylor Killian, Amin Raksha,
Maria Attarian, and Heiko Carrasco for providing detail feedback on our writing, and Evgenii for
help with the experiments. For the adversarial experiments, we received helpful advice from Avery
Ma, Jonas Guan, and Anvith Thudi.
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback and in-depth discussion.
EE and MH’s research was partially supported by the Army Research Office under MURI award
W911NF20-1-0080, the DARPA Triage Challenge under award HR00112420305, and by the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania ASSET center. Any opinions, findings, and conclusion or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of DARPA,
the Army, or the US government.
AMF acknowledges the funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC) through the Discovery Grant program (2021-03701). CV acknowledges the fund-
ing from the Ontario Graduate Scholarship. Resources used in preparing this research were pro-
vided, in part, by the Province of Ontario, the Government of Canada through CIFAR, and compa-
nies sponsoring the Vector Institute.

R EFERENCES
Zaheer Abbas, Rosie Zhao, Joseph Modayil, Adam White, and Marlos C. Machado. Loss of plas-
  ticity in continual deep reinforcement learning, 2023.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 2021.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Reincarnating reinforcement learning: Reusing prior computation to accelerate progress. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Brandon Amos, Samuel Stanton, Denis Yarats, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. On the model-based
  stochastic value gradient for continuous reinforcement learning. In Learning for Dynamics and
  Control. PMLR, 2021.
Oron Anschel, Nir Baram, and Nahum Shimkin. Averaged-DQN: Variance reduction and stabiliza-
  tion for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Leemon Baird. Residual algorithms: Reinforcement learning with function approximation. In
  Machine learning proceedings 1995, pp. 30–37. Elsevier, 1995.
Philip J. Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learn-
  ing with offline data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Jacob Buckman, Danijar Hafner, George Tucker, Eugene Brevdo, and Honglak Lee. Sample-
  efficient reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expansion. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 2018.
Johan Samir Obando Ceron, João Guilherme Madeira Araújo, Aaron Courville, and Pablo Samuel
  Castro. On the consistency of hyper-parameter selection in value-based deep reinforcement learn-
  ing. Reinforcement Learning Journal, 2024.
Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-
  learning: Learning fast without a model. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2020.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learn-
  ing in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2018.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pierluca D’Oro, Max Schwarzer, Evgenii Nikishin, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Marc G Bellemare, and
  Aaron Courville. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning by breaking the replay ratio barrier.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Eric Eaton, Marcel Hussing, Michael Kearns, and Jessica Sorrell. Replicable reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Mohamed Elsayed, Qingfeng Lan, Clare Lyle, and A Rupam Mahmood. Weight clipping for deep
 continual and reinforcement learning. In Reinforcement Learning Conference, 2024.

Amir-massoud Farahmand. Iterative value-aware model learning. In Advances in Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems, 2018.

Amir-massoud Farahmand, André Barreto, and Daniel Nikovski. Value-Aware Loss Function for
 Model-based Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, 2017.

Jesse Farebrother, Joshua Greaves, Rishabh Agarwal, Charline Le Lan, Ross Goroshin,
  Pablo Samuel Castro, and Marc G Bellemare. Proto-value networks: Scaling representation learn-
  ing with auxiliary tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Jesse Farebrother, Jordi Orbay, Quan Vuong, Adrien Ali Taiga, Yevgen Chebotar, Ted Xiao, Alex Ir-
  pan, Sergey Levine, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aleksandra Faust, Aviral Kumar, and Rishabh Agarwal.
  Stop regressing: Training value functions via classification for scalable deep RL. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

William Fedus, Prajit Ramachandran, Rishabh Agarwal, Yoshua Bengio, Hugo Larochelle, Mark
 Rowland, and Will Dabney. Revisiting fundamentals of experience replay. In International Con-
 ference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.

Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2052–2062, 2019.

Scott Fujimoto, Wei-Di Chang, Edward Smith, Shixiang Shane Gu, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  For sale: State-action representation learning for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Dibya Ghosh and Marc G Bellemare. Representations for stable off-policy reinforcement learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Raj Ghugare, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Benjamin Eysenbach, Sergey Levine, and Russ Salakhutdinov.
  Simplifying model-based RL: Learning representations, latent-space models, and policies with
  one objective. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. In Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2020.

Christopher Grimm, André Barreto, Satinder Singh, and David Silver. The value equivalence prin-
  ciple for model-based reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020.

Christopher Grimm, André Barreto, Gregory Farquhar, David Silver, and Satinder Singh. Proper
  value equivalence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, 2018.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. TD-MPC2: Scalable, robust world models for con-
  tinuous control. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Nicklas A Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Temporal difference learning for model predictive
  control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.

Hado van Hasselt. Double q-learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2010.

Takuya Hiraoka, Takahisa Imagawa, Taisei Hashimoto, Takashi Onishi, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka.
  Dropout q-functions for doubly efficient reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.

Marcel Hussing, Claas A Voelcker, Igor Gilitschenski, Amir-massoud Farahmand, and Eric Eaton.
 Dissecting deep rl with high update ratios: Combatting value divergence. In Reinforcement Learn-
 ing Conference, 2024.

Maximilian Igl, Gregory Farquhar, Jelena Luketina, Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson.
 Transient non-stationarity and generalisation in deep reinforcement learning. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Garud N. Iyengar. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research, 2005.

Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-
 based policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.

Tyler Kastner, Murat A Erdogdu, and Amir-massoud Farahmand. Distributional model equivalence
  for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023.

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.

Qi Kuang, Zhoufan Zhu, Liwen Zhang, and Fan Zhou. Variance control for distributional rein-
  forcement learning. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.

Aviral Kumar, Rishabh Agarwal, Dibya Ghosh, and Sergey Levine. Implicit under-parameterization
  inhibits data-efficient deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2021.

Qingfeng Lan, Yangchen Pan, Alona Fyshe, and Martha White. Maxmin q-learning: Controlling the
  estimation bias of q-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Sascha Lange, Thomas Gabel, and Martin Riedmiller. Batch reinforcement learning. In Reinforce-
  ment learning: State-of-the-art, pp. 45–73. Springer, 2012.

Samuel Lavoie, Christos Tsirigotis, Max Schwarzer, Ankit Vani, Michael Noukhovitch, Kenji
  Kawaguchi, and Aaron Courville. Simplicial embeddings in self-supervised learning and down-
  stream classification. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Hojoon Lee, Hanseul Cho, HYUNSEUNG KIM, DAEHOON GWAK, Joonkee Kim, Jaegul Choo,
  Se-Young Yun, and Chulhee Yun. Plastic: Improving input and label plasticity for sample efficient
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hojoon Lee, Hyeonseo Cho, Hyunseung Kim, Donghu Kim, Dugki Min, Jaegul Choo, and Clare
  Lyle. Slow and steady wins the race: Maintaining plasticity with hare and tortoise networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Qiyang Li, Aviral Kumar, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient deep reinforcement learning
  requires regulating overfitting. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Ângelo G. Lovatto, Thiago P. Bueno, Denis D. Mauá, and Leliane N. de Barros. Decision-aware
   model learning for actor-critic methods: When theory does not meet practice. In ”I Can’t Believe
   It’s Not Better!” at NeurIPS Workshops, 2020.
Cong Lu, Philip Ball, Yee Whye Teh, and Jack Parker-Holder. Synthetic experience replay. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Clare Lyle, Mark Rowland, and Will Dabney. Understanding and preventing capacity loss in rein-
  forcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo Avila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney.
  Understanding plasticity in neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Khimya Khetarpal, Hado van Hasselt, Razvan Pascanu, James Martens,
  and Will Dabney. Disentangling the causes of plasticity loss in neural networks, 2024.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.
Hamid Maei, Csaba Szepesvari, Shalabh Bhatnagar, Doina Precup, David Silver, and Richard S
  Sutton. Convergent temporal-difference learning with arbitrary smooth function approximation.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 22, 2009.
Diganta Misra. Mish: A self regularized non-monotonic activation function. British Machine Vision
  Conference, 2020.
Thomas M. Moerland, Joost Broekens, Aske Plaat, and Catholijn M. Jonker. Model-based rein-
  forcement learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 16(1), 2023.
Ted Moskovitz, Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Michael Arbel, and Michael Jordan. Tacti-
  cal optimism and pessimism for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Michal Nauman, Michał Bortkiewicz, Piotr Miłoś, Tomasz Trzcinski, Mateusz Ostaszewski, and
 Marek Cygan. Overestimation, overfitting, and plasticity in actor-critic: the bitter lesson of rein-
 forcement learning. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Michal Nauman, Mateusz Ostaszewski, Krzysztof Jankowski, Piotr Miłoś, and Marek Cygan. Big-
 ger, regularized, optimistic: scaling for compute and sample-efficient continuous control. Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024b.
Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, Erfan Seyedsalehi, Michel Ma, Clement Gehring, Aditya Ma-
  hajan, and Pierre-Luc Bacon. Bridging state and history representations: Understanding self-
  predictive rl. To appear in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2022.
Evgenii Nikishin, Junhyuk Oh, Georg Ostrovski, Clare Lyle, Razvan Pascanu, Will Dabney, and
  André Barreto. Deep reinforcement learning with plasticity injection. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Arnab Nilim and Laurent El Ghaoui. Robust control of markov decision processes with uncertain
  transition matrices. Operations Research, 2005.

Georg Ostrovski, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Will Dabney. The difficulty of passive learning in deep
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Yangchen Pan, Hengshuai Yao, Amir-massoud Farahmand, and Martha White. Hill climbing on
  value estimates for search-control in dyna. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence, 2019.

Yangchen Pan, Jincheng Mei, and Amir-massoud Farahmand. Frequency-based search-control in
  dyna. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Andrew Patterson, Samuel Neumann, Raksha Kumaraswamy, Martha White, and Adam White.
  Cross-environment hyperparameter tuning for reinforcement learning. Reinforcement Learning
  Journal, 2024.

Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforce-
  ment learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.

Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, Inc., USA, 1st edition, 1994. ISBN 0471619779.

Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839), 2020.

Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bach-
 man. Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive representations. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Max Schwarzer, Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, Marc G Bellemare, Rishabh Agar-
 wal, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Bigger, better, faster: Human-level Atari with human-level effi-
 ciency. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

David Silver, Hado van Hasselt, Matteo Hessel, Tom Schaul, Arthur Guez, Tim Harley, Gabriel
  Dulac-Arnold, David Reichert, Neil Rabinowitz, Andre Barreto, et al. The predictron: end-to-end
  learning and planning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.

Ghada Sokar, Rishabh Agarwal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Utku Evci. The dormant neuron phe-
  nomenon in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.

Richard S Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine learning,
  1988.

Richard S Sutton. Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting based on approximat-
  ing dynamic programming. In Machine learning Proceedings. 1990.

Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018.

Richard S Sutton, A Rupam Mahmood, and Martha White. An emphatic approach to the problem
  of off-policy temporal-difference learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(73):1–29,
  2016.

Erin J Talvitie, Zilei Shao, Huiying Li, Jinghan Hu, Jacob Boerma, Rory Zhao, and Xintong Wang.
  Bounding-box inference for error-aware model-based reinforcement learning. Reinforcement
  Learning Journal, 2024.

Sebastian Thrun and Anton Schwartz. Issues in using function approximation for reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the 1993 Connectionist Models Summer School, 1993.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dhruva Tirumala, Thomas Lampe, Jose Enrique Chen, Tuomas Haarnoja, Sandy Huang, Guy Lever,
  Ben Moran, Tim Hertweck, Leonard Hasenclever, Martin Riedmiller, Nicolas Heess, and Markus
  Wulfmeier. Replay across experiments: A natural extension of off-policy RL. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
John Tsitsiklis and Benjamin Van Roy. Analysis of temporal-diffference learning with function
  approximation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 1996.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
  Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and tasks for
  continuous control. Software Impacts, 6, 2020a.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
  Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and tasks for
  continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020b. ISSN 2665-9638. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100022.
Giuseppe Vietri, Borja Balle, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Steven Wu. Private reinforcement learn-
  ing with PAC and regret guarantees. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2020.
Claas A Voelcker, Victor Liao, Animesh Garg, and Amir-massoud Farahmand. Value gradient
  weighted model-based reinforcement learning. International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022.
Claas A Voelcker, Tyler Kastner, Igor Gilitschenski, and Amir-massoud Farahmand. When does
  self-prediction help? understanding auxiliary tasks in reinforcement learning. In Reinforcement
  Learning Conference, 2024.
Ran Wei, Nathan Lambert, Anthony D McDonald, Alfredo Garcia, and Roberto Calandra. A unified
  view on solving objective mismatch in model-based reinforcement learning. Transactions on
  Machine Learning Research, 2024.
Wolfram Wiesemann, Daniel Kuhn, and Breç Rustem. Robust markov decision processes. Mathe-
 matics of Operations Research, 38(1):153–183, 2013.
Guowei Xu, Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Xiyao Wang, Zhecheng Yuan, Tianying Ji, Yu Luo,
  Xiaoyu Liu, Jiaxin Yuan, Pu Hua, Shuzhen Li, Yanjie Ze, Hal Daumé III, Furong Huang, and
  Huazhe Xu. Drm: Mastering visual reinforcement learning through dormant ratio minimization.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, 2019.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.
Yi Zhao, Wenshuai Zhao, Rinu Boney, Juho Kannala, and Joni Pajarinen. Simplified temporal
  consistency reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    L IMITATIONS
The core limitation of our methodology relies in the assumption that a sufficiently strong environ-
ment model can indeed be learned online. While a proof of feasibility exists for many interesting RL
benchmarks in the forms of the Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2021) and TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2024)
lines of work among many others, for a completely novel environment a practitioner will still have
to test if current model learning schemes are sufficient to achieve strong control policies.
Furthermore, we can only generate data from the states visited under a past policy. There is still a
difference between the state distribution of the replay buffer, and the target policy stationary distri-
bution. While this difference does not seem to lead to catastrophic failures in the DMC benchmarks,
the distribution shift might be more problematic in other environments.
Finally, we observe an interesting failure cases of our idea: in some simple environments we sur-
prisingly observe worse performance with our network architectures compared to the BRO baseline.
This issue is likely due to the fact that the TD-MPC2 architecture is tuned for learning in complex
high-dimensional problems, which leaves it potentially over-parameterized on simple tasks.
While our work shows that reduced learning capacity due to plasticity does not seem to be the major
contributor to learning problems in benchmarks like DMC, that does not exclude the possibility
that related issues appear nonetheless after accounting for the off-policy value estimation problem.
We did not test increasing the reset ratio even further as other prior work has done, as we already
observed no benefits from increasing the replay ratio from 8 to 16 in most of our experiments and
performed on par or beyond previous baselines. Issues in reinforcement learning are often entangled
in a complex way, e.g. a failure in exploration can lead to stagnant data in the replay buffer which
prevents a critic from further improving its estimates, leading to worse exploration and so on.

B    E XTENDED RELATED WORK
Beyond mitigating value function overestimation and unstable learning (see Subsection 3.3), other
works have approached the difficulty of off-policy learning and high update ratios from other per-
spectives. Here, we survey further related papers which do not provide direct background for this
work, but are nonethless relevant as either alternative approaches or possible enhancements.

Other ways of incorporating off-policy data Having access to more diverse data has been shown
to be beneficial for reinforcement learning, when this data is carefully used to mitigate the problems
resulting from off-policy training. Ball et al. (2023) show that a large offline replay buffer can
be used to improve training by sampling online training batches both from online data and offline
data, and labelling the offline transitions with a reward of 0. Agarwal et al. (2022) and Tirumala
et al. (2024) also highlight that previously collected replay buffers can be used to improve training
performance on agents. In this work, we focus on the online setting where we do not have access to
a replay buffer of previously collected transitions. These ideas however can easily be combined by
e.g. training a model from an available larger offline data buffer.

SynthER Another related approach to obtain additional data is the diffusion-based method pro-
posed by (Lu et al., 2024). In this work, the replay buffer data is augmented with additional samples
obtained from a diffusion model that is trained on the replay buffer. The underlying hypothesis of
SynthER is that the failure of high-UTD learning stems mostly from a lack of diverse data in the
replay buffer. They demonstrate on the easier DM Control tasks that simply adding data from a
generative model can be beneficial to learning. This is opposed to our hypothesis, which claims
that high-UTD learning is difficult specifically due to the lack of off-policy action corrections. As
SynthER does not provide results on the hard DMC tasks, we reran the original code to compare our
claims The results and a discussion can be found in Subsection E.4.
In the online off-policy regime, Fujimoto et al. (2024) recently proposed TD7, which incorporates
similar architectural choices to MAD-TD. They use a self-predictive encoder to learn good state
representations, but concatenate them with the state and action representation provided by the envi-
ronment to limit loss of information. This design choice proved to be beneficial but would require
learning a observation-space next-state prediction, which is difficult in practice, especially in high
dimensional environments. To address the policy distribution shift, TD7 does not update the actor


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


at every timestep but instead collects several full trajectories with a fixed policy and then conducts
update steps afterwards. However, this interval still needs to be balanced as a hyperparameter. TD7
was not evaluated on DMC, which is why we do not present a comparison.

Model-based reinforcement learning As surveying model-based reinforcement learning is a
rather sizable tasks, we refer readers to the survey by (Moerland et al., 2023) for reference. Decision-
aware latent models such as the one Hansen et al. (2024) and we use have been studied specifically
in several different variants. Silver et al. (2017) proposes a latent model that is trained with TD
learning, which provides the basis for the Schrittwieser et al. (2020) algorithm. The addition of a
latent self-prediction loss was first proposed by Li et al. (2023) to stabilize learning problems with
the TD learning loss. This interplay was further studied by Ni et al. (2024) and Voelcker et al. (2024)
in recent works.
From a theoretical angle, decision-aware losses similar to those used in MuZero where first studied
by Farahmand et al. (2017) and Farahmand (2018). Grimm et al. (2020) and Grimm et al. (2021)
further study the loss landscape and minimizers of such losses, while Kastner et al. (2023) studied
the extension of the loss to distributional settings.
While previous works have called the stability of the VAML loss into question (Lovatto et al., 2020;
Voelcker et al., 2022), we find that it is stable and performant when combined with the HL-Gauss
representation Farebrother et al. (2024) and an auxiliary BYOL style loss Grill et al. (2020); Li et al.
(2023). Compared to MuZero it is also significantly easier to implement.
A more thorough overview on the topic of decision-aware learning can be found by Wei et al. (2024).

Offline reinforcement learning In the context of batch reinforcement learning or offline RL
(Lange et al., 2012; Fujimoto et al., 2019), the action distribution shift is a known phenomenon.
The main counter to the problem however does not rely on closing the generalization gap, but on ex-
plicit pessimistic regularization Jin et al. (2021). Such pessimistic regularization has been shown to
be highly detrimental in online RL, as it removes the capability for the agent to explore its environ-
ment efficiently (D’Oro et al., 2023; Hussing et al., 2024). In offline RL, authors have explored the
capability of models to provide some improvements to generalization (Yu et al., 2020). However, in
online RL the community has mostly relied on the hope that additional optimistic exploration based
on the value function will close the generalization gap without explicit interventions. We show that
this is not the case.

Loss of plasticity A phenomenon that was originally reported in continual learning is that ten-
dency for neural network based agents to lose their ability to learn over time. This phenomenon
has also been investigated in the realms of RL (Igl et al., 2021), as RL can effectively be thought
of as a type of continual learning problem. Sometimes the phenomenon is referred to as plasticity
loss (Lyle et al., 2021; Abbas et al., 2023). As highlighted before, we do not find strong evidence
for the primacy bias or loss of plasticity during our experiments on the DMC suite.
However, that does not imply that the phenomenon does not exist. In fact, we believe that resolving
stability issues such as those presented in our paper will help us to better isolate other nuanced issues
such as plasticity loss more clearly. Previous studies have identified and combated plasticity loss
using feature rank maximization (Kumar et al., 2021), regularization (Lyle et al., 2023), additional
neural network copies (Nikishin et al., 2024), minimizing dormant neurons (Sokar et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2024), various neural network architecture changes (Lee et al., 2023), slow and fast network
updates (Lee et al., 2024) or weight clipping (Elsayed et al., 2024).
It is unclear how many improvements obtained by these changes can be explained by divergence
effects (Hussing et al., 2024) or stability issues such as those established in our work as there seems
to be a non-zero overlap in techniques that combat either. Nauman et al. (2024a) have argued that
many RL training problems can be difficult to disentangle from the plasticity loss phenomenon.
An interesting direction of future work is to test for plasticity loss with well regularized off-policy
value function learning, for instance by combining our method with separate solutions established
for plasticity loss such as those from Lyle et al. (2024).
It is also not unlikely that the training dynamics of the state-based dense-reward tasks on the DMC
suite are more benign than those found in Atari games. Many works on plasticity loss have stud-


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ied sparse image-based control tasks with pure Q learning approaches, such as DQN on the Atari
benchmark (Sokar et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024). The problem may be more prevalent when replay
buffers cannot be maintained in full and the RL setting becomes a true continual learning problem.

Other stability perspectives Our work studies the stability of losses during training. We highlight
that forgoing resetting decreases regret as the executed policies are more stable in the sense that they
are not reset at regular intervals. We also highlight that model-generated data can somewhat improve
the stability of policies against adversarial attacks. However, there are other notions of stability that
should be considered relevant and that are orthogonal to our work. Here we will give a non extensive
overview into the different directions that exist as a starting point for the reader. For instance from
a theoretical perspective, stability can be formulated as differential privacy (Vietri et al., 2020) or
algorithmic replicability to obtain identical policies (Eaton et al., 2023). From a theoretical as well
as practical perspective, issues such as robustness to adversarial attacks (Nilim & Ghaoui, 2005;
Iyengar, 2005; Wiesemann et al., 2013; Pinto et al., 2017). Finally, from an empirical perspective
robustness to hyperparameters (Ceron et al., 2024; Patterson et al., 2024) and attempts at variance
reduction to get more reliable solutions (Anschel et al., 2017; Kuang et al., 2023) can be considered
notions of stability.

C     M ATHEMATICAL DERIVATIONS
While the proof by Sutton (1988) which we use as a basis discusses the stationary distribution of the
Markov chain P π , we define our loss in terms of a discounted state-action occupancy. We therefore
briefly prove an auxiliary result to extend the analysis to the case of discounted state occupancy
probabilities. Note that when we talk about positive-definiteness, we use a definition which applies
to potentially non-symmetric matrices, and merely requires that u⊤ Xu 0 for all vectors u.
Proposition 1. Let P be a stochastic matrix. Define the discounted state occupancy distribution µ
of P for some starting state distribution ρ and some discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1) as
                                                     ∞
                                                     X
                                       ⊤
                                     µ = (1 − γ)           γ n ρ⊤ P n .
                                                     n=0

Let D be a diagonal matrix whose entries correspond to the discounted state occupancy distribution.
Then the matrix D(I − γP ) is positive definite.

Proof. First, note that
                                     (1 − γ)ρ⊤ + γµ⊤ P = µ⊤
by the definition of µ and the properties of the infinite sum. Therefore,
                                               1
                                     µ⊤ P =      (µ − (1 − γ)ρ) .
                                               γ

Sutton (1988) asserts that a matrix A is positive definite iff A + A⊤ is positive definite. Furthermore,
if the diagonal entries of a symmetric matrix are positive and its off-diagonal entries are negative,
then it suffices to show that the row and column sums of matrix are positive.
For
                                   D(I − γP ) + (I − γP ⊤ )D⊤
the off-diagonal terms are clearly non positive as D is diagonal. On the main diagonal, we have
2(µi − γp(i|i)µi ) which is positive as p(µi |µi ) ≤ 1. It now suffices to show that the row and
column sums of D(I − γP ) are positive. For the row sum, we can make use of the fact that P is a
stochastic matrix, so
                                D(I − γP )1 = D(1 − γ1) ≥ 1 .

For the column sum, we make use of the fact that 1D = µ. Then
                                            1
                      µ(I − γP ) = µ − γ      (µ − (1 − γ)ρ) = (1 − γ)ρ ≥ 1 .
                                            γ
As ρ is a probability vector the final inequality holds for all γ ∈ [0, 1).


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


All conditions presented by Sutton (1988) hold, and therefore we have D(I−γP ) is positive definite.


To derive the gradient flow stability conditions in Subsection 3.1, we first restate the loss function
                                     n
                                     X   πi ⊤
                                        D Φ θ − [R + γP π Φ⊤ θ]sg )2 .

                          L(θ) =                                                                     (7)
                                     i=1


The stability of learning with this loss can be analyzed using the gradient flow (Sutton et al., 2016).
To derive the gradient flow, we compute the gradient of the loss function with regard to the parame-
ters θ. As the loss has a relatively simple quadratic form and the derivative is a linear transformation,
it decomposes nicely as
                                        n
                                        X
                                              Dπi Φ⊤ θ − R − γP ΠΦ⊤ θ

                     ∇θ L(θ) = 2Φ                                                                    (8)
                                        i=1
                                        Xn
                                              Dπi (I − γP Π) Φ⊤ θ − R

                               = 2Φ                                                                  (9)
                                        i=1
                                        Xn                                n
                                                                          X
                               = 2Φ           Dπi (I − γP π ) Φ⊤ θ − 2Φ          D πi R .           (10)
                                        i=1                               i=1


Using the equation for the gradient flow θ̇ = − η2 ∇θ L(θ) with learning rate η2 , we obtain
                                     n
                                     X                                 n
                                                                       X
                       θ̇ = −ηΦ            Dπi (I − γP π ) Φ⊤ θ + ηΦ         D πi R   ,             (11)
                                     i=1                               i=1


This gradient flow is guaranteed
                      Pn         to be stables (meaning it will not diverge around the stationary point
θ∗ ) if the key matrix i=1 Dπi (I − γP Π) is positive definite (Sutton, 1988).
We can decompose our key matrix into the on-policy key matrix and a remainder easily
                              n
                              X
                                    Dπi (I − γP Π)                                                  (12)
                              i=1
                              Xn
                          =         Dπi (I − γP Π + γP Πi − γP Πi )                                 (13)
                              i=1
                              Xn                           X
                          =         Dπi (I − γP Πi ) + γ         Dπi P (Πi − Π) .                   (14)
                              i=1                          i=1


The first group of summands are all positive definite, following Proposition 1. As the sum of positive
definite matrices is positive definite, the claim stands.
However, the second group has no such guarantees. This highlights the role that the target policy
action selection plays in the stability of Q learning.

D    I MPLEMENTATION
Our experiments are implemented in the jax library to allow for easy parallelization of multiple ex-
periments across seeds. All networks follow the standard architecture from Hansen et al. (2024) with
two changes: instead of using an ensemble of critics, we opt for a single double critic pair. We also
do not use a stochastic policy, instead simply using a deterministic network with a tanh activation as
used in Lillicrap et al. (2016); Fujimoto et al. (2018). Full hyperparameters are presented in Table 2
and the architecture can be found in Table 1. We use mish activation functions (Misra, 2020) and
the Adam optimizer to train our models (Kingma & Ba, 2015). For reference, our code is available
at https://github.com/adaptive-agents-lab/mad-td.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Encoder Φ        Dense Layer              Mish            in size=|X |, out size=512
                            Dense Layer           Simnorm(8)                out size=512
                            Dense Layer              Mish         in size=512 + |A|, out size=512
        Latent Model F      Dense Layer              Mish                   out size=512
                            Dense Layer           Simnorm(8)                out size=512
                            Dense Layer              Mish         in size=512 + |A|, out size=512
            Q head Q̂       Dense Layer              Mish                   out size=512
                            Dense Layer                –                     out size=1
                            Dense Layer              Mish            in size=512, out size=512
             Actor π̂       Dense Layer              Mish                   out size=512
                            Dense Layer              tanh                   out size=|A|

                            Table 1: Network architecture for MAD-TD.

 Parameter                                                    Parameter
 Initial steps (Random policy)              5000              HL-Gauss vmax                         150 · AR
 Batch size                                 512               HL-Gauss num bins                        151
 RL learning rate                         0.0003              Model data proportion                   0.95
 Model learning rate                      0.0003              Reset interval (where applicable)      200000
 Encoder learning rate                    0.0001              Model & encoder update ratio              1
 Soft update τ                             0.995              Actor & critic update ratio            varying
 Discount factor γ                          0.99              MPC number of samples                    512
 Model forward prediction steps       1 (4 for AR=1)          MPC iterations                            6
 Gradient clipping                          10.0              MPC top k                                64
 HL-Gauss vmin                          −150 · AR             MPC temperature                          0.5

Table 2: Hyperparameters. We adapted three parameters to the action repeat = 1 setting, as the
magnitude of the reward changes.


Loss functions: As we use the HL-Gauss representation (Farebrother et al., 2024) for the critic,
the loss is the cross-entropy between the estimated Q function’s categorical representation Qrep and
the bootstrapped TD estimate,
                                          m
                                          X
                                  LQ =            TD(Q̂rep )i log Q̂repi ,
                                          i=1

where the indices i denote the positions of the categorical vector representation used by HL-Gauss.
This is the same loss that is used for the two-hot encoding in Hansen et al. (2024), the only difference
is the target encoding function. For more details, see Farebrother et al. (2024).
We use a latent encoder ϕ : X × A → Z that maps into the SimNorm space, the space of
n k-dimensional simplices (Lavoie et al., 2023). Writing p̂ for the learned world model and
r̂, x̂′ ∼ p̂(|x, a) for reward and next latent-state samples, the loss for our model and encoder is
             Lmodel (x, a, r, x′ ) = Lrew (x, a, r) + Lforward (x, a, x′ ) + LQ (x, a, r, x′ )         (15)
                                              2
                   Lrew (x, a, r) = (r − r̂)                                                           (16)
                                       n·k
                                       X
                        Lforward = −         ϕ(x′ )i log x̂′i ,                                        (17)
                                       i=1

where the index i is again element-wise across the simplex representation used for the latent state.
Note that we propagate the critic learning gradients into the encoder only for the real data and not
the model generated one to prevent instability.

Baseline results We took available results from Nauman et al. (2024b) and Hansen et al. (2024)
for all plots where possible, and used the official implementation of BRO to rerun the experiments
without resetting and with differing action repeats. Other hyperparameters were left as-is.



                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E                           F URTHER RESULTS
E.1                            Q VALUE OVERESTIMATION

                                  dog run – Return                           dog run – Q value                          dog walk – Return                        dog walk – Q value
                 1000                                           200                                         1000                                      300
Episode reward


                      750                                       150                                          750                                      225

                      500                                       100                                          500                                      150

                      250                                        50                                          250                                       75

                        0                                         0                                            0                                        0
                         0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5      2.0      0.0       0.5     1.0   1.5       2.0        0.0     0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0      0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5     2.0
                                                        ×106                                       ×106                                       ×106                                     ×106
                                 dog stand – Return                         dog stand – Q value                          dog trot – Return                        dog trot – Q value
                 1000                                           300                                         1000                                      300
Episode reward


                      750                                       225                                          750                                      225

                      500                                       150                                          500                                      150

                      250                                        75                                          250                                       75

                        0                                         0                                            0                                        0
                         0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5      2.0      0.0       0.5     1.0   1.5       2.0        0.0     0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0      0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5     2.0
                                                        ×106                                       ×106                                       ×106                                     ×106
                                humanoid run – Return                     humanoid run – Q value                      humanoid walk – Return                   humanoid walk – Q value
                      300                                       100                                         1000                                      200
     Episode reward


                      225                                        75                                          750                                      150

                      150                                        50                                          500                                      100

                       75                                        25                                          250                                       50

                        0                                         0                                            0                                        0
                         0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5      2.0      0.0       0.5     1.0   1.5       2.0        0.0     0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0      0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5     2.0
                                                        ×106                                       ×106                                       ×106                                     ×106
                               humanoid stand – Return                   humanoid stand – Q value
                 1000                                           200
Episode reward


                      750                                       150

                      500                                       100

                      250                                        50

                        0                                         0
                         0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5      2.0      0.0       0.5     1.0   1.5        2.0
                                  Environment steps ×106                     Environment steps ×106

                                                                      MAD-TD (UTD 1)              MAD-TD (UTD 8)               MAD-TD (UTD 16)
                                                                      Model-free (UTD 1)          Model-free (UTD 8)           Model-free (UTD 16)

                                                                                                        1


                                               Figure 11: Return curves and Q values with differing UTD values.

We plot the return curves and corresponding Q estimates for different UTD values and with and
without model-generated data on the hard suite. The results are presented in Figure 11. As we
see, across all tasks the model free variant strongly overestimates the Q values, especially in the
beginning.


                                                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2         H UMANOID RESULTS

                                  humanoid run                                 humanoid walk                          humanoid stand
                       300                                     1000                                        1000


                       225                                      750                                         750
      Episode reward


                       150                                      500                                         500


                        75                                      250                                         250


                         0                                        0                                           0
                          0.0   0.5    1.0     1.5       2.0       0.0       0.5       1.0   1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5     1.0      1.5   2.0
                                Environment steps ×106                       Environment steps ×106                  Environment steps ×106



                                  MAD-TD (model-based)                MAD-TD (model-free)          MAD-TD (model-based, random actions)

                                                                                   1

Figure 12: Return curves for the humanoid tasks when using on-policy (blue), random (green) and
no model-generated data (orange). The observed performance impacts are comparable to the dog
case.


For several experiments, we only showed the dog results from the main suite to avoid cluttering
the main body of the paper. The corresponding humanoid results are presented in Figure 11 and
Figure 12, corresponding to Figure 3 and Figure 8 respectively. As the plots highlight, the main
insights transfer across the hard tasks.


                                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3                        D IFFERENT QUANTITIES OF MODEL DATA

We evaluate using more model data to update our value functions and provide the results in Fig-
ure 13. Aggregated scores are presented in Figure 14. We observe that the majority of gain is
obtained when using limited amount of model data, and larger amounts only provided limited gains
in some humanoid runs. When using high amounts of model generated data, we observe deteriorat-
ing performance, which implies that the agent learns to exploit the model instead of solving the real
task. This observation is consistent with similar observation about model exploration in prior work
Zhao et al. (2023).

                                   dog run                                    dog walk                                  dog stand                                 dog trot
                 1000                                      1000                                         1000                                      1000
Episode reward


                  750                                       750                                          750                                       750


                  500                                       500                                          500                                       500


                  250                                       250                                          250                                       250


                    0                                         0                                            0                                         0
                     0.0     0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5     1.0      1.5      2.0       0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5     1.0      1.5     2.0
                                                   ×106                                         ×106                                      ×106                                     ×106
                               humanoid run                               humanoid walk                            humanoid stand
                 1000                                      1000                                         1000
Episode reward


                  750                                       750                                          750


                  500                                       500                                          500


                  250                                       250                                          250


                    0                                         0                                            0
                     0.0     0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5     1.0      1.5      2.0       0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5     2.0
                             Environment steps ×106                     Environment steps ×106                    Environment steps ×106
                                                                      MAD-TD (0%)                MAD-TD (5%)             MAD-TD (25%)
                                                                      MAD-TD (50%)               MAD-TD (75%)            MAD-TD (95%)
                                                                      MAD-TD (100%)

                                                                                                    1


Figure 13: Return curves on the hard suite. We see that using substantially more data than 5% does
not improve performance in a statistically significant way.


                                                                                                        Mean
                                                                       0%
                                                                       5%
                                                                      25%
                                                                      50%
                                                                      75%
                                                                      95%
                                                                     100%
                                                                                               250       500                 750
                                                                                                  Scores

             Figure 14: Aggregate statistics for differing values
                                                              1   of α (amount of model data used) at UTD 8.


                                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4                        S YNTH ER COMPARISON

We present a comparison of our method and SynthER on the hard DMC tasks. Results can be found
in Figure 15.
As is evident from the lack of strong performance of SynthER, merely increasing the amount of
generated data is insufficient to combat the failure of learning at high UTD. We find that the Q values
of the SynthER agents quickly diverge on all tasks in which it is unable to learn. This strengthens
our hypothesis that for hard tasks, off-policy action correction is vital to achieve strong results.

                                    dog run                                    dog walk                                     dog stand                                    dog trot
                 1000                                         1000                                        1000                                          1000
Episode reward


                  750                                          750                                         750                                           750


                  500                                          500                                         500                                           500


                  250                                          250                                         250                                           250


                    0                                            0                                           0                                             0
                    0.00     0.25    0.50     0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25     0.50     0.75     1.00      0.00    0.25     0.50      0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25     0.50     0.75     1.00
                                                     ×106                                        ×106                                          ×106                                        ×106
                                humanoid run                              humanoid walk                                humanoid stand
                 1000                                         1000                                        1000
Episode reward


                  750                                          750                                         750


                  500                                          500                                         500


                  250                                          250                                         250


                    0                                            0                                           0
                    0.00     0.25    0.50     0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25     0.50     0.75     1.00      0.00    0.25     0.50      0.75     1.00
                             Environment steps ×106                     Environment steps ×106                        Environment steps ×106



                                                                                           MAD-TD                Synther

                                                                                                      1


Figure 15: Performance curves for MAD-TD and SynthER on the hard DMC tasks. SynthER fails
to achieve nontrivial results on most tasks, only outperforming a random policy on the humanoid
walk and stand tasks.


                                                                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.5                        TD-MPC2 ABLATION

As described in the main paper, we simplify the base model of TD-MPC2 to improve the compu-
tational efficiency of the algorithm. This is necessary to conduct high UTD experiments. Here, we
present a direct comparison of the original TD-MPC2 model, and our adapted version (Figure 16).
We compare MAD-TD without any model generated data, at UTD 1, which corresponds to the stan-
dard setting of TD-MPC2. As pointed out in the main paper, all of our changes to the base model
boil down to setting different hyperparameters, such as the rollout length, to achieve faster learning.
We find that this does not significantly change the overall results achieved by the base model, and
we are therefore confident to attribute performance gains to our presented method.

                                   dog run                                    dog walk                                     dog stand                                   dog trot
                 1000                                        1000                                         1000                                       1000
Episode reward


                  750                                         750                                          750                                        750

                  500                                         500                                          500                                        500

                  250                                         250                                          250                                        250

                    0                                           0                                            0                                          0
                     0.0     0.5      1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                     ×106                                         ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                               humanoid run                              humanoid walk                               humanoid stand                                  hopper hop
                 1000                                        1000                                         1000                                       1000
Episode reward


                  750                                         750                                          750                                        750

                  500                                         500                                          500                                        500

                  250                                         250                                          250                                        250

                    0                                           0                                            0                                          0
                     0.0     0.5      1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                     ×106                                         ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                              acrobot swingup                                cheetah run                                  walker run                             quadruped run
                 1000                                        1000                                         1000                                       1000
Episode reward


                  750                                         750                                          750                                        750

                  500                                         500                                          500                                        500

                  250                                         250                                          250                                        250

                    0                                           0                                            0                                          0
                     0.0     0.5      1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                     ×106                                         ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                              finger turn hard                         pendulum swingup                              quadruped walk                                  reacher hard
                 1000                                        1000                                         1000                                       1000
Episode reward


                  750                                         750                                          750                                        750

                  500                                         500                                          500                                        500

                  250                                         250                                          250                                        250

                    0                                           0                                            0                                          0
                     0.0     0.5      1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                     ×106                                         ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                                   fish swim                                 hopper stand
                 1000                                        1000
Episode reward


                  750                                         750

                  500                                         500

                  250                                         250

                    0                                           0
                     0.0     0.5      1.0      1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                             Environment steps ×106                    Environment steps ×106


                                                                                TD-MPC2 (MAD-TD ablation)                 TD-MPC2

                                                                                                      1


Figure 16: Performance variation of the base MAD-TD model compared to TD-MPC2. Our changes
only very few times lead to lower performance which is acceptable given the large reduction in
computational cost.


                                                                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.6   MAD-TD, BRO, TD-MPC2 PER ENV ON THE HARD SUITE

We present the return curves for MAD-TD and the baselines per environment on the hard suite.
Figure 17 shows the results with action repeat 2 and Figure 18 with action repeat 1. Perhaps sur-
prisingly, the results of the algorithms are not fully consistent across this regime. Partially, this
can be explained by the fact that our method and TD-MPC2 were first developed in the regime of
action repeat 2, while BRO was only evaluated in the action repeat 1 setting. This suggests that
the performance of each method depends in a non-trivial fashion on hyperparameter tuning. Yet,
across both action repeat setting MAD-TD outperforms BRO without resetting consistently and
only under-performs any previous algorithm on the dog trot task in the action repeat 1 setting.

                                            dog run                                     dog walk                                       dog stand                                    dog trot
                           1000                                       1000                                         1000                                            1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                        750                                          750                                             750


                            500                                        500                                          500                                             500


                            250                                        250                                          250                                             250


                              0                                          0                                            0                                               0
                               0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5     2.0        0.0     0.5      1.0     1.5      2.0        0.0       0.5      1.0      1.5       2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0     1.5      2.0
                                                             ×106                                         ×106                                             ×106                                       ×106
                                        humanoid run                                humanoid walk                                 humanoid stand
                           1000                                       1000                                         1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                        750                                          750


                            500                                        500                                          500


                            250                                        250                                          250


                              0                                          0                                            0
                               0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0       0.0     0.5      1.0     1.5       2.0       0.0       0.5      1.0      1.5       2.0
                                     Environment steps ×106                       Environment steps ×106                         Environment steps ×106



                                                                                MAD-TD             TD-MPC2                BRO             BRO (no reset)

                                                                                                               1



                                                    Figure 17: Return curves with action repeat set to 2.


                                            dog run                                     dog walk                                       dog stand                                    dog trot
                           1000                                       1000                                         1000                                            1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                        750                                          750                                             750


                            500                                        500                                          500                                             500


                            250                                        250                                          250                                             250


                              0                                          0                                            0                                               0
                              0.00   0.25    0.50     0.75     1.00      0.00    0.25     0.50     0.75     1.00      0.00      0.25     0.50      0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25     0.50     0.75     1.00
                                                             ×106                                         ×106                                            ×106                                        ×106
                                        humanoid run                               humanoid walk                                  humanoid stand
                           1000                                       1000                                         1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                        750                                          750


                            500                                        500                                          500


                            250                                        250                                          250


                              0                                          0                                            0
                              0.00   0.25    0.50     0.75     1.00      0.00    0.25     0.50     0.75     1.00      0.00      0.25     0.50      0.75     1.00
                                     Environment steps ×106                       Environment steps ×106                         Environment steps ×106



                                                                                         MAD-TD              BRO                BRO (no reset)

                                                                                                               1



                                                    Figure 18: Return curves with action repeat set to 1.


We conjecture that the remaining gap in performance seems to be most likely attributable to explo-
ration and optimism. While we focus on learning accurate value functions, Bro contains several
components which are specifically designed to improve exploration. Investigating the tension be-
tween exploration and accurate value function fitting is an important direction for future work.
Bro and TD-MPC2 are explicitly evaluated without their exploration bonuses in separate evaluation
rollouts. We however do not conduct such as separate evaluation as we do not add any additional ex-
ploration noise to our training. When plotting training performance, the gap between MAD-TD and
Bro further closes, suggesting an important trade-off between test time and training performance.


                                                                                                            27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.7   R ESULTS ACROSS FURTHER DMC ENVIRONMENTS

We conducted more experiments on all DMC environments which were shown to benefit from the
interventions in prior work (D’Oro et al., 2023; Nauman et al., 2024b).

                                             dog run                                     dog walk                                   dog stand
          Episode reward   1000                                         1000                                       1000

                            750                                          750                                        750

                            500                                          500                                        500

                            250                                          250                                        250

                              0                                            0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                                             dog trot                               humanoid run                               humanoid walk
                           1000                                         1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                        750

                            500                                          500                                        500

                            250                                          250                                        250

                              0                                            0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                                      humanoid stand                                    hopper hop                            acrobot swingup
                           1000                                         1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                        750

                            500                                          500                                        500

                            250                                          250                                        250

                              0                                            0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                                           cheetah run                                  walker run                             quadruped run
                           1000                                         1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                        750

                            500                                          500                                        500

                            250                                          250                                        250

                              0                                            0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                                      finger turn hard                            pendulum swingup                            quadruped walk
                           1000                                         1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                        750

                            500                                          500                                        500

                            250                                          250                                        250

                              0                                            0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                       ×106                                         ×106
                                           reacher hard                                 fish swim                                  hopper stand
                           1000                                         1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                        750

                            500                                          500                                        500

                            250                                          250                                        250

                              0                                            0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                     Environment steps ×106                       Environment steps ×106                     Environment steps ×106


                                       MAD-TD (5%, MPC)                   MAD-TD (5%)               MAD-TD (0%, MPC)               MAD-TD (0%)

                                                                                         1

Figure 19: Return curves evaluating the impact of model-based data for critic learning and MPC.
Overall, MPC and model-based critic learning both stabilize the learning process, as conjectured.


                                                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             dog run                                      dog walk                                      dog stand
                           1000                                          1000                                       1000


          Episode reward
                            750                                           750                                        750

                            500                                           500                                        500

                            250                                           250                                        250

                              0                                             0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0        0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                            ×106
                                             dog trot                                humanoid run                                  humanoid walk
                           1000                                          1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                           750                                        750

                            500                                           500                                        500

                            250                                           250                                        250

                              0                                             0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0        0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                            ×106
                                      humanoid stand                                     hopper hop                               acrobot swingup
                           1000                                          1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                           750                                        750

                            500                                           500                                        500

                            250                                           250                                        250

                              0                                             0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0        0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                            ×106
                                           cheetah run                                   walker run                                quadruped run
                           1000                                          1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                           750                                        750

                            500                                           500                                        500

                            250                                           250                                        250

                              0                                             0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0        0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                            ×106
                                      finger turn hard                             pendulum swingup                                quadruped walk
                           1000                                          1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                           750                                        750

                            500                                           500                                        500

                            250                                           250                                        250

                              0                                             0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0        0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                            ×106
                                           reacher hard                                  fish swim                                     hopper stand
                           1000                                          1000                                       1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                           750                                        750

                            500                                           500                                        500

                            250                                           250                                        250

                              0                                             0                                          0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5      2.0       0.0   0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0      0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                     Environment steps ×106                        Environment steps ×106                         Environment steps ×106


                                           MAD-TD               MAD-TD (reset)            MAD-TD (no MPC)                  MAD-TD (no MPC, reset)

                                                                                          1

Figure 20: Return curves for the impact of resetting on MAD-TD with and without MPC. Without
MPC, resetting can still improve the performance, but with MPC, we see no significant benefits
from resetting across environments except pendulum. The hopper results highlight the importance
(and danger) of the reset interval, as seemingly the reset algorithm is not able to recover “in time”
to improve performance.


                                                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             dog run                                      dog walk                                   dog stand
                           1000                                         1000                                        1000


          Episode reward
                            750                                          750                                         750

                            500                                          500                                         500

                            250                                          250                                         250

                              0                                            0                                           0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                         ×106
                                             dog trot                                humanoid run                               humanoid walk
                           1000                                         1000                                        1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                         750

                            500                                          500                                         500

                            250                                          250                                         250

                              0                                            0                                           0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                         ×106
                                      humanoid stand                                     hopper hop                            acrobot swingup
                           1000                                         1000                                        1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                         750

                            500                                          500                                         500

                            250                                          250                                         250

                              0                                            0                                           0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                         ×106
                                           cheetah run                                   walker run                             quadruped run
                           1000                                         1000                                        1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                         750

                            500                                          500                                         500

                            250                                          250                                         250

                              0                                            0                                           0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                         ×106
                                      finger turn hard                             pendulum swingup                            quadruped walk
                           1000                                         1000                                        1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                         750

                            500                                          500                                         500

                            250                                          250                                         250

                              0                                            0                                           0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                                                ×106                                        ×106                                         ×106
                                           reacher hard                                  fish swim                                  hopper stand
                           1000                                         1000                                        1000
          Episode reward


                            750                                          750                                         750

                            500                                          500                                         500

                            250                                          250                                         250

                              0                                            0                                           0
                               0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0       0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5     2.0       0.0   0.5       1.0        1.5     2.0
                                     Environment steps ×106                        Environment steps ×106                     Environment steps ×106


                                                                          MAD-TD              TD-MPC2 ((AR=2!))

                                                                                          1

Figure 21: Comparison of MAD-TD and TD-MPC2 across more environments of the DMC suite.
We observe gains compared to TD-MPC2 in the hard tasks, especially in terms of early learning per-
formance, while TD-MPC2 has advantages on the pendulum swingup and acrobot swingup tasks.
These seem to be exploration and stability issues for which the longer model rollouts of TD-MPC2
seem to help.


                                                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.8   M ETAWORLD

To broaden the basis of comparison, we compare our method to BRO and TD-MPC2 on 9 selected
environments from the metaworld suite. Results can be found in Figure 22.
Overall, we observe that our method performs strongly on tasks in which the agent has access to
a dense reward, such as lever-pull and button press. MAD-TD demonstrates the ability to quickly
and stably bootstrap reward when available. When exploration is a challenge, learning can take
longer with MAD-TD. Strong exploration for high-UTD algorithms is not the focus of MAD-TD
and remains an open problem (Hussing et al., 2024). This is consistent with our core hypothesis:
high UTD learning benefits in cases where fitting a correct value function is challenging. In tasks
such as pick-place-wall the core challenge is exploration, as the agent receives no reward signal
for the majority of early training. We therefore cannot expect high UTD learning to improve the
performance in these tasks.
As pointed out, BRO and to a lesser extent TD-MPC2 have the benefit of exploring with optimism
bonuses and ensembled value functions. We removed these from our method to cleanly study the
impact of model generated data. However, improvements to exploration are mostly orthogonal to
our proposed method and can be freely combined in future work.
Finally, as also shown by Nauman et al. (2024b), there is a curious failure case of TD3 compared
to SAC in the case of environments with sparse rewards. In the absence of the entropy penalty
form the SAC loss function, the tanh policy of TD3 tends to saturate, which can stymie exploration
completely. This is, to the best of our knowledge, not discussed in the literature, and should be
investigated in future work.

                                             assembly                                      coffee-pull                                    coffee-push
                           1.00                                           1.00                                           1.00
          Episode reward


                           0.75                                           0.75                                           0.75

                           0.50                                           0.50                                           0.50

                           0.25                                           0.25                                           0.25

                           0.00                                           0.00                                           0.00
                              0.00   0.25      0.50       0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25         0.50    0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25       0.50       0.75     1.00
                                                                 ×106                                           ×106                                            ×106
                                            disassemble                                    lever-pull                                     button-press
                           1.00                                           1.00                                           1.00
          Episode reward


                           0.75                                           0.75                                           0.75

                           0.50                                           0.50                                           0.50

                           0.25                                           0.25                                           0.25

                           0.00                                           0.00                                           0.00
                              0.00   0.25      0.50       0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25         0.50    0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25       0.50       0.75     1.00
                                                                 ×106                                           ×106                                            ×106
                                       pick-place-wall                                           push                                        reach
                           1.00                                           1.00                                           1.00
          Episode reward


                           0.75                                           0.75                                           0.75

                           0.50                                           0.50                                           0.50

                           0.25                                           0.25                                           0.25

                           0.00                                           0.00                                           0.00
                              0.00   0.25      0.50       0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25         0.50    0.75     1.00      0.00   0.25       0.50       0.75     1.00
                                     Environment steps           ×106               Environment steps           ×106               Environment steps ×106


                                                                          MAD-TD                 BRO            TD-MPC

                                                                                             1

Figure 22: Performance comparison on Metaworld between MAD-TD, BRO, and TD-MPC2.
MAD-TD performs strongly on tasks which provide sufficient reward information to bootstrap the
value function quickly, while learning more slowly on sparse reward tasks. This is consistent with
the core goal of our algorithm, to stabilize and improve value function learning.


                                                                                           31
