Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S IMPLIFYING D EEP T EMPORAL D IFFERENCE L EARN -
ING

 Matteo Gallici∗ 1       Mattie Fellows∗ 2       Benjamin Ellis2
 Bartomeu Pou1,3         Ivan Masmitja4         Jakob Nicolaus Foerster2  Mario Martin1
 1                                           2
   Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya        University of Oxford
 3                                         4
   Barcelona Supercomputing Center           Institut de Ciències del Mar
 {gallici,mmartin}@cs.upc.edu
 {matthew.fellows,benjamin.ellis,jakob.foerster}@eng.ox.ac.uk
 bartomeu.poumulet@bsc.es masmitja@icm.csic.es

                                                A BSTRACT
             Q-learning played a foundational role in the field reinforcement learning (RL).
             However, TD algorithms with off-policy data, such as Q-learning, or nonlinear func-
             tion approximation like deep neural networks require several additional tricks to
             stabilise training, primarily a large replay buffer and target networks. Unfortunately,
             the delayed updating of frozen network parameters in the target network harms the
             sample efficiency and, similarly, the large replay buffer introduces memory and
             implementation overheads. In this paper, we investigate whether it is possible to
             accelerate and simplify off-policy TD training while maintaining its stability. Our
             key theoretical result demonstrates for the first time that regularisation techniques
             such as LayerNorm can yield provably convergent TD algorithms without the need
             for a target network or replay buffer, even with off-policy data. Empirically, we find
             that online, parallelised sampling enabled by vectorised environments stabilises
             training without the need for a large replay buffer. Motivated by these findings,
             we propose PQN, our simplified deep online Q-Learning algorithm. Surprisingly,
             this simple algorithm is competitive with more complex methods like: Rainbow
             in Atari, PPO-RNN in Craftax, QMix in Smax, and can be up to 50x faster than
             traditional DQN without sacrificing sample efficiency. In an era where PPO has
             become the go-to RL algorithm, PQN reestablishes off-policy Q-learning as a
             viable alternative. We open-source our code at: https://github.com/mttga/purejaxql.

1       I NTRODUCTION
In reinforcement learning (RL), the challenge of developing simple, efficient and stable algorithms
remains open. Temporal difference (TD) methods have the potential to be simple and efficient,
but are notoriously unstable when combined with either off-policy sampling or nonlinear function
approximation (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997). Starting with the introduction of the seminal deep
Q-network (DQN)(Mnih et al., 2013), many tricks have been developed to stabilise TD for use with
deep neural network function approximators, most notably: the introduction of batched learning
through a replay buffer (Mnih et al., 2013), target networks (Mnih et al., 2015), trust region based
methods (Schulman et al., 2015), double Q-networks (Wang & Blei, 2017; Fujimoto et al., 2018),
maximum entropy methods (Haarnoja et al., 2017; 2018) and ensembling (Chen et al., 2021). Out of
this myriad of algorithmic combinations, proximal policy optimisation (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017)
has emerged as the de facto choice for RL practitioners, proving to be a strong and efficient baseline
across popular RL domains. Unfortunately, PPO is far from stable and simple: PPO does not have
provable convergence properties for nonlinear function approximation and requires extensive tuning
and additional tricks to implement effectively (Huang et al., 2022a; Engstrom et al., 2020).
Recent empirical studies (Lyle et al., 2023; 2024; Bhatt et al., 2024) provide evidence that TD can be
stabilised without target networks by introducing regularisation such as BatchNorm (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015) and LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016; Nauman et al., 2024) into the Q-function approximator. Little
is known about why these techniques work or whether they have unintended side-effects. Motivated
by these findings, we ask: are regularisation techniques such as BatchNorm and LayerNorm the
key to unlocking simple, efficient and stable RL algorithms? To answer this question, we provide a
    ∗
        Equal Contribution.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rigorous analysis of regularised TD. We summarise our core theoretical contributions as: I) Introduce
a highly general and widely applicable analysis of TD stability; II) we show introducing LayerNorm
and ℓ2 regularisation into the Q-function approximator leads to provable convergence, stabilising
nonlinear and/or off-policy TD without the need for target networks or replay buffers.
Many applications in RL allow for multiple actions to be taken in an environment at once, solving a
parallel world problem. Guided by our theoretical insights, we develop a modern off-policy value-
based TD method which we call a parallelised Q-network (PQN): for simplicity, we revisit the original
Q-learning algorithm (Watkins, 1989), which updates a Q-function approximator without a target
network. A recent breakthrough in RL has been running the environment and agent jointly on the
GPU (Makoviychuk et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2022; Matthews et al., 2024b; Rutherford
et al., 2023; Lange, 2022). However, the replay buffer’s large memory footprint makes pure-GPU
training impractical with traditional DQN. With the goal of enabling Q-learning in pure-GPU setting,
we propose replacing a large replay buffer with a synchronous update across a large number of
parallel environments, reducing memory requirements. For stability, we integrate our theoretical
findings in the form of a regularised deep Q network. We provide a schematic of our proposed PQN
algorithm in Fig. 1d.
                                           New Experience           Actors        Environment        Learner
           Environment                                                                                                              Vectorised
                                                                              Environment
                                    Environment                                                                                    Environment
Interact                                               Replay           Environment
                                                                                         Agent
                        Learning                                                                                        Batched                  Learning
                                                       Buffer
                       Experience     Interact                                   Agent             Replay
                                                                                                   Buffer    Learning   Interact                  Batch
                                                                        Q-Network
            Q-Values                                Learning
                                                                                                              Batch
                                                                                                                                   Q-Network
                                     Q-Network                                                   Q-Network
                                                     Batch
                                                                                 Copy
                                                                                Weights


(a) Online Q-Learning                   (b) DQN                      (c) Distributed DQN                                           (d) PQN
Figure 1: Classical Q-Learning directly interacts with the environment and updates the learned Q-values at each
transition. In contrast, DQN stores experiences in a replay buffer and trains a Q-network using minibatches
sampled from this buffer. Distributed DQN enhances this approach by collecting experiences in parallel threads,
while a separate process continually trains the network (i.e. a learner module and multiple actors modules run
concurrently and independently). Similar to online Q-Learning, PQN trains a Q-network with the experiences
as they are collected in the same process, but conducts interactions and learning in batches.

To validate our theoretical results, we evaluated PQN in Baird’s counterexample, a challenging
domain that is provably divergent for off-policy methods (Baird, 1995). Our results show that PQN
can converge where non-regularised variants fails. We provide an extensive empirical evaluation
to test the performance of PQN in single-agent and multi-agent settings. Despite its simplicity, our
algorithm is competitive in a range of tasks; notably, PQN achieves high performances in just a few
hours in many games of the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013), competes
effectively with PPO on the open-ended Craftax task (Matthews et al., 2024a), and stands alongside
state-of-the-art Multi-Agent RL (MARL) algorithms, such as MAPPO in Overcooked (Carroll et al.,
2019) and Hanabi (Bard et al., 2020) and Qmix in Smax (Rutherford et al., 2023). Despite not
sampling from a large buffer of historic data, the faster convergence of PQN demonstrates that the
sample efficiency loss can be minimal. This positions PQN as a strong method for efficient and stable
RL in the age of deep vectorised Reinforcement Learning (DVRL).
We summarise our empirical contributions: I) we propose PQN, a simplified, parallelised, and
normalised version of DQN which eliminates the use of both large replay buffers and the target
network; II) we demonstrate that PQN is fast, stable, simple to implement, uses few hyperparameters,
and is compatible with pure-GPU training and temporal-based networks such as RNNs, and III)
our extensive empirical study demonstrates PQN achieves competitive results in significantly less
wall-clock time than existing state-of-the-art methods.
2      P RELIMINARIES
Let ∥·∥ denote the ℓ2 -norm and P(X ) the set of all probability distributions over a set X .
2.1 R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
In this paper, we consider the infinite horizon discounted RL setting, formalised as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) (Bellman, 1957; Puterman, 2014): M := ⟨S, A, PS , P0 , PR , γ⟩ with bounded
state space S, bounded action space A, transition distribution PS : S × A → P(S), initial state
distribution P0 ∈ P(S), bounded stochastic reward distribution PR : S × A → P([−rmax , rmax ])
where rmax ∈ R < ∞ and scalar discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1). An agent in state st ∈ S taking action
at ∈ A observes a reward rt ∼ PR (st , at ). The agent’s behaviour is determined by a policy that


                                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


maps a state to a distribution over actions: π : S → P(A) and the agent transitions to a new state
st+1 ∼ PS (st , at ). As the agent interacts with the environment through a policy π, it follows a
trajectory τt := (s0 , a0 , r0 , s1 , a1 , r1 , . . . st−1 , at−1 , rt−1 , st ) with distribution Ptπ . For simplicity,
we denote state-action pair xt := (st , at ) ∈ X where X := S × A. The state-action pair transitions
                                                           π
under policy π according to the distribution PX              (x) : X → P(X ).
The agent’s goal is to learn an optimal policy of behaviour π ⋆ ∈ Π⋆ by optimising the expected
                                                                  π
discounted sum of rewards over all possible trajectories JP         , where: Π⋆ := arg maxπ J π is the
                                                 π :=                ∞    t
set of optimal policies for the objective J            Eτ∞ ∼P∞π [
                                                                     t=0 γ rt ]. The expected discounted
reward for an agent in state st for taking action at is characterised by a Q-function, which is defined
recursively through the Bellman equation: Qπ (xt ) = B π [Qπ ](xt ), where the Bellman operator
B π projects functions forwards by one step through the dynamics of the MDP: B π [Qπ ](xt ) :=
Ext+1 ∼PXπ (xt ),rt ∼PR (xt ) [rt + γQπ (xt+1 )]. Of special interest is the Q-function for an optimal
policy π ⋆ , which we denote as Q⋆ (xt ) := Qπ⋆ (xt ). The optimal Q-function satisfies the optimal
Bellman equation Q⋆ (xt ) = B ⋆ [Q⋆ ](xt ), where B ⋆ is the optimal Bellman operator: B ⋆ [Q⋆ ](xt ) :=
Est+1 ∼PS (xt ),rt ∼PR (xt ) [rt + γ maxa′ Q⋆ (st+1 , a′ )].
2.2 T EMPORAL D IFFERENCE M ETHODS
Many RL algorithms employ TD learning for policy evaluation, which combines bootstrapping, state
samples and sampled rewards to estimate the expectation in the Bellman operator (Sutton, 1988). We
introduce a Q-function approximation Qϕ : X → R parametrised by ϕ ∈ Φ to represent the space of
Q-functions. We assume that Qϕ is initialised from a distribution ϕ0 ∼ PΦ . In their simplest form,
TD methods estimate the application of a Bellman operator by updating the Q-function approximator
parameters according to:
                      ϕi+1 = ϕi + αi (r + γQϕi (x′ ) − Qϕi (x)) ∇ϕ Qϕi (x),                     (1)
where x ∼ dµ , r ∼ PR (x), x′ ∼ PX
                                 π
                                   (x) and αi is a sequence of stepsizes satisfying the standard
Robbins-Munro conditions (Robbins & Monro, 1951):      P∞                  P∞
Assumption 1 (RM Conditions). We assume αi > 0 with i=0 αi = ∞ and i=0 αi2 < ∞.
Here dµ ∈ P(X ) is a sampling distribution, and µ is a sampling policy that may be different from
the target policy π. Methods for which the sampling policy differs from the target policy are known
as off-policy methods. In this paper, we will study the Q-learning (Watkins, 1989; Dayan, 1992)
TD update: ϕi+1 = ϕi + αi (r + γ supa′ Qϕi (s′ , a′ ) − Qϕi (x))∇ϕ Qϕi (x), which aims to learn an
optimal Q-function by estimating the optimal Bellman operator. As data in Q-learning is gathered
from an exploratory policy µ that is not optimal, Q-learning is an inherently off-policy algorithm.
For simplicity of notation we define the tuple ς := (x, r, x′ ) with distribution Pς and the TD-error
vector as:
                          δ(ϕ, ς) := (r + γQϕ (x′ ) − Qϕ (x)) ∇ϕ Qϕ (x),                          (2)
allowing us to write the TD parameter update as: ϕi+1 = ϕi + αi δ(ϕi , ς). Typically, dµ is the
stationary state-action distribution of an ergodic Markov chain but may be another offline distribution
such as a distribution induced by a replay buffer. We introduce the following mild regularity
assumptions for our analysis.
Assumption 2 (Regularity Assumptions). Assume that Φ ⊂ Rd is compact and convex and δ(ϕ, ς) is
Lipschitz in ϕ, ς. When updating TD, x ∼ dµ is either sampled i.i.d. from a distribution with support
over X or is sampled from a geometrically ergodic Markov chain with stationary distribution dµ .
The condition of Φ ⊂ Rd being compact is ubiquitous in TD theory and stochastic approximation
(Papavassiliou & Russell, 1999; Nemirovski et al., 2009; Maei et al., 2010; Kushner, 2010; Lacoste-
Julien et al., 2012; Bhandari et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021) and
can be achieved by projecting any ϕ ∈  / Φ back into Φ using the projection PΦ (ϕ′ ) := arg minϕ∈Φ ∥ϕ−
  ′
ϕ ∥. Projection is a mathematical formality and should not be required in practice as Φ can be made
large enough to contain all updates when TD is stable and a suitable stepsize regime is chosen. Finally,
geometric ergodicity extends traditional notions of aperiodicity and irreducibility in discrete MDPs
to the more general continuous state-action space formulations (see Roberts & Rosenthal (2004) for
details). It is one of the weakest ergodicity assumptions.
We denote the expected TD-error vector as: δ(ϕ) := Eς∼Pς [δ(ϕ, ς)], and define the set of TD fixed
points as: ϕ⋆ ∈ {ϕ|δ(ϕ) = 0}. If a TD algorithm converges, it must converge to a TD fixed point as
the expected parameter update is zero for all ϕ⋆ . We remark that convergence to a TD fixed point
does not imply a value error of zero between the approximate and true Q-function (Kolter, 2011).

                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.3     V ECTORISED E NVIRONMENTS
Parallelising the interactions between an RL agent and a learning environment is a standard method for
speeding up training. In classical frameworks like Gymnasium (Towers et al., 2023), this is achieved
by processing multiple environments via multi-threading. In more recent GPU-based frameworks like
IsaacGym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021), ManiSkill2 (Gu et al., 2023), Jumanji (Bonnet et al., 2024),
Craftax (Matthews et al., 2024b), JaxMARL (Rutherford et al., 2023) the environments’ operations
are vectorised, meaning that they are performed together using batched tensors. This allows an
agent to easily interact with thousands of environments, and it enables the compilation of end-to-end
GPU learning pipelines, which can accelerate the training of on-policy agents like PPO and A2C
by orders of magnitude (Makoviychuk et al., 2021; Weng et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2023; Lu et al.,
2022). Unfortunately, end-to-end single-GPU training is not compatible with traditional off-policy
methods like DQN for two reasons: firstly, maintaining a replay buffer in GPU is not feasible in
complex environments, as it would occupy most of the GPU memory; and secondly, the convergence
of off-policy methods demands a very high number of updates in relation to the sampled experiences
(DQN traditionally performs one gradient step per environment step). Commonly, parallelisation
of Q-Learning (like in Ape-X (Horgan et al., 2018), R2D2 (Kapturowski et al., 2018) and a recent
method presented in Li et al. (2023)) is achieved by continuously training the Q-network in a separate
process in order to keep up with the fast sampling (see Fig. 1c), a setup that is not feasible in a
single pure-GPU setting. For this reason, all referenced frameworks primarily provide PPO or A2C
baselines, i.e. vectorised RL lacks a off-policy Q-learning baseline.
2.4     R ELATED W ORK
Our paper makes several significant contributions across a range of interconnected threads in RL
research. We provide an extensive discussion of all related work in Appendix A.
                                                                                  ϕt+1
3     A NALYSIS OF R EGULARISED TD                                                                       ϕt
                                                                                        αt δ(ϕt )
Proofs for all theorems and corollaries can be found in Appendix B
Building on (Bhandari et al., 2018; Fellows et al., 2023), we now develop
                                                                                          ϕt − ϕ⋆
a powerful and general Jacobian analysis tool to characterise stability            ϕ⋆
of TD approaches used in practice (Section 3.1). We then apply this
analysis to regularised TD, confirming our theoretical hypothesis that
careful application of LayerNorm and ℓ2 regularisation can stabilise TD
(Section 3.2). Finally, we compare LayerNorm to BatchNorm regularisa-
tion techniques in Section 3.3, explaining our preference for LayerNorm. Figure 2: Geometric interpre-
Recalling that x = (s, a), we remark that our results can be derived for tation of TD stability crite-
value functions by setting x = s in our analysis.                         rion. Expected updates in the
                                                                              shaded ball ensure contrac-
3.1     S TABILITY OF TD                                                      tion mapping.
As TD updates aren’t a gradient of any objective, they fall under the more general class of algorithms
known as stochastic approximation (Robbins & Monro, 1951; Borkar, 2008). Stability is not
guaranteed in the general case and convergence of TD methods has been studied extensively (Watkins
& Dayan, 1992; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997; Dalal et al., 2017; Bhandari et al., 2018; Srikant &
Ying, 2019). We now extend the methods of Fellows et al. (2023) to study general nonlinear TD
in a Markov chain, meaning our analysis applies exactly to TD methods used in practice. Key to
determining stability of the TD updates is establishing that the Jacobian is negative definite:

      TD Stability Criterion: Define the TD Jacobian as J(ϕ) := ∇ϕ δ(ϕ). The TD stability
      criterion holds if the Jacobian is negative definite, that is: v ⊤ J(ϕ)v < 0 for any test vector
      v ̸= 0 and ϕ ∈ Φ, except possibly on a set of measure 0.

Intuitively, the Jacobian replaces the Hessian from classical optimisation theory (Boyd & Vanden-
berghe, 2004), which measures curvature of the underlying objective, thereby ensuring convexity.
As TD methods are not a gradient of any objective, the TD stability condition instead implies
δ(ϕt )⊤ (ϕt − ϕ⋆ ) < 0 for all ϕt , ensuring the expected update vector will always move the parameters
closer to a fixed point with a sufficiently small stepsize. We sketch a geometric interpretation in
Fig. 2. Mathematically, if the TD stability criterion holds, then as stepsizes approach zero in the limit
limi→∞ αi = 0, there exists some t such that for every i > t each update is a contraction mapping:
E [∥ϕi+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥] < E [∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥]. This key condition allows us to prove convergence of TD:


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 1 (TD Stability). Let Assumptionsh 1 and 2 hold.
                                                      i If the TD criterion holds then the TD
                                                  ⋆ 2
updates in Eq. (1) converge with: limi→∞ E ∥ϕi − ϕ ∥ = 0.

We can split the TD Jacobian condition into two separate off-policy and nonlinear components:
v ⊤ J(ϕ)v = COffPolicy (Qϕ , dµ ) + CNonlinear (Qϕ ), whose negativity ensure the overall TD stability
criterion is satisfied (see Appendix B.1). This naturally yields two forms of TD instability:
Off-policy Instability: The TD stability criterion can be violated if:
                                                                       h             2 i
 COffPolicy (Qϕ , dµ ) := γEς∼Pς v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x) − Ex∼dµ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)

                                                                                         < 0, (3)
does not hold for any test vector v. To better
                                            h understand the  off-policy
                                                              i          component,
                                                                          h         we invoke   the
                                               ⊤          ′ 2                ⊤
                                                                                         2 i
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to show Eς∼Pς v ∇ϕ Qϕ (x )             ≤ Ex∼dµ v ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)         is key
to proving COffPolicy (Qϕ , dµ ) < 0 (see Appendix B.1 for a derivation). Unfortunately, ergodic theory
reveals this condition only holds in the on-policy sampling regime, i.e. when dµ = dπ , for both i.i.d.
or Markov chain sampling. For off-policy sampling, the distributional
                                                                  h      shift betweeni the target policy
                                                                                    2
π and the sampling policy µ can cause the expectation Eς∼Pς v ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )
                                                                      ⊤
                                                                                        to be arbitrarily
large. We conclude that COffPolicy (Qϕ , dµ ) characterises the degree of distributional shift that TD
can tolerate before becoming unstable and off-policy sampling is a key source of instability in TD,
especially in algorithms such as Q-learning.
Nonlinear Instability: The TD stability criterion can be violated if:
                CNonlinear (Qϕ ) := Eς∼Pς (r + γQϕ (x′ ) − Qϕ (x))v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qϕ (x)v < 0,

                                                                                                     (4)
does not hold for any test vector v. This condition does not apply in the linear case as second order
derivatives are zero: ∇2ϕ Qϕ (x) = 0. In the nonlinear case, the left hand side of the inequality can be
arbitrarily positive depending upon the specific MDP and choice of function approximator. Hence
nonlinearity is a key source of instability in TD which is characterised by CNonlinear (Qϕ ). Together
both off-policy and nonlinear instability formalise the deadly triad (Sutton & Barto, 2018a; van
Hasselt et al., 2018) and TD can be unstable if either Conditions 3 or 4 are not satisfied. We now
investigate how LayerNorm with ℓ2 regularisation can tackle these sources of instability.
3.2 S TABILISING TD W ITH L AYER N ORM + ℓ2 R EGULARISATION
To understand how LayerNorm with ℓ2 regularisation stabilises TD, we study the following Q-
function approximator:
                       Qkϕ (x) = w⊤ σPost ◦ LayerNormk [σPre ◦ M x] .                    (5)
Here ϕ = [w⊤ , Vec(M )⊤ ] is the parameter vector where M ∈ Rk×d is a k × d matrix where each
row ∥mi ∥ is bounded, w ∈ Rk is a vector of final layer weights where ∥w∥ is bounded and σPre and
σPost are element-wise C 2 continuous activations with bounded 2nd order derivatives. We assume
the final activation σPost is LPost -Lipschitz with σPost (0) = 0 (e.g. tanh, identity, GELU, ELU...).
LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016) is defined element-wise as:
                                                                    Pk−1
                           k              1            fi (x) − k1 j=0 fj (x)
               LayerNormi [f (x)] := √ · q P                                             ,       (6)
                                           k     1   k−1
                                                           (fi (x) − 1
                                                                       Pk−1
                                                                            fj (x))2 + ϵ
                                                k       i=0        k    j=0
where ϵ > 0 is a small constant introduced for numerical stability. Deeper networks with more
LayerNorm layers may be used in practice, however our analysis reveals that only the final layer
weights affect the stability of TD with wide LayerNorm neural networks. We observe that adding
LayerNorm does not affect the representational capacity of the network as it merely rescales the
input according to a standard Gaussian. The output is then rescaled due to the final linear layer. As k
increases, the empirical mean and standard deviations in Eq. (6) approach their true expectations,
thereby increasing the degree of normalisation provided. Using the LayerNorm Q-function, we can
bound the off-policy and nonlinear components of the TD stability condition:
                                                                                              ⊤ ⊤ ⊤
Lemma 2. Let Assumption 2 apply. Let vw be the first k components of the test vector v = [vw    , vM ] ,
associated with final layer parameters w, and vM be the remaining components, associated with the
matrix parameters Vec(M ). Using the LayerNorm Q-function defined in Eq. (5):
                                                                             2
                                     COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) ≤ ∥vw · γLPost/2∥ + O ∥vM ∥ /k ,
                                                                                       2

            Off-Policy Bound:                                                                       (7)
                                                        k            2 √

             Nonlinear Bound:            CNonlinear (Qϕ ) = O ∥v∥ / k ,                             (8)
almost surely for any test vector v and any state-action transition pair x, x′ ∈ X .

                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Analysis in Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) of Lemma 2 reveals that as the degree of regularisation increases,
that is in the limit k → ∞, all nonlinear instability can be mitigated: limk→∞ CNonlinear (Qkϕ ) = 0
                                                                                                    2
and a residual term is left in the off-policy bound: limk→∞ COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) ≤ ∥vw · γLPost/2∥ . The
nonlinear bound in Eq. (8) can be explained using established theory of wide neural networks; as
layer width increases, second order derivative terms tend to zero (Liu et al., 2020). Our proof extends
this theory, showing that LayerNorm preserves this property.
As linear function approximators still stuffer from off-policy instability due the distributional shift
between π and µ, linearisation of wide networks cannot explain the bound in Eq. (7). Instead, our
proof for Lemma 2 reveals this bound is  due to the normalising      property of LayerNorm, which
upper bounds the expected norm: Ex∼dµ LayerNormk [M x] ≤ 1 regardless of the sampling
                                                                                               2
distribution dµ or magnitude of M . This yields a bound with a residual term of ∥vw · γLPost/2∥ that is
independent of π and µ, overcoming the distributional shift issue responsible for off-policy instability.
We tackle it by targeting ϕ with ℓ2 regularisation using the following TD update vector:

                  k              k                    2 w                   0
                 δreg (ϕ, ς) := δ (ϕ, ς) − η ( Post/2)
                                              γL             + (η − 1)                ,              (9)
                                                         0               Vec(M )
for any η > 1 where δ k (ϕ, ς) is the TD update vector from Eq. (2) using the LayerNorm critic from
Eq. (5) respectively. Eq. (9) yields a bound:

                                                                2       2
                COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) ≤ (1 − η) ∥vw · γLPost/2∥ + ∥vM ∥ + O (1/k) ,

which implies COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) < 0 with sufficiently large k, meaning the TD stability criterion will
be satisfied. We now formally confirm now this intuition:
                                                                                                k
Theorem 2. Let Assumption 2 apply. Using the LayerNorm regularised TD update δreg                  (ϕ, ς) in
Eq. (9), there exists some finite k ′ such that the TD stability criterion holds for all k > k ′ .
In Section 5.1 we test our theoretical claim in Theorem 2 empirically, demonstrating that LayerNorm
+ ℓ2 regularisation can stabilise Baird’s counterexample, an MDP intentionally designed to cause
TD to diverge (Baird, 1995). We remark that whilst adding an ℓ2 regularisation term −ηϕ to all
parameters can stabilise TD alone, large η recovers a quadratic optimisation problem with minimum
at ϕ = 0, pulling the TD fixed points towards 0. Hence, we suggest ℓ2 -regularisation should be used
sparingly; only when LayerNorm alone cannot stabilise the environment and initially only over the
final layer weights. Aside from Baird’s counterexample, we find LayerNorm without ℓ2 regularisation
can stabilise all environments in our extensive empirical evaluation in Section 5.
3.3 L AYER N ORM AND BATCH N ORM TD
We have seen from Theorem 2 that LayerNorm + ℓ2 regularised TD can stabilise TD by mitigating
the effects of nonlinearity and off-policy sampling. Empirical evidence suggests that BatchNorm
(Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) regularisation, which is essential for stabilising algorithms such as CrossQ
(Bhatt et al., 2024), may also possess similar properties to LayerNorm. It is natural to ask: ‘what are
the potential benefits of LayerNorm over BatchNorm methods?’
Naïvely applying BatchNorm as presented by Ioffe & Szegedy (2015) does not stabilise TD as
CrossQ does not succeed without applying several modifying ‘tricks’ such as double Q-learning,
batch renormalisation using running statistics and calculating the batch statistics from a mixture of
datasets (Bhatt et al., 2024). In contrast, LayerNorm + ℓ2 regularisation benefits from the strong
theoretical guarantees in Theorem 2 without burdening practioners with additional tricks and their
associated hyperparameter tuning. Additionally, compared to BatchNorm, LayerNorm does not
require memory or estimation of the running batch averages.
Our empirical analysis in Section 5 shows that BatchNorm can degrade performance in some cases,
while in others it can improve results if applied early in the network. Therefore, we don’t dismiss
BatchNorm outright, but a thorough theoretical analysis is needed to fully understand its practical
effects. Nonetheless, we recommend starting with LayerNorm and ℓ2 regularisation as a strong,
simple baseline for stabilising TD algorithms before experimenting with alternatives like BatchNorm.
4 PARALLELISED Q-L EARNING
Guided by our analysis in Section 3, we develop a simplified version of deep Q-learning to exploit the
power of parallelised sampling with minimal memory requirements and without target networks. The
Q-Network is regularised with network normalisation (preferably LayerNorm) and ℓ2 regularisation


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as required (see Eq. (9)). As we are developing an online algorithm, it is straightforward to exploit
n-step returns. In Algorithm 1 we present PQN with λ-returns, which is a parallelised variant of
the approach of Daley & Amato (2019). An exploration policy πExplore (ϵ-greedy for this paper)
                                                                                                     λ
is rolled out for a small trajectory of size T : (si , ai , ri , si+1 . . . si+T ). Starting with Ri+T    =
                    ′                                                                   λ           λ
maxa′ Qϕ (si+T   , a  ) the targets are computed  recursively   back  in   time from  R i+T −1 to Ri  using:
                        + (1 − λ) maxa′ Qϕ (st+1 , a′ ) or Rtλ = rt if st is a terminal state. We provide
               λ
Rtλ = rt + γ λRt+1
a derivation of our approach in Appendix B.4. Due to the use of λ-returns and minibatches, we
require a small buffer of size I · T containing interactions from the current exploration policy.
The special case λ = 0 with T = 1 is equivalent to a vectorised variant of Watkins (1989)’s original
Q-learning algorithm with LayerNorm + ℓ2 regularisation where I separate interactions occur in
parallel with the environment.
                                             Algorithm 1 PQN with λ-returns
PQN with λ-returns is simpler than ex- 1: ϕ ← initialise regularised Q-network parameters
isting state-of-the-art λ-based algorithms 2: s0 ∼ P0 , t ← 0
such as Retrace (Munos et al., 2016) 3: for each episode do
which adopt computationally intensive 4: for each i ∈ {0, 1, . . . I − 1} (in parallel) do
techniques to handle the computation of 5:            ait ∼ πExplore (sit ), (e.g. ϵ-greedy)
λ-targets. Similarly, an implementation 6:            rti ∼ PR (sit , ait ) sit+1 ∼ PS (sit , ait ),
of PQN using RNNs only requires sam- 7:               t ← t + 1,
pling trajectories for multiple time-steps 8: end for
and then back-propagating the gradient 9: if t mod T =λ,i0 then λ,i
through time in the learning phase. In 10:            calculate Rt−1 to Rt−T ,
contract existing approaches like R2D2 11:            for number of epochs do
(Kapturowski et al., 2018) that integrate    12:          for number of minibatches do
                                             13:             draw minibatch B of size b ≤ I · T from
RNNs with replay buffers must handle hid-
                                                             {t − T, . . . t − 1} and {0, . . . I − 1}
den states of trajectories collected with
                                                             ϕ ← ϕ + α2bt ∇ϕ i,t∈B (Rtλ,i − Qϕ (xit ))2
                                                                                   P
                                             14:
old policies during replay. A basic multi-
                                             15:          end for
agent version of PQN for coordination 16:             end for
problems can be obtained by adopting 17: end if
Value Network Decomposition Networks 18: end for
(VDN) (Sunehag et al., 2017b), i.e. opti-
mising the joined action-value function as a sum of the single agents action-values. Finally, similar to
PPO, it is possible to increase PQN’s sample efficiency by dividing the collected experiences into
multiple minibatches and using them multiple times within epochs.
Table 1 summarises the advantages of PQN in comparison to popular methods. Compared to
traditional DQN and distributed DQN, PQN enjoys ease of implementation, fast execution, very
low memory requirements, and high compatibility with GPU-based training and RNNs. The only
algorithm that shares these attributes is PPO. However, although PPO is in principle a simple
algorithm, its success is determined by numerous interacting implementation details (Huang et al.,
2022a; Engstrom et al., 2020), making the actual implementation challenging. Moreover, PQN uses
few main hyperparameters, namely the number of parallel environments, the learning rate and epsilon
with its decay, plus the value for λ if λ-returns are used. We emphasise that, whilst PQN can be
run using a single environment interaction at each timestep (i.e. with I = 1, T = 1), yielding a
stable, regularised Q-learning algorithm without a replay buffer (see Fig. 10), PQN is also designed
to exploit vectorisation to solve parallel world problems, i.e. applications trained in simulators where
parallelisation is advantageous and possible.
             Table 1: Advantages and Disadvantages of DQN, Distributed DQN, PPO and PQN.

                                                     DQN       Distr. DQN       PPO         PQN
      Implementation                                 Easy        Difficult    Medium      Very Easy
      Memory Requirement                             High       Very High      Low          Low
      Training Speed                                 Slow         Fast         Fast         Fast
      Sample Efficient                                Yes          No          Yes           Yes
      Compatibility with RNNs                       Medium       Medium        High         High
      Compatibility w. end-to-end GPU Training       Low          Low          High         High
      Amount of Hyper-Parameters                    Medium        High        Medium        Low
      Convergence                                     No           No           No           Yes



                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                           Computational Time (Hours-Log)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cleanrl-DQN-jax
                           PQN        Rainbow                                  250%       PQN                             1.00               DDQN                                                       PQN


                                                 Median Normalized Score (%)
                 200       PPO
                                                                                                           Rainbow                           Prior. DDQN                                    103
                                                                               200%



Atari-10 Score
                                                                                                                                             Rainbow
                                                                                                                          0.75               PQN
                                                                                                                                                                                            102


                                                                                                                     %>
                                                                                                    Prior. DDQN
                 100                Prior.DDQN
                                                                               100%                        DDQN
                                        DDQN                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                            101
                                                                                                                          0.25
                       0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0                                            0   1     2      3       4                 0 1 2 3 4                                                        Single Game Full Suite
                             Frames 1e8                                                       Frames         1e8                 Normalised Score ( )
                  (a) Atari-10 Score                                           (b) Atari-57 Median                   (c) Atari-57 Score Profile                                         (d) Speed Comparison
Figure 4: (a) Comparison between PPO and PQN in Atari-10. (b) Median score of PQN in the full Atari suite of
57 games. (c) Percentage of games with score higher than human score. (d) Computational time required to run a
single game and the full ALE suite for PQN and DQN implementation of CleanRL. In (c) and (d) performances
of PQN are relative to training for 400M frames.
4.1 B ENEFITS OF O NLINE Q- LEARNING WITH V ECTORISED E NVIRONMENTS
Vectorisation of the environment enables fast collection of                                   x ∼ dπ                                                                                                                  t′


many parallel transitions from independent trajectories. De- t = t     ′

noting the stationary distribution at time t of the MDP under
policy πt as dπt , uniformly sampling from a replay buffer con-
taining historic data estimates sampling from the average of                       1
                                                                             x ∼ t +1
                                                                                      Pt    π
                                                                                       t=0 dt                                                                                               ′
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ′
                                                                                                                                                                                                        t


                                           1
                                              Pt′
all distributions across all timesteps: t′ +1 t=0 dπt . In con-
trast, vectorised sampling in PQN estimates sampling from the t = 0
stationary distribution dπt′ at timestep t’. We sketch the differ-          x0                   x0

ence in these sampling regimes in Fig. 3. Coloured lines rep-              DQN                  PQN
resent different state-actions trajectories across the vectorised
environment as a function of timestep t. Crosses represent Figure 3: Sketch of Sampling Regimes
                                                                   in DQN and PQN
samples drawn for each algorithm at timestep t′ .
PQN’s sampling further aids algorithmic stability by better approximating this regime in two ways:
firstly, the parallelised nature can help exploration since the (potential) natural stochasticity in the
dynamics means even a greedy policy will explore several different states in parallel. Secondly, by
taking multiple actions in multiple states, PQN’s sampling distribution is a good approximation of
the true stationary distribution under the current policy: as time progresses, ergodic theory states that
this sampling distribution converges to dπt′ . In contrast, sampling from DQN’s replay buffer involves
sampling from an average of older stationary distributions under shifting policies from a single
agent, which will be more offline and take longer to converge, as illustrated in Fig. 3. We emphasise
that PQN is still an off-policy approach since it uses two different policies to optimise the Bellman
equations: the ϵ-greedy policy for the current timestep and the current policy for the next. Notice that
at beginning of training PQN uses an ϵ = 1, meaning that it approximates a value function from a
completely random policy. This requires normalisation to mitigate off-policy instability identified in
Section 3.

5                  E XPERIMENTS
In contrast to prior work in Q-learning, which has focused heavily on evaluation in the Atari Learning
Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013), probably overfitting to this environment, we evaluate
PQN on a range of single- and multi-agent environments, with PPO as the primary baseline. We
summarise the memory and sample efficiency of PQN in Table 2. Due to our extensive evaluation,
additional results are presented in Appendix D. All experimental results are shown as mean of 10
seeds, except in ALE where we followed a common practice of reporting 3 seeds.
5.1 C ONFIRMING T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
Fig. 5a shows that together LayerNorm + ℓ2 can stabilise TD in Baird’s counterexample (Baird, 1995),
a challenging environment that is intentionally designed to be provably divergent, even for linear
function approximators. Our results show that stabilisation is mostly attributed to the introduction
of LayerNorm. Moreover the degree of ℓ2 -regularisation needed is small - just enough to mitigate
off-policy stability due to final layer weights according to Theorem 2 - and it makes relatively little
difference when used in isolation.
5.2 ATARI
To save computational resources, we evaluate PQN against PPO in the Atari-10 suite of games from
the ALE, which estimates the median across the full suite using a smaller sample of games. PQN


                                                                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                                                                    16                                         1.00                                                   1.00                                       25
1018              LayerNorm
1016


                                               Returns (% of Max)


                                                                                                                                                 Max-Normalised IQM
                  LayerNorm+L2
                                                                                                                                                                      0.75


                                                                                                Win Rate IQM
                  LayerNorm+HigherL2                                12                                         0.75
                  No-Normalization                                                                                                                                                                               15


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Returns
 Loss (log)
                  No-Normalization+L2
                                                                     8                                         0.50                                                   0.50
                                                                                                                                      MAPPO                                                 IPPO
                                                                     4              PQN-RNN                    0.25                   QMIX                            0.25                  IQL                                   PQN-VDN
                                                                                    PPO-RNN                                           PQN-VDN                                               VDN                                   MAPPO
 101                                                                 0                                         0.00                   VDN                             0.00                  PQN-VDN              0
              0                         5000                             0.0      0.5     1.0                         0.0       0.5        1.0                               0.0      2.5        5.0                  0.0      0.5      1.0
                  Episodes                                                     Timesteps 1e9                                Timesteps 1e7                                          Timesteps 1e6                            Timesteps 1e10
(a) Baird’s Counter.                                                     (b) Craftax                                  (c) Smax                                         (d) Overcooked                                  (e) Hanabi
Figure 5: Results in Baird’s Counterexample, Craftax and Multi-Agent tasks. For Smax, we report the
Interquartile Mean (IQM) of the Win Rate on the 9 most popular maps. For Overcooked, we report the IQM of
the returns normalized by the maximum obtained score in the classic 4 layouts. In Hanabi, we report the returns
of self-play in the 2-player game.
outperforms PPO in terms of sample efficiency, final score, and training time (1 hour compared to
2.5 hours for PPO), and also surpasses sample-efficient methods like Double-DQN and Prioritised
DDQN in the same number of frames, despite these methods being trained for several days and
using over 16 times more gradient updates (12.5M compared to 780k for PQN). To further test our
method, we train PQN on the full suite of 57 Atari games. Fig. 4d shows that the time needed to train
PQN on the full Atari suite is equivalent to the time required to train traditional DQN methods on a
single game1 . With an additional budget of 100M frames (30 minutes of training), PQN achieves
the median score of Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018), which is still a SOTA method in ALE for sample
efficiency but requires around 3 days of training per game, meaning that PQN can be considered
50x faster. While Rainbow is slightly more sample efficient, it’s important to note that Rainbow is a
much more complex system, designed specifically for Atari. Moreover, parallelisation of Q-Learning
has traditionally sacrificed far more sample efficiency than PQN. For instance, Ape-X struggles to
solve even the simplest Atari game, Pong, within 200M frames (Horgan et al., 2018). In this regard,
PQN represents a significant advancement in Q-Learning research, offering a balanced compromise
between speed, simplicity, and sample efficiency.
In Appendix D, we provide detailed data from these experiments, a comparison with Dopamine-
Rainbow using the IQM score, and a comparative bar chart (Fig. 13) of the performances of algorithms
in all the games. In this chart, we show that PQN reaches human-level performance in 40 of the
57 games of the ALE, underperforming mainly in the hard-exploration games, suggesting that the
ϵ-greedy exploration used by PQN is too simple to solve ALE, and indicating a clear research
direction to improve the method.
5.3 C RAFTAX
Craftax (Matthews et al., 2024b) is an open-ended RL environment based on Crafter (Hafner, 2021)
and Nethack (Küttler et al., 2020). It is a challenging environment that requires an agent to solve
multiple tasks before completion. By design, Craftax is fast to run in a pure-GPU setting, but existing
benchmarks are based solely on PPO. The observation size of the symbolic environment is around
8000 floats, making a pure-GPU DQN implementation with a buffer prohibitive, as it would take
around 30GBs of GPU-ram. PQN can provide an off-policy Q-learning baseline without using GPU
memory for a replay buffer. Following the Craftax paper, we evaluate for 1B steps and compared
PQN to PPO using both an MLP and an RNN. The RNN results are shown in Fig. 5b. PQN is more
sample efficient and with a RNN obtains a higher score of 16% against the 15.3% of PPO-RNN. The
two methods also take a similar amount of time to train. PQN offers researchers a simple, successful
Q-learning alternative to PPO that can be run on a GPU in this challenging environment.
5.4 M ULTI -AGENT TASKS
When dealing with multi-agent problems, any replay buffer needs to store observations for all agents,
increasing the memory requirements up to hundreds of gigabytes. Additionally, RNNs are highly
effective in handling the individual agents’ partial observability of the environments and credit
assignment, a key challenge in MARL, is typically addressed with value-based methods Sunehag
et al. (2017b); Rashid et al. (2020a). Therefore, a memory-efficient, RNN-compatible and value-
based method is highly desirable. We evaluate PQN combined with VDN in Hanabi (Bard et al.,
2020), SMAC-SMACV2 (Ellis et al., 2024; Samvelyan et al., 2019) (in its JAX-vectorised version,
Smax) (Rutherford et al., 2023), and Overcooked (Carroll et al., 2019). Smax is a faster version
of SMAC, running entirely on a single GPU. Notably, when at least 20 agents are active in the
environment, a replay buffer can consume all available memory on a typical 10GB GPU. PQN-VDN
runs successfully on Smax without a large buffer, outperforming MAPPO and QMix. Remarkably,
PQN learns a coordination policy even in the most difficult scenarios in about 10 minutes, compared
        1
              DQN training time was optimistically estimated using the JAX-based CleanRL DQN implementation.


                                                                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                                                                                                                                       15
                                                            15                                      200   =0                                                                  1.00


                                                                                                                                                         Max Normalised IQM
                 200                                                                                                                                                                 1


                                                                                                                  Returns (% of Max)
                                       Returns (% of Max)
                           LayerNorm                                                                      =0.3                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                       10


Atari-10 Score
                           BatchNorm                                                                                                                                          0.75   8


                                                                                   Atari-10 Score
                                                                                                          =0.65                                                                      16
                           NoNorm
                           CrossQ
                                                            10                                            =0.9                                                                       32

                 100                                                                                100                                                                       0.50   64

                                                             5   LayerNorm                                                              5                                            128
                                                                                                                                                                                     256
                                                                 BatchNorm
                                                                 NoNorm
                                                                                                                                            PQN                               0.25   512

                                                                                                                                            PQN+buffer
                                                             0   BatchNorm Input                                                        0                                     0.00
                  2    0  0.0      1
                                 0.5     1.0    0       1     2        0      18      36     0.0     0.5     1.0
         Frames 1e8           Timesteps 1e9          Frames 1e8          Time (Hours)             Timesteps 1e7
(a) Normalisation in (b) Normalisation in (c) λ-returns in Atari- (d) Replay Buffer in (e) Num. Environ-
Atari-10             Craftax                 10                   Craftax                ments in MinAtar
         Figure 6: Ablations confirming the importance of the different components of our method.
to QMix’s 1 hour (see Fig. 17). Similarly, PQN outperforms the replay-buffer-based version of VDN
and PPO in Overcooked, and is significantly more sample-efficient than MAPPO in Hanabi, where it
achieves an average score of 24 points.
5.5 A BLATIONS
To examine the effectiveness of PQN’s algorithmic components, we perform the following abla-
tions.
Regularisation: In Fig. 6a, we examine the impact of regularisation on performance in the Atari-10
suite. Results show that LayerNorm significantly improves performance, supporting the theoretical
findings in Section 3, while BatchNorm can degrade performance when applied through the network.
Additionally, applying the additional tricks from CrossQ further worsens PQN’s performance.
Input Normalisation: In preliminary experiments, we observed that BatchNorm significantly
improves PQN performances in Craftax. Figure 6b compares the performance of PQN RNN with
BatchNorm, LayerNorm, and no normalisation in the two cases where BatchNorm is applied to
the input before the first hidden layer or not. Without input normalisation, BatchNorm provides
a substantial boost. However, PQN performs best when only the input to the first layer is batch
normalised, and applying LayerNorm to the rest of the network offers a similar improvement. This
suggests BatchNorm can be effective as input normalisation, particularly in scenarios like Craftax
with large, sparse observation vectors.
Varying λ: In Fig. 6c we compare different values of λ in Atari-10. We find that a value of
λ = 0.65 performs the best by a significant margin. It significantly outperforms λ = 0 (which is
equal to performing 1-step update with the traditional Bellman operator) confirming that the use of
λ-returns represents an important design choice over one-step TD.
Replay Buffer: In Fig. 6d, we compare PQN from with a variant that maintains a standard sized
replay buffer of 1M of experiences in GPU using Flashbax Toledo et al. (2023). This version
converges to the same final performance but takes ∼6x longer to train, which is likely due to the
constant need to perform random access of a buffer of around 30GBs. This reinforces our core
message that a large memory buffer should be avoided in pure GPU training.
Number of Environments: PQN can learn even with a small number of environments but clearly
benefits from collecting more experiences in parallel (Fig. 6e). As expected, PQN is also significantly
faster when greater parallelisation is used, (see Fig. 10 in Appendix).
6 C ONCLUSION                                          Table 2: Summary of Memory Saved and Speedup
We have presented the first rigorous analysis explain- of PQN Compared to Baselines. The Atari speedup
ing the stabilising properties of LayerNorm and ℓ2 is relative to the traditional DQN pipeline, which
regularisation in TD methods. These results allowed runs a single environment on the CPU while training
                                                       the network on GPU. Smax and Craftax speedups
us to develop PQN, a simple, stable and efficient are relative to baselines that also run entirely on
regularised Q-learning algorithm without the need GPU but use a replay buffer. The Hanabi speed-up is
for target networks or a large replay buffer. PQN relative to an R2D2 multi-threaded implementation.
exploits vectorised computation to achieve excellent
performance across an extensive empirical evalu-                      Memory Saved        Speedup
ation with a significant boost in computational ef-
                                                         Atari             26gb               50x
ficiency and without sacrificing sample efficiency.
                                                         Smax      10gb (up to hundreds)       6x
PQN offers a simple pipeline that is easy to imple- Hanabi                250gb                4x
ment and out-of-the-box compatible with key ele- Craftax                   31gb                6x
ments in RL, such as λ-returns and RNNs, which
are otherwise difficult to use in current Q-Learning implementations. Additionally, it provides a
valuable baseline for multi-agent systems. By saving the memory occupied by large replay buffers,
PQN paves the way for a generation of powerful but stable algorithms that exploit end-to-end GPU
vectorised deep RL.


                                                                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All     our    experiments    can     be    replicated   with   the    following    repository:
https://github.com/mttga/purejaxql.   Proofs for all theorems and corollaries can be found in
Appendix B.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Mattie Fellows is funded by a generous grant from the UKRI Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council EP/Y028481/1. Jakob Nicolaus Foerster is partially funded by the UKRI grant
EP/Y028481/1 (originally selected for funding by the ERC). Jakob Nicolaus Foerster is also supported
by the JPMC Research Award and the Amazon Research Award.
Matteo Gallici was partially founded by the FPI-UPC Santander Scholarship FPI-UPC_93. Ivan
Masmitja is partially founded by the European Union’s Horizon Europe programme under grant
agreement No 101112883, as part of DIGI4ECO. This work also acknowledges the Spanish Ministerio
de Ciencia, Innovacion y Universidades (BITER-ECO: PID2020- 114732RBC31), the the Spanish
National Program Ramon y Cajal RYC2022-038056-I (IM) and "Severo Ochoa Centre of Excellence"
accreditation (CEX2019-000928-S).

R EFERENCES
Matthew Aitchison, Penny Sweetser, and Marcus Hutter. Atari-5: Distilling the arcade learning
 environment down to five games. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 421–438.
 PMLR, 2023. C
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016. 1, 3.2
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi,
  Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 507–517. PMLR, 2020. A.1
Leemon Baird. Residual algorithms: Reinforcement learning with function approximation. In
  Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 30–37,
  1995. doi: 10.1.1.48.3256. 1, 3.2, 5.1
Nolan Bard, Jakob N Foerster, Sarath Chandar, Neil Burch, Marc Lanctot, H Francis Song, Emilio
  Parisotto, Vincent Dumoulin, Subhodeep Moitra, Edward Hughes, et al. The Hanabi challenge: A
  new frontier for ai research. Artificial Intelligence, 280:103216, 2020. 1, 5.4
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
 253–279, 2013. 1, 5
Richard Bellman. A markovian decision process. Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 6(5):
  679–684, 1957. ISSN 00959057, 19435274. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
  24900506. 2.1
Jalaj Bhandari, Daniel Russo, and Raghav Singal. A finite time analysis of temporal difference
   learning with linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.02450, 2018. 2.2, 3, 3.1,
  A.2, B.2
Aditya Bhatt, Daniel Palenicek, Boris Belousov, Max Argus, Artemij Amiranashvili, Thomas Brox,
  and Jan Peters. Crossq: Batch normalization in deep reinforcement learning for greater sample
  efficiency and simplicity. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PczQtTsTIX. 1, 3.3, A.3
Clément Bonnet, Daniel Luo, Donal Byrne, Shikha Surana, Sasha Abramowitz, Paul Duckworth,
  Vincent Coyette, Laurence I. Midgley, Elshadai Tegegn, Tristan Kalloniatis, Omayma Mahjoub,
  Matthew Macfarlane, Andries P. Smit, Nathan Grinsztajn, Raphael Boige, Cemlyn N. Waters,
  Mohamed A. Mimouni, Ulrich A. Mbou Sob, Ruan de Kock, Siddarth Singh, Daniel Furelos-
  Blanco, Victor Le, Arnu Pretorius, and Alexandre Laterre. Jumanji: a diverse suite of scalable
  reinforcement learning environments in jax, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
  09884. 2.3


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Vivek Borkar. Stochastic Approximation: A Dynamical Systems Viewpoint. Hindustan Book Agency
  Gurgaon, 01 2008. ISBN 978-81-85931-85-2. doi: 10.1007/978-93-86279-38-5. 3.1

Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
  3.1

Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca
 Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 32, 2019. 1, 5.4

Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G. Bellemare.
  Dopamine: A Research Framework for Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2018. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1812.06110. 12

Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W. Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-learning:
  Learning fast without a model. The Ninth International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), abs/2101.05982, 2021. 1

Gal Dalal, Balázs Szörényi, Gugan Thoppe, and Shie Mannor. Finite sample analysis for TD(0) with
  linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01161, 2017. 3.1, A.2

Brett Daley and Christopher Amato. Reconciling λ-returns with experience replay. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019. 4, A.4, B.4

Peter Dayan. The convergence of TD(λ) for general λ. Mach. Learn., 8(3–4):341–362, May
  1992. ISSN 0885-6125. doi: 10.1007/BF00992701. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  BF00992701. 2.2

Christian Schroeder De Witt, Tarun Gupta, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Philip HS
  Torr, Mingfei Sun, and Shimon Whiteson. Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft
  multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533, 2020. A.5

Benjamin Ellis, Jonathan Cook, Skander Moalla, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mingfei Sun, Anuj Mahajan,
  Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. SMACv2: An improved benchmark for cooperative multi-
  agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
  5.4

Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry Rudolph,
  and Aleksander Madry. Implementation matters in deep policy gradients: A case study on ppo and
  trpo. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. 1, 4

Mattie Fellows, Matthew Smith, and Shimon Whiteson. Why target networks stabilise temporal
 difference methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023. 3, 3.1, A.2

Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
  Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2974–2982, 2018. A.5

Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. International Conference on Machine Learning, abs/1802.09477, 2018. 1

Jiayuan Gu, Fanbo Xiang, Xuanlin Li, Zhan Ling, Xiqiang Liu, Tongzhou Mu, Yihe Tang, Stone
   Tao, Xinyue Wei, Yunchao Yao, Xiaodi Yuan, Pengwei Xie, Zhiao Huang, Rui Chen, and Hao
   Su. Maniskill2: A unified benchmark for generalizable manipulation skills. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. 1, 2.3

Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1352–1361, International Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, 06–11 Aug 2017.
  PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/haarnoja17a.html. 1


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft Actor-Critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Jennifer Dy and
  Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1861–1870, Stockholmsmässan,
  Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v80/haarnoja18b.html. 1
Danijar Hafner. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent capabilities. In The Ninth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 5.3
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
 deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Conference on Uncertainty in
 Artificial Intelligence, 2018. 5.2
Matthew W. Hoffman, Bobak Shahriari, John Aslanides, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Nikola Momchev,
 Danila Sinopalnikov, Piotr Stańczyk, Sabela Ramos, Anton Raichuk, Damien Vincent, Léonard
 Hussenot, Robert Dadashi, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Manu Orsini, Alexis Jacq, Johan Ferret, Nino
 Vieillard, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Sertan Girgin, Olivier Pietquin, Feryal Behbahani,
 Tamara Norman, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Albin Cassirer, Fan Yang, Kate Baumli, Sarah Henderson,
 Abe Friesen, Ruba Haroun, Alex Novikov, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Serkan Cabi, Caglar
 Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Andrew Cowie, Ziyu Wang, Bilal Piot, and Nando
 de Freitas. Acme: A research framework for distributed reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.00979, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.00979. A.1
Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado Van Hasselt,
  and David Silver. Distributed prioritized experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00933,
  2018. 2.3, 5.2, A.1, C
Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Brandon Cui, Luis Pineda, Noam Brown, and Jakob Foerster. Off-belief
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4369–4379. PMLR, 2021. C
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa, Antonin Raffin, Anssi Kanervisto, and
  Weixun Wang.      The 37 implementation details of proximal policy optimization. In
  ICLR Blog Track, 2022a. URL https://iclr-blog-track.github.io/2022/03/
  25/ppo-implementation-details/. https://iclr-blog-track.github.io/2022/03/25/ppo-
  implementation-details/. 1, 4
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa, Chang Ye, Jeff Braga, Dipam Chakraborty, Kinal
  Mehta, and João G.M. Araújo. Cleanrl: High-quality single-file implementations of deep reinforce-
  ment learning algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(274):1–18, 2022b. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-1342.html. C
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: accelerating deep network training
  by reducing internal covariate shift. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on
  International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 37, ICML’15, pp. 448–456. JMLR.org,
  2015. 1, 3.3
Steven Kapturowski, Georg Ostrovski, John Quan, Remi Munos, and Will Dabney. Recurrent
  experience replay in distributed reinforcement learning. In The Sixth International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018. 2.3, 4, A.1
J. Kolter. The fixed points of off-policy td. In J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and
   K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 24. Cur-
   ran Associates, Inc., 2011. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
   paper/2011/file/fe2d010308a6b3799a3d9c728ee74244-Paper.pdf. 2.2
Tadashi Kozuno, Yunhao Tang, Mark Rowland, Remi Munos, Steven Kapturowski, Will Dabney,
  Michal Valko, and David Abel. Revisiting peng’s q(lambda) for modern reinforcement learning. In
  Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5794–5804. PMLR,
  18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/kozuno21a.html.
  A.4


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Harold J. Kushner. Stochastic approximation: a survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Com-
  putational Statistics, 2, 2010. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  15194610. 2.2
Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The nethack learning environment. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:7671–7684, 2020. 5.3
Simon Lacoste-Julien, Mark Schmidt, and Francis Bach. A simpler approach to obtaining an o(1/t)
  convergence rate for the projected stochastic subgradient method. 12 2012. 2.2
Robert Tjarko Lange. gymnax: A JAX-based reinforcement learning environment library, 2022. URL
  http://github.com/RobertTLange/gymnax. 1
Zechu Li, Tao Chen, Zhang-Wei Hong, Anurag Ajay, and Pulkit Agrawal. Parallel q-learning: Scaling
  off-policy reinforcement learning under massively parallel simulation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 19440–19459. PMLR, 2023. 2.3
Chaoyue Liu, Libin Zhu, and Mikhail Belkin. On the linearity of large non-linear models: when and
  why the tangent kernel is constant. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS 2020, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates
  Inc. ISBN 9781713829546. 3.2, B.3
Liyuan Liu, Haoming Jiang, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Jiawei
  Han. On the variance of the adaptive learning rate and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03265,
  2019. C
Ryan Lowe, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
  critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017. A.5
Chris Lu, Jakub Kuba, Alistair Letcher, Luke Metz, Christian Schroeder de Witt, and Jakob Foerster.
  Discovered policy optimisation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:16455–
  16468, 2022. 1, 2.3
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo Avila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney.
  Understanding plasticity in neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 23190–23211. PMLR, 2023. 1, A.2, A.3
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Khimya Khetarpal, Hado van Hasselt, Razvan Pascanu, James Martens,
  and Will Dabney. Disentangling the causes of plasticity loss in neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.18762, 2024. 1, A.3
Hamid Reza Maei, Csaba Szepesvári, Shalabh Bhatnagar, and Richard S. Sutton. Toward off-policy
  learning control with function approximation. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference
  on International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’10, pp. 719–726, Madison, WI, USA,
  2010. Omnipress. ISBN 9781605589077. 2.2
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, and Gavriel State. Isaac gym: High
  performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning, 2021. 1, 2.3
Michael Matthews, Michael Beukman, Benjamin Ellis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Matthew Jackson,
 Samuel Coward, and Jakob Foerster. Craftax: A lightning-fast benchmark for open-ended rein-
 forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16801, 2024a. 1, C
Michael Matthews, Michael Beukman, Benjamin Ellis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Matthew Jackson,
 Samuel Coward, and Jakob Foerster. Craftax: A lightning-fast benchmark for open-ended rein-
 forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16801, 2024b. 1, 2.3, 5.3
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602. cite
  arxiv:1312.5602Comment: NIPS Deep Learning Workshop 2013. 1


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G.
  Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Pe-
  tersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran,
  Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep rein-
  forcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, February 2015. ISSN 00280836. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14236. 1
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1928–1937, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v48/mniha16.html. A.1
Remi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-
  policy reinforcement learning. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2016/file/c3992e9a68c5ae12bd18488bc579b30d-Paper.pdf. 4, A.4
Michal Nauman, Mateusz Ostaszewski, Krzysztof Jankowski, Piotr Miłoś, and Marek Cygan. Bigger,
 regularized, optimistic: scaling for compute and sample-efficient continuous control, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16158. 1
A. Nemirovski, A. Juditsky, G. Lan, and A. Shapiro. Robust stochastic approximation approach to
  stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 19(4):1574–1609, 2009. doi: 10.1137/
  070704277. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/070704277. 2.2
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration
  via bootstrapped dqn. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2016/file/8d8818c8e140c64c743113f563cf750f-Paper.pdf. C
Ian Osband, Yotam Doron, Matteo Hessel, John Aslanides, Eren Sezener, Andre Saraiva, Katrina
  McKinney, Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvari, Satinder Singh, et al. Behaviour suite for reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03568, 2019. C
Vassilis A. Papavassiliou and Stuart Russell. Convergence of reinforcement learning with general
  function approximators. In Proceedings of the 16th International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence - Volume 2, IJCAI’99, pp. 748–755, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999. Morgan Kaufmann
  Publishers Inc. 2.2
Jing Peng and Ronald J. Williams. Incremental multi-step q-learning. In William W. Cohen and
   Haym Hirsh (eds.), Machine Learning Proceedings 1994, pp. 226–232. Morgan Kaufmann, San
   Francisco (CA), 1994. ISBN 978-1-55860-335-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-55860-
   335-6.50035-0. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
   B9781558603356500350. A.4
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014. 2.1
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(178):1–51, 2020a. 5.4
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(178):1–51, 2020b. A.5
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A Stochastic Approximation Method. The Annals of Math-
  ematical Statistics, 22(3):400 – 407, 1951. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729586. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177729586. 2.2, 3.1


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gareth O. Roberts and Jeffrey S. Rosenthal. General state space Markov chains and MCMC
  algorithms. Probability Surveys, 1(none):20 – 71, 2004. doi: 10.1214/154957804100000024. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1214/154957804100000024. 2.2, 1, 1
Alexander Rutherford, Benjamin Ellis, Matteo Gallici, Jonathan Cook, Andrei Lupu, Gardar Ing-
  varsson, Timon Willi, Akbir Khan, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Alexandra Souly, et al. Jaxmarl:
  Multi-agent rl environments in jax. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10090, 2023. 1, 1, 2.3, 5.4
Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas Nardelli,
 Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. The
 starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043, 2019. 5.4
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 1889–1897, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v37/schulman15.html. 1
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1707.06347. 1
Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. Qtran: Learning to
  factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 5887–5896. PMLR, 2019. A.5
Rayadurgam Srikant and Lei Ying. Finite-time error bounds for linear stochastic approximation and
  td learning. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2803–2830. PMLR, 2019. 3.1, A.2
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinicius Zambaldi, Max
  Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, et al. Value-decomposition
  networks for cooperative multi-agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017a. A.5
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinicius Zambaldi, Max
  Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, et al. Value-decomposition
  networks for cooperative multi-agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017b. 4, 5.4
Richard S. Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine Learning, 3
  (1):9–44, Aug 1988. ISSN 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/BF00115009. 2.2
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT
  Press, second edition, 2018a. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-
  2nd.html. 3.1
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018b.
  C
Edan Toledo, Laurence Midgley, Donal Byrne, Callum Rhys Tilbury, Matthew Macfarlane, Cyprien
  Courtot, and Alexandre Laterre. Flashbax: Streamlining experience replay buffers for reinforce-
  ment learning with jax, 2023. URL https://github.com/instadeepai/flashbax/.
  5.5
Mark Towers, Jordan K. Terry, Ariel Kwiatkowski, John U. Balis, Gianluca de Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Arjun KG, Markus Krimmel, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, Andrea
 Pierré, Sander Schulhoff, Jun Jet Tai, Andrew Tan Jin Shen, and Omar G. Younis. Gymnasium,
 March 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/record/8127025. 2.3
J. N. Tsitsiklis and B. Van Roy. An analysis of temporal-difference learning with function approxi-
   mation. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 42(5):674–690, May 1997. ISSN 2334-3303.
   doi: 10.1109/9.580874. 1, 3.1, A.2
Hado van Hasselt, Yotam Doron, Florian Strub, Matteo Hessel, Nicolas Sonnerat, and Joseph Modayil.
  Deep Reinforcement Learning and the Deadly Triad. working paper or preprint, December 2018.
  URL https://hal.science/hal-01949304. 3.1


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoyan Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. On the global optimality of model-
  agnostic meta-learning: reinforcement learning and supervised learning. In Proceedings of the
  37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’20. JMLR.org, 2020. 2.2
Yixin Wang and David Blei. Frequentist consistency of variational bayes. Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 05 2017. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2018.1473776. 1
Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando Freitas. Dueling
  network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pp. 1995–2003. PMLR, 2016. C
Christopher J. C. H. Watkins and Peter Dayan. Technical note: q -learning. Mach. Learn., 8(3–4):
  279–292, May 1992. ISSN 0885-6125. doi: 10.1007/BF00992698. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1007/BF00992698. 3.1
Christopher John Cornish Hellaby Watkins. Learning from Delayed Rewards. PhD thesis, King’s
  College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, May 1989. URL http://www.cs.rhul.
  ac.uk/~chrisw/new_thesis.pdf. 1, 2.2, 4
Jiayi Weng, Min Lin, Shengyi Huang, Bo Liu, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk,
   Zichen Liu, Yufan Song, Ting Luo, Yukun Jiang, Zhongwen Xu, and Shuicheng Yan.
   EnvPool: A highly parallel reinforcement learning environment execution engine. In
   S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Ad-
   vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 22409–22421. Cur-
   ran Associates, Inc., 2022.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
   files/paper/2022/file/8caaf08e49ddbad6694fae067442ee21-Paper-
   Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf. 2.3
Zhuora Yang, Yuchen Xie, and Zhaoran Wang. A theoretical analysis of deep q-learning, 2019. 2.2
Kenny Young and Tian Tian. Minatar: An atari-inspired testbed for thorough and reproducible
  reinforcement learning experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03176, 2019. C
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The
  surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:24611–24624, 2022. A.5
Yang Yue, Rui Lu, Bingyi Kang, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang.            Understanding, pre-
  dicting and better resolving q-value divergence in offline-rl. In A. Oh, T. Naumann,
  A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 60247–60277. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/bd6bb13e78da078d8adcabbe6d9ca737-Paper-Conference.pdf. A.2
Shangtong Zhang, Hengshuai Yao, and Shimon Whiteson. Breaking the deadly triad with a target
  network. Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Unknown Month
  2021. URL NoURL. 2.2


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORK
A.1 A SYNCHRONOUS M ETHODS AND PARALLELISATION OF Q- LEARNING
Existing attempts to parallelise Q-learning adopt a distributed architecture, where a separate process
continually trains the agent and sampling occurs in parallel threads which contain a delayed copy
of its parameters (Horgan et al., 2018; Kapturowski et al., 2018; Badia et al., 2020; Hoffman et al.,
2020). On the contrary, PQN samples and trains in the same process, enabling end-to-end single
GPU training. While distributed methods can benefit from a separate process that continuously train
the network, PQN is easier to implement, doesn’t introduce time-lags between the learning agent and
the exploratory policy. Moreover, PQN can be optimised to be sample efficient other than fast, while
distributed system usually ignore sample efficiency.
Mnih et al. (2016) propose an asynchronous Q-learning, a parallelised version of Q-learning which
performs updates of a centralised network asynchronously. Compared to PQN, asynchronous Q-
learning still uses target networks and accumulates gradients over many timesteps to update the
network. Moreover, it is a multi-threaded approach where each worker independently performs
exploration and gradient updates with its own target network. This setup results in each actor being
optimised independently with its own experiences and objective, introducing significant noise into
the central learner that periodically unifies the gradients. Finally, the algorithm relies on collecting
historical data: "We also accumulate gradients over multiple timesteps before they are applied" (Mnih
et al., 2016). This undermines a key benefit of parallelised methods, which is avoiding the use of data
collected under historic policies (see Section 4.1).
PQN is a synchronous method where a single actor interacts with vectorised environments, and a
single gradient is computed at once using all the experiences. PQN can be seen as the synchronous
version of that asynchronous Q-Learning algorithm, which has never been implemented before.
Note that moving from asynchronous to synchronous, removing the target networks, and avoiding
multi-step gradient accumulation drastically changes the optimisation procedure and implementation,
resulting in a much simpler and more stable algorithm. To our knowledge, we are the first to unlock
the potential of a parallelised deep Q-learning algorithm with minimal memory requirements and
without target networks.
A.2 A NALYSIS OF TD
Most prior approaches analysing TD focus on linear function approximation. Tsitsiklis & Van Roy
(1997) first proved convergence of linear, on-policy TD, arguing that the projected Bellman operator
in this setting is a contraction. Dalal et al. (2017) give the first finite time bounds for linear TD(0),
under an i.i.d. data model similar to the one that we use here. Bhandari et al. (2018) provide bounds
for linear TD in both the i.i.d. and Markov chain setting. Srikant & Ying (2019) approach the problem
from the perspective of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE) analysis, bounding the divergence
of a Lyapunov function from the limiting point of the ODE that arises from the TD update scheme.
Analysis of pure TD in the general nonlinear and Markov chain sampling regime is lacking.
Two papers that are most closely related to our work are: (Fellows et al., 2023) and (Yue et al.,
2023).
(Yue et al., 2023) analyses the effect of LayerNorm in TD, however there are several important
differences. Firstly, the paper analyzes the neural tangent kernel (NTK) of the update, which only
exists in the limit of infinite width networks and does not capture the nonlinear instability that we
analyse. We make no such assumption as this will never hold in practice. Instead, we use the analysis
of Fellows et al. (2023) which predates (Yue et al., 2023) and provides a more general framework
for studying TD with finite width nonlinear networks. Moreover, Fellows et al. (2023) provide key
results on establishing stability of general TD using an eigenvalue analysis this is more general but
are remarkably similar to Yue et al. (2023)’s SEEM framework. We extend these results to Markov
chain sampling with normalised regularisation.
Yue et al. (2023) claim that LayerNorm alone can stabilise TD. Under our more general and applicable
analysis, as our results show, LayerNorm without ℓ2 regularisation cannot completely stabilise TD
for all domains. This is because for stability, the Jacobian eigenvalues need to be strictly negative.
As Lemma 2 shows, there may still be a residual positive term that prevents this. Our empirical
results in Baird’s counterexample confirm this, showing that the algorithm can only be stabilised
using normalisation. Existing empirical research (Lyle et al., 2023) also supports this.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3 R EGULARISATION IN RL
CrossQ is a recently developed off-policy algorithm based on SAC that removes target networks
and introduces BatchNorm into the critic (Bhatt et al., 2024). CrossQ demonstrates impressive
performance when evaluated across a suite of MuJoCo domain with high sample and computational
efficiency, however no analysis is provided explaining its stability properties or what effect introducing
BatchNorm has. To develop PQN, we performed a rigorous analysis of LayerNorm in TD. Here is a
complete list of the differences between CrossQ and PQN:
       • CrossQ is based on a soft-actor critic architecture for continuous action control. Its entropy-
         based actor objective optimises a stochastic policy. On the contrary, PQN consists of a
         single, simple value network optimised with the standard Bellman Equations, which is used
         to learn a deterministic policy for discrete actions.
       • CrossQ is not parallelised, i.e., it interacts with a single environment at a time, while a
         fundamental contribution of PQN is handling parallel environments for faster training on
         modern hardware. Parallelisation of Q-Learning algorithms is not trivial: one cannot simply
         interact with multiple environments while leaving the rest of the learning pipeline unchanged,
         as this drastically modifies the ratio between interactions with the environments and the
         number of gradient updates. PQN approaches this problem by offering a sample-efficient
         implementation based on normalisation, Q-Lambda, and mini-batches/mini-epochs updates.
       • CrossQ uses a large replay buffer containing data from historical policies to perform updates,
         while PQN obtains mini-batches directly from interactions with parallel environments under
         a single policy.
       • CrossQ is not directly compatible with Q-Lambda and Recurrent Neural Networks because
         of the overhead introduced by the replay buffers: the use of old experiences in the update
         step makes computation of Q-Lambda unsafe, and the use of hidden states for the RNNs
         problematic. To include these methods in CrossQ one should add, e.g., Retrace and Burn-In
         techniques. Conversely, the theoretical absence of a replay buffer in PQN allows us to use
         them out of the box. Note that these are crucial in many scenarios (see Q-Lambda ablation
         for Atari and MLP-RNN results in Craftax).
       • There is no theoretical analysis of normalisation in CrossQ and empirical evidence limited
         to six Mujoco continuous-action tasks. This is not sufficient to make any reasonable claims
         for its performance in general RL scenarios. We give a theoretical basis for our method
         and we compare it with baselines across 79 discrete-action tasks (2 Classic Control tasks, 4
         MinAtar games, 57 Atari games, Craftax, 9 Smax tasks, 5 Overcooked, and Hanabi). The
         limited evaluation provided for CrossQ is concerning, and the results in Mujoco might not
         reflect its true capabilities. Our results in Atari demonstrate it.
       • PQN is designed for complete GPU implementation and to be compatible with end-to-end
         compilation, which is a fundamental step for bringing Q-Learning into modern RL research
         (currently dominated by PPO). CrossQ does not tackle this problem, instead favouring a
         standard pipeline (which consists of interacting with one environment - sampling from
         the replay buffer - updating the network - repeat) with the addition of normalisation. This
         pipeline is exactly the same as that used by DQN in our Atari experiments, where we show
         that PQN is between 50x and 100x faster and uses 26 times less memory.
The benefits of regularisation have also been reported in other areas of the RL literature. Lyle
et al. (Lyle et al., 2023; 2024) investigate plasticity loss in off-policy RL, a phenomenon where
neural networks lose their ability to fit a new target functions throughout training. They propose
LayerNorm (Lyle et al., 2023) and LayerNorm with ℓ2 regularisation (Lyle et al., 2024), as a solution
to this problem, and show improved performance on the Atari Learning Environment, but they also
use other methods of stabilisation, such as target networks, that we explicitly remove. In addition,
they provide no formal analysis explaining stability.
A.4 M ULTI -S TEP Q- LEARNING
The concept of n-step returns in reinforcement learning extends the traditional one-step update to
consider rewards over future timesteps. The n-step return for a state-action pair (s, a) is defined as
the cumulative reward over the next n steps plus the discounted value of the state reached after n
steps. Several variations of n-step Q-learning have been proposed to enhance learning efficiency and


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


stability. Peng & Williams (1994) introduced a variation known as Q(λ), which integrates eligibility
traces to account for multiple time steps while maintaining the off-policy nature of Q-learning.
Replay buffers are difficult to combine with Q(λ), so standard methods like DQN use a single-step
TD learning. The most relevant work that aimed to use Q(λ) with a replay buffer is Retrace (Munos
et al., 2016). More recent methods have tried to reconcile λ-returns with the experience buffer Daley
& Amato (2019) most notably in TD3 Kozuno et al. (2021).
A.5 M ULTI -AGENT D EEP Q L EARNING
Q-learning methods are a popular choice for multi-agent RL (MARL), especially in the purely
cooperative centralised training with decentralised execution (CTDE) setting (Foerster et al., 2018;
Lowe et al., 2017). In CTDE, global information is made available at training time, but not at test
time. Many of these methods develop approaches to combine individual utility functions into a joint
estimate of the Q function: Son et al. (2019) introduce the individual-global-max (IGM) principle
to describe when a centralised Q function can be computed from individual utility functions in a
decentralised fashion; Value Decomposition Networks (VDN) (Sunehag et al., 2017a) combines
individual value estimates by summing them, and QMIX (Rashid et al., 2020b) learns a hypernetwork
with positive weights to ensure monotonicity. All these methods can be combined with PQN, which
parallises the learning process.
IPPO (De Witt et al., 2020) and MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022) use vectorised environments, adapting a
single-agent method for use in multi-agent RL. These are both on-policy actor-critic based methods
based on PPO.

B    P ROOFS AND D ERIVATIONS
B.1 D ERIVATION OF TD S TABILITY R ESULTS
We start by examining the TD Jacobian to separate the TD stability condition into two components.
From the definition of the TD Jacobian:
            J(ϕ) = ∇ϕ δ(ϕ) = ∇ϕ Eς∼Pς [δ(ϕ, ς)],
                = Eς∼Pς [∇ϕ ((r + γQϕ (x′ ) − Qϕ (x)) ∇ϕ Qϕ (x))] ,
                = γEς∼Pς ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ − Eς∼Pς ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤


                   + Eς∼Pς (r + γQϕ (x′ ) − Qϕ (x)) ∇2ϕ Qϕ (x) ,


                = γEς∼Pς ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ − Ex∼dµ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤


                   + Eς∼Pς (r + γQϕ (x′ ) − Qϕ (x)) ∇2ϕ Qϕ (x) ,


hence, we can write the TD Jacobian condition as:
     v ⊤ J(ϕ)v = γEς∼Pς v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ v − Ex∼dµ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ v


                 + Eς∼Pς (r + γQϕ (x′ ) − Qϕ (x)) v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qϕ (x)v ,

                                                               h           2 i
               = γEς∼Pς v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ v − Ex∼dµ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)


                 + Eς∼Pς (r + γQϕ (x′ ) − Qϕ (x)) v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qϕ (x)v ,


                   = COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) + CNonlinear (Qkϕ ),
yielding the two stability components introduced in Section 3.1. Next, we investigate the effect that
off-policy sampling has on COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ):
                                                                        h                2 i
    COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) = γEς∼Pς v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ v − Ex∼dµ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)

                                                                                             . (10)
We now apply the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to separate the expectations in the first term:
  Eς∼Pς v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ v ≤ Eς∼Pς v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ v ,

                                      q
                                                                              2
                                     = |Eς∼Pς [v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qϕ (x)⊤ v]| ,
                                      r         h                 i       h                  i
                                                                2                          2
                                     ≤ Eς∼Pς (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )) Eς∼Pς (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)) ,
                                      r         h                 i        h                 i
                                                                      2                       2
                                       =    Eς∼Pς (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ ))       Ex∼dπ (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)) .


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Substituting into Eq. (10) yields:
                                         r      h                    i       h              i
                                                                   2                      2
            COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) ≤ γ Eς∼Pς (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )) Ex∼dπ (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x))
                                              h                 2 i
                                   − Ex∼dµ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)            .
                                                                                   h                 2 i
Now, as γ ∈ [0, 1), to prove that COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) < 0, we require that Eς∼Pς v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x′ )      ≤
      h                      i
                           2
Ex∼dπ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x) , yielding:


                                  r          h                   i2           h
                                                               2                            2 i
                     k     µ
        COffPolicy (Qϕ , d ) ≤ γ Ex∼dπ (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x))               − Ex∼dµ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)      ,
                                                  h                 2  i
                               = (γ − 1)Ex∼dµ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)              ,
                              < 0.

B.2 T HEOREM 1 - A NALYSING TD
We now characterise the convergence of TD in our general setting. Our proof is structured as follows:
we first bound the expected hnorm one timestep i into the future in
                                                                  h terms of the i expected norm at
                                           ⋆ 2                               ⋆ 2
the current timestep: Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕi+1 − ϕ ∥ ≤ Constant · E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ ∥ + Residuali where
Residuali is a residual term that accounts for the variance of the updates and sampling from the
                                                           2
Markov chain. This is done by expanding ∥ϕi+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥ and following the algebra to Ineq. 11 of
Theorem 1. To bound the residual term, we then invoke Lemma 1. Bounding the variance contribution
results naturally from our Lipschitz assumption. Bounding the Markov contribution follows from the
definition of geometric ergodicity and our proof is similar to Bhandari et al. (2018). Crucially, this
bound implies limi→∞ Residuali = 0. We then use the fundamental theorem of calculus to show that
the TD stability criterion implies Constant < 1 for small enough αi (see Eq. (12)). This demonstrates
that the TD updates are a contraction mapping with a decaying residual term, allowing us to verify
convergence in the remainder of the proof.
Theorem 1 (TD Stability). Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. If the TD criterion holds then the TD
updates in Eq. (1) converge with:
                                             h             i
                                                         2
                                      lim E ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ = 0.
                                             i→∞


Proof. We use the notation E−ςi [·] to denote the expectation over {ς0 , . . . ςi−1 } and Eςi |ςi−1 [·] to
denote
  h     the expectation
                   i      over ςi conditioned on ςi−1 . Substituting for ϕi+1 = ϕi + αi δ(ϕi , ςi ) into
                 2
E ∥ϕi+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥ yields:
          h                 i           h                          i
                          2                                      2
  Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕi+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥ = Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕi + αi δ(ϕi , ςi ) − ϕ⋆ ∥ ,
                 h                                                             i
                                2
        =Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ + 2αi δ(ϕi , ςi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) + αi2 ∥δ(ϕi , ςi )∥2 ,
               h                                                                               i
                              2                      ⊤
        =E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ + 2αi Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) + αi2 Eςi |−ςi ∥δ(ϕi , ςi )∥2 ,

               h                                                           ⊤
                              2
        =E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ + 2αi Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] − δ(ϕi ) + δ(ϕi ) (ϕi − ϕ⋆ )
                                        i
          + αi2 Eςi |−ςi ∥δ(ϕi , ςi )∥2 ,

               h
                              2
        =E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ + 2αi δ(ϕi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ )
                                                ⊤                                        i
          + 2αi Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] − δ(ϕi ) (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) + αi2 Eςi |−ςi ∥δ(ϕi , ςi )∥2 ,

               h                                     i
                              2
        ≤E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ + 2αi δ(ϕi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ )
                        h                            ⊤             i
          + 2αi E−ςi Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] − δ(ϕi ) (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) +αi2 Eςi ,−ςi ∥δ(ϕi , ςi )∥2 , (11)

                 |                         {z                       }        |        {z        }
                                         Non i.i.d. term                          Variance term



                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we have isolated the contribution of variance and non-i.i.d. sampling in deriving the final line.
We now bound the non-i.i.d. contribution in total variation and variance term using Lemma 1:

         h              i   h                                   i
                      2                2
 Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕi+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥ ≤E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ + 2αi δ(ϕi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) + 2αi CMarkov ρi + αi2 CVar .


Note that for i.i.d. sampling, Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] = Eςi ∼Pς [δ(ϕi , ςi )] = δ(ϕi ) and so CMarkov = 0.
Next, we re-write δ(ϕi ) to contain a factor of ϕi − ϕ⋆ . Define the line joining ϕ⋆ to ϕi as ℓ(l) =
ϕi − l(ϕi − ϕ⋆ ). Under Assumption 2, we can apply the fundamental theorem of calculus to integrate
along this line, yielding:

                               δ(ϕi ) = δ(ϕi ) − δ(ϕ⋆ ),
                                                 | {z }
                                                        =0
                                     = δ(ϕ = ℓ(0)) − δ(ϕ = ℓ(1)),
                                         Z 1
                                     =−      ∂l δ(ϕ = ℓ(l))dl,
                                               0
                                         Z 1
                                     =         ∇ϕ δ(ϕ = ℓ(l))(ϕi − ϕ⋆ )dl,
                                          0
                                         Z 1
                                     =         J(ϕ = ℓ(l))dl(ϕi − ϕ⋆ ),
                                          0
                                       ˜ i − ϕ⋆ )
                                     = J(ϕ

                                                                                                  R1
where we have used the chain rule to derive the fourth line and introduced the notation J˜ :=      0
                                                                                                       J(ϕ =
ℓ(l))dl. Substituting yields:

                    h              i   h                                       i
                                 2                2                  ˜ i − ϕ⋆ )
            Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕi+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥ ≤E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ + 2αi (ϕi − ϕ⋆ )⊤ J(ϕ
                                         + 2αi CMarkov ρi + αi2 CVar .


Now, as the TD criterion: v ⊤ J(ϕ)v < 0 holds almost everywhere, it follows that:

                                               Z 1
                                (ϕi − ϕ⋆ )⊤            J(ϕ = ℓ(l))dl(ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) < 0,
                                                   0
                                               |          {z       }
                                                           :=J˜

                  ˜ i − ϕ⋆ ) = (ϕi − ϕ⋆ )⊤             1
   =⇒ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ )⊤ J(ϕ                                        J˜ + J˜⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) ≤ −λmin ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥2 ,
                                                       2

where λmin > 0 is the smallest (in magnitude) eigenvalue of − 21 (J˜ + J˜⊤ ). Substituting yields:

           h              i    h            i
                        2                 2
   Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕi+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥ ≤ E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ (1 − 2αi λmin ) + 2αi CMarkov ρi + αi2 CVar .                 (12)


Re-arranging yields:

                h            i
                           2
   2λmin αi E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥
                       h            i        h              i
                                  2                       2
                 ≤ E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ − Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕi+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥ + 2αi CMarkov ρi + αi2 CVar .


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Summing over i up to timestep t and using the telescoping property of the series yields:
            t
            X            h            i
                                    2
    2λmin         αi E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥
            i=0
                       h                       i             h             i         t
                                                                                     X             t
                                                                                                   X
                                         ⋆ 2                           ⋆ 2                 i
            ≤ E−ςi ∥ϕ0 − ϕ ∥                       − Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕt+1 − ϕ ∥ + 2CMarkov   αi ρ + CVar   αi2 ,
                                                                                                                 i=0       i=0
                       h                       i                      t
                                                                      X                        t
                                                                                               X
                                           2
            ≤ E−ςi ∥ϕ0 − ϕ⋆ ∥                      + 2CMarkov               αi ρi + CVar             αi2 ,
                                                                      i=0                      i=0
            t
            X          αi                  h
                                                              2
                                                                  i
     =⇒           Pt       E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥
           i=0
                     α i
                    i′ =0
                         ′

                             h                 i                                             
                                            ⋆ 2
                1    E −ς  i   ∥ϕ  0 − ϕ    ∥               Pt
                                                                   αi ρ i
                                                                                 Pt
                                                                                         α 2
           ≤                  Pt                   + 2CMarkov Pi=0
                                                                 t        + CVar Pti=0 i  ,    (13)
              2λmin              i′ =0 αi
                                          ′
                                                                 i=0 αi            i′ =0 αi
                                                                                            ′

                                                           h                i
                                                                          2
where the penultimate bound follows from Eςi ,−ςi ∥ϕt+1 − ϕ⋆ ∥ ≥ 0. In preparation for taking
the limit t → ∞, we observe that by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality:
                                                      v              v
                    Xt               Xt               u t
                                                      uX
                                                                     u t
                                                                     uX X        t
                              i                  i            2
                          αi ρ =        |αi ||ρ | ≤   t         2i
                                                            α ρ ≤t            α2   ρ2i .
                                                                                    i                        i
                            i=0                i=0                          i=0                      i=0         i=0
                                                     Pt       2
Now, from Assumption 1, limt→∞                           i=0 αi < ∞, hence:
                                                          v
                                         t
                                         X
                                                          u
                                                          u     t
                                                                X         t
                                                                          X
                                                       i
                                   lim             αi ρ ≤ t lim   αi2 lim   ρ2i = O(1)
                               t→∞                                t→∞                   t→∞
                                         i=0                                i=0               i=0
              Pt
As limt→∞         i=0 αi = ∞, this implies:
                                                                      Pt
                                                                              αi ρi
                                                          lim Pi=0
                                                                t                       = 0.
                                                          t→∞
                                                                           i=0 αi
We are now ready to take limits of Inq. 13, yielding:
                                                   t
                                                   X          αi               h
                                                                                          2
                                                                                            i
                                         lim             Pt                E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ = 0.                                  (14)
                                         t→∞
                                                          i′ =0 αi
                                                                       ′
                                                   i=0

Eq. (14) proves our desired result:
                                             h               i
                                                           2
                                    lim E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ = 0.
                                   i→∞
                                                               h       i
                                                                     2
To see why, assume this does not hold, that is limi→∞ E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ ̸= 0. This implies there
exists some infinite length sub-sequence S such that for all i ∈ S:
                                          h              i
                                                       2
                                      E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ > 0,
hence, as all quantities are positive:
           t
           X           αi              h
                                                  2
                                                    i    X    αi                                              h
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                           i
     lim          Pt               E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ ≥ lim   Pt                                             E−ςi ∥ϕi − ϕ⋆ ∥ > 0,
    t→∞                                                                t→∞
                    i′ =0 αi                                                              i′ =0 αi
                               ′                                                                      ′
            i=0                                                                   i∈S

which is a contradiction.
Lemma 1. Let Assumption 2 hold. Then there exist constants: 0 < CMarkov < ∞, 0 < CVar < ∞
and ρ ∈ [0, 1) such that:
       h                               ⊤         i
  E−ςi Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] − δ(ϕi ) (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) ≤ CMarkov ρi , Eςi ,−ςi ∥δ(ϕi , ςi )∥2 ≤ CVar .



                                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. For both results, we use the fact that, because Φ is compact and X is bounded, rewards are
bounded and δ(ϕ, ς) is Lipschitz under Assumption 2, δ(ϕ, ς) is bounded almost everywhere. To
prove the first bound, we denote the marginal probability distribution of the i-th timestep element in
the Markov chain ςi as P i with density:
                                             Z
                                     i
                                   p (ςi ) = p(−ςi , ςi )d(−ςi ).

Under this notation we write:
     h                               ⊤              i
E−ςi Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] − δ(ϕi ) (ϕi − ϕ⋆ )
             h                                    ⊤            i
  =E−ςi ,ςi δ(ϕi , ςi ) − Eςi′ ∼Pς [δ(ϕi , ςi′ )] (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) ,
             h                                                          i
                                                             ⊤
  =E−ςi ,ςi δ(ϕi , ςi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) − Eςi′ ∼Pς [δ(ϕi , ςi′ )] (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) ,
  =E−ςi ,ςi δ(ϕi , ςi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) − Eςi′ ∼Pς δ(ϕi , ςi′ )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) ,


  =Eςi ∼P i E−ςi ∼P i (ςi ) δ(ϕi , ςi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) − Eςi ∼Pς E−ςi ∼P i (ςi ) δ(ϕi , ςi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) ,


                                                                                                     (15)
where P i (ςi ) is the backwards conditional distribution in the Markov chain with density:
                                                         pi (−ςi , ςi )
                                       pi (−ςi |ςi ) =                  .
                                                            pi (ςi )
Introducing the notation:
                             g(ςi ) = E−ςi ∼P i (ςi ) δ(ϕi , ςi )⊤ (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) ,


we write Eq. (15) as:
             h                                  ⊤             i
        E−ςi Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] − δ(ϕi ) (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) = Eςi ∼P i [g(ςi )] − Eςi ∼Pς [g(ςi )] ,

              = Eς0 Eςi ∼P i (ς0 ) [g(ςi )] − Eςi ∼Pς [g(ςi )] ,

                                              g(ςi )               g(ςi )
              = Eς0 gmax Eςi ∼P i (ς0 )                − Eςi ∼Pς              ,                     (16)
                                              gmax                 gmax
where gmax := maxς |g(ς)| < ∞ almost everywhere, which follows from the fact that δ(ϕ, ς) is
bounded almost everywhere, implying g(ς) is also bounded almost everywhere. Now, as gg(·)        max
                                                                                                     :
X × R × X → [−1, 1], we can bound Eq. (16) in total variation using Roberts & Rosenthal
(2004)[Proposition 3b]:

                                       g(ςi )                  g(ςi )
            Eς0 gmax Eςi ∼P i (ς0 )               − Eςi ∼Pς                  ≤
                                        gmax                   gmax

                                              g(ςi )                g(ςi )
                 Eς0 gmax Eςi ∼P i (ς0 )               − Eςi ∼Pς
                                               gmax                  gmax

                            1                   g(ςi )                g(ςi )
              =2gmax Eς0       Eςi ∼P i (ς0 )            − Eςi ∼Pς              ,
                            2                   gmax                   gmax
                          "                                                                   #
                            1
              ≤2gmax Eς0             sup              E     i    [f (ςi )] − Eςi ∼Pς [f (ςi )] ,
                            2 f :X ×R×X →[−1,1] ςi ∼P (ς0 )
              =2gmax Eς0 TV(P i (ς0 )∥Pς ) ,

                                                                                                 (17)

where TV(P i (ς0 )∥Pς ) is the total variational distance between the marginal distribution P i (ς0 )
(conditioned on initial observations) and the steady state distribution Pς . Now, as the Markov chain
is geometricaly ergodic, by definition there exists some function M (ς0 ) and constant ρ ∈ [0, 1) such
that:
                                     TV(P i (ς0 )∥Pς ) ≤ M (ς0 )ρi ,


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


almost surely (see Roberts & Rosenthal (2004)[Section 3.4]), hence substituting into Eq. (17) yields
our desired result:
                h                              ⊤         i
          E−ςi Eςi |−ςi [δ(ϕi , ςi )] − δ(ϕi ) (ϕi − ϕ⋆ ) ≤2gmax Eς0 TV(P i (ς0 )∥Pς ) ,


                                                           ≤2gmax Eς0 M (ς0 )ρi ,


                                                                          =2gmax Eς0 [M (ς0 )] ρi ,
                                                                          =CMarkov ρi ,

where CMarkov := 2gmax Eς0 [M (ς0 )] < ∞. Our second bound follows from the fact that δ(ϕ, ς) is
bounded almost everywhere. This implies there exists some CVar > 0 such that ∥δ(ϕ, ς)∥2 ≤ CVar
almost everywhere, hence:

                                  Eςi ,−ςi ∥δ(ϕi , ςi )∥2 ≤ CVar .


B.3   T HEOREM 2 - S TABILISING TD WITH L AYER N ORM AND ℓ2 -R EGULARISATION
Notation:    For all proofs in this section, we introduce the following simplifying notations:

                                         fM (x) :=σPre ◦ M x,
                                                      1 fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x)
                              LayerNormki [f ](x) := √ ·                     ,
                                                       k     σ̂[f ](x)

where µ̂ [f ] (x) and σ̂[f ](x) are the element-wise empirical mean and standard deviation of the output
f (x):
                                                            v
                                k−1                         u k−1
                              1 X                           u1 X
             µ̂ [f ] (x) :=         fi (x),    σ̂[f ](x) := t       (fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x))2 + ϵ,
                              k i=0                           k i=0


Finally, we write M in terms of its row vectors:

                                                             mT0
                                                                         
                                                     | |


                                                                    | |


                                                            m⊤ 1
                                                                          
                                              M =                        .
                                                                         
                                                              ..
                                                              .          
                                                             m⊤
                                                     |


                                                                    |


                                                              k−1

and split the test vector into the corresponding k + 1 sub-vectors:

                                      v ⊤ = [vw
                                              T    ⊤
                                                , vm 0
                                                          ⊤
                                                       , vm 1
                                                                       ⊤
                                                              , · · · vm k−1
                                                                             ],

where vw is a vector with the same dimension as the final weight vector w and each vmi ∈ Rn has the
same dimension as x. We will make use of the following three key properties of LayerNorm:
Proposition 1. Let f : X → Rk be a vector-valued function such that all components fi are bounded,
then:

             ∥LayerNormk [f (x)]∥ ≤ 1,

                                                           1
            ∂fi LayerNormkj [f (x)] = O k       1(i = j) +
                                                  − 12
                                                                ,
                                                           k

                                                                                 1
                         k
        ∂fs ∂ft LayerNormj [f (x)] = O k  − 32
                                                1(t = j) + 1(t = s) + 1(j = s) +      .
                                                                                 k


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Our first result follows directly from the definition of LayerNorm:
                                                 1 ∥f (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x)∥
                   ∥LayerNormk [f (x)]∥ = √                                   ,
                                                   k        σ̂[f ](x)
                                                q P
                                                    1   k−1                           2
                                                    k   i=0 (fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x))
                                            =                                           ,
                                                               σ̂[f ](x)
                                                q P
                                                    1   k−1                           2
                                                    k   i=0 (fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x)) + ϵ
                                            ≤                                                ,
                                                                  σ̂[f ](x)
                                                σ̂[f ](x)
                                            =             ,
                                                σ̂[f ](x)
                                            = 1,
as required. For our second result, we take partial derivatives with respect to the ith input channel to
the LayerNorm:
                                       1(i = j) − k1 fj (x) − µ̂[f ](x)

                    k            1
     ∂fi LayerNormj [f (x)] = √                          −                        ∂fi σ̂[f ](x) ,
                                  k       σ̂[f ](x)               σ̂[f ](x)2
                                       1(i = j) − k1 √ LayerNormkj [f (x)]
                                                                                                       !
                                 1
                             =√                          − k                              ∂fi σ̂[f ](x) .
                                  k       σ̂[f ](x)                      σ̂[f ](x)
Finding the derivative of the empirical variance yields:
                       v
                       u k−1
                       u1 X
   ∂fi σ̂[f ](x) = ∂fi t       (fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x))2 + ϵ,
                         k i=0

                         k−1
                                                         !− 12          k−1
                                                                                                          !
                 1    1X                            2                1X                              2
               =            (fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x)) + ϵ         ∂fi            (fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x)) + ϵ ,
                 2    k i=0                                          k i=0
                            k−1
                     1                                                1
                                 (fl (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x)) 1(i = l) −
                            X
               =                                                            ,
                 kσ̂[f ](x)                                           k
                             l=0
                               k−1                                       k−1                        k−1
                                                                                                          !
                     1                                                1X                            X1
                                   (fl (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x))1(i = l) −
                               X
               =                                                               fl (x) + µ̂ [f ] (x)         ,
                 kσ̂[f ](x)                                           k                                 k
                               l=0                                       l=0                        l=0
                                                         k−1
                                                                                 !
                     1                                 1X
               =              fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x) −         fl (x) +µ̂ [f ] (x) ,
                 kσ̂[f ](x)                            k
                                                         l=0
                                                      | {z }
                                                          =µ̂[f ](x)

                 fi (x) − µ̂ [f ] (x)
               =                      ,
                      kσ̂[f ](x)
                  1
               = √ LayerNormki [f (x)],
                    k
hence:
           ∂fi LayerNormkj [f (x)]

                        1                      1
               =√                 1(i = j) − − LayerNormki [f (x)]LayerNormkj [f (x)] ,        (18)
                     kσ̂[f ](x)                k

                         1                  1
               =O √            1(i = j) +         ,
                          k                 k

where we use the fact that LayerNormkj [f (x)] = O √1k to derive the final line. To prove our third
result, we start with the first order partial derivative using Eq. (18):

                                   1                      1
∂ft LayerNormkj [f (x)] = √                  1(t = j) − − LayerNormkt [f (x)]LayerNormkj [f (x)] ,
                                kσ̂[f ](x)                k


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Taking partial derivatives with respect to fs yields:
∂fs ∂ft LayerNormkj [f (x)]

       ∂fs σ̂[f ](x)              1
 = −√                  1(t = j) − − LayerNormt [f (x)]LayerNormj [f (x)]
                                                   k           k
        kσ̂[f ](x)2               k
       1  ∂fs LayerNormkt [f (x)] · LayerNormkj [f (x)] + LayerNormkt [f (x)]∂fs LayerNormkj [f (x)]
 − k− 2 ·                                                                                            ,
                                                    σ̂[f ](x)

                           1                                  1                           1
 = O k − 2 1(t = j) +             + O k − 2 1(t = s) +             + O k − 2 1(j = s) +
           3                               3                                3
                                                                                                  ,
                           k                                  k                           k

                                                     1
 = O k − 2 1(t = j) + 1(t = s) + 1(j = s) +
           3
                                                            ,
                                                     k
as required.

We are now ready to prove our main result. Most of the work is done by proving Lemma 2: once
the bounds in Lemma 2 have been established, the result follows by subtracting the regularisation
term from the off policy and nonlinear components of the TD stability condition. We split the proof
of Lemma 2 into two parts. Firstly, we bound the off-policy contribution by splitting it further into
components that affect the final layer weights and the other matrix weights. By doing so, we find
a residual term remains that is only affected by the final layer weights (Lemma 3). Secondly, we
bound the non-linear contribution in Lemma 4 by isolating the second order derivative of the function
                                                                 √
approximator. What remains is to show this term decays as 1/ k, which we prove in Lemma 5. Our
proof of Lemma 5 is similar to Liu et al. (2020).
                                                                                              k
Theorem 2. Let Assumption 2 apply. Using the LayerNorm regularised TD update δreg               (ϕ, ς) in
                                   ′                                                         ′
Eq. (9), there exists some finite k such that the TD stability criterion holds for all k > k

Proof. From the definition of the expected regularised TD error vector:
                         k
                            (ϕ) = Eς∼Pς r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x) ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x)

                       δreg
                                                          2                          !
                                                  γLPost     w                 0
                                         − η                    + (η − 1)                ,
                                                     2       0              Vec(M )

          =⇒ v ⊤ ∇ϕ δreg
                       k
                          (ϕ)v = Eς∼Pς r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x) v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)v


                                  + Eς∼Pς v ⊤ (γ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x′ ) − ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x))∇ϕ Qkϕ (x)⊤ v

                                                   2
                                           γLPost
                                    −η               ∥vw ∥2 − (η − 1)∥v−m ∥2 ,
                                             2
                                 = COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) + CNonlinear (Qkϕ )
                                                             2
                                                     γLPost
                                             −η                ∥vw ∥2 − (η − 1)∥v−m ∥2 .
                                                         2
Applying Lemma 2 and taking the limit k → ∞ yields:
                                                  2
                                          γLPost
              lim v ⊤ ∇ϕ δreg
                            k
                              (ϕ)v =                   (1 − η)∥vw ∥2 + (1 − η)∥vM ∥2 < 0,
             k→∞                             2
almost everywhere, which follows from the fact η > 1, hence, by the definition of the limit, there
must exist some finite k ′ such that for all k > k ′ :
                                           v ⊤ ∇ϕ δreg
                                                    k
                                                        (ϕ)v < 0,
almost everywhere, as required.
                                                                                            ⊤ ⊤ ⊤
Lemma 2. Let Assumption 2 apply. Let vw be the first k components of the test vector v = [vw , vM ] ,
associated with final layer parameters w, and vM be the remaining components, associated with the
matrix M parameters. Using the LayerNorm Q-function defined in Eq. (5):
                                                                            2
                                    COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) ≤ ∥vw · γLPost/2∥ + O ∥vM ∥ /k ,
                                                                                      2

           Off-Policy Bound:
                                                                    2 √
                                        CNonlinear (Qkϕ ) = O ∥v∥ / k ,

            Nonlinear Bound:
almost surely for any test vector and any state-action transition pair x, x′ ∈ X .


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. By definition of the off-policy and nonlinear contribution terms:
                                                                             h             2 i
     COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) :=γEς∼Pς v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x′ )v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x) − Ex∼dµ v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x)

                                                                                               ,
         CNonlinear (Qkϕ ) :=Eς∼Pς (r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x))v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)v .


Applying Lemma 3 and Lemma 4 yields:
                                          h                                                2 i
           COffPolicy (Qkϕ , dµ ) =Eς∼Pς γv ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x′ )v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x) − v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x)      ,
                                          "                 2                 #
                                                                     ∥vM ∥2

                                              γLPost ∥vw ∥
                                  ≤Eς∼Pς                      +O                ,
                                                    2                    k
                                                    2
                                                             ∥vM ∥2

                                      γLPost ∥vw ∥
                                  =                   +O               ,
                                           2                   k
              CNonlinear (Qkϕ ) :=Eς∼Pς (r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x))v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)v ,


                                  ≤Eς∼Pς (r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x))v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)v ,


                                        ∥v∥2

                                  =O √          ,
                                           k
as required.
Lemma 3 (Mitigating Off-policy Instability). Under Assumption 2, using the LayerNorm critic in
Eq. (5):
                                                                          2
                                                                                 ∥vM ∥2

                                                            γLPost ∥vw ∥
     γv ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qkϕ (x)⊤ v − (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x))2 ≤                   +O            , (19)
                                                                2                  k
almost surely for any test vector and any state-action transition pair x, x′ ∈ X .

Proof. Using the notation introduced at the start of Appendix B.3, we start by splitting the left hand
side of Eq. (19) into two terms, one determining the stability of the final layer weights and one for
the matrix vectors:
     γv ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qkϕ (x)⊤ v − (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x))2
             ⊤
         = γvw ∇w Qkϕ (x′ )∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw − (vw
                                              ⊤
                                                ∇w Qkϕ (x))2
               k−1
               X
                       ⊤
                           ∇mi Qkϕ (x′ )∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi − vm
                                                            ⊤
                                                                ∇mi Qkϕ (x)∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi .

           +         γvm i                                    i
                                                                                                   (20)
               i=0
We first focus on the term determining stability of the final layer weights. Taking derivatives of the
critic with respect to the final layer weights w yields:
                              ∇w Qkϕ (x′ ) =σPost ◦ LayerNormk [fM (x′ )] ,
hence:
                      ∥∇w Qkϕ (x′ )∥ =∥σPost ◦ LayerNormk [fM (x′ )]∥,
                                     =∥σPost ◦ LayerNormk [fM (x′ )] − σPost (0)∥,
                                                                       | {z }
                                                                              =0
                                                          k        ′
                                     ≤LPost ∥LayerNorm [fM (x )] − 0∥,
                                     =LPost ∥LayerNormk [fM (x′ )]∥,
                                     ≤LPost ,                                                      (21)
where we have used the fact that σPost (·) is LPost -Lipschitz to derive the third line and ap-
plied ∥LayerNormk [fM (x′ )]∥ ≤ 1 from Proposition 1 to derive the final line. We then bound
 ⊤
vw ∇w Qkϕ (x′ )∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw as:
                  ⊤
                 vw ∇w Qkϕ (x′ )∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw ≤ ∥vw ∥∥∇w Qkϕ (x′ )∥|∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw |,
                                                 ≤ LPost ∥vw ∥|∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw |.


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Defining ϵ := |∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw | yields:
   ⊤
 γvw ∇w Qkϕ (x′ )∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw − (vw
                                    ⊤
                                      ∇w Qkϕ (x))2 ≤ γ∥vw ∥|∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw | − |∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw |2 ,
                                                             = γLPost ∥vw ∥ϵ − ϵ2 ,
                                                             ≤ max γLPost ∥vw ∥ϵ − ϵ2 .

                                                                 ϵ
Our desired result follows from the fact that the function γLPost ∥vw ∥ϵ − ϵ2 is maximised at ϵ =
γLPost ∥vw ∥
     2       , hence:
                                                                                                   2
                                                              γ 2 L2Post ∥vw ∥2

           ⊤                                                                         γLPost ∥vw ∥
        γvw   ∇w Qkϕ (x′ )∇w Qkϕ (x)⊤ vw − (vw
                                             ⊤
                                               ∇w Qkϕ (x))2 ≤                    −
                                                                      2                  2
                                                                                 2
                                                                γLPost ∥vw ∥
                                                            =
                                                                       2
Substituting into Eq. (20) yields:
                                                                            2
         ⊤        k   ′      k     ⊤      ⊤     k      2     γLPost ∥vw ∥
      γv ∇ϕ Qϕ (x )∇ϕ Qϕ (x) v − (v ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)) ≤
                                                                   2
              k−1
              X
                      ⊤
                          ∇mi Qkϕ (x′ )∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi − vm
                                                           ⊤
                                                               ∇mi Qkϕ (x)∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi .

          +         γvm i                                    i
                                                                                                  (22)
              i=0
We now bound the remaining terms (i.e. those that characterise stability of the matrix row vectors) by
taking derivatives of the critic with respect to each matrix row vector: mi :
                          ∇mi Qkϕ (x) = ∇mi w⊤ σPost ◦ LayerNormk [fM (x)] ,
                                         k−1
                                         X
                                     =         wj ∇mi σPost (LayerNormkj [fM (x)]).
                                         j=0
Applying the chain rule to find an expression for the derivative:
                    k−1
                    X
                              ′
   ∇mi Qkϕ (x) =          wj σPost (LayerNormkj [fM (x)])∇mi LayerNormkj [fM (x)] ,
                    j=0
                    k−1
                    X
                              ′                                                    ′
                =         wj σPost (LayerNormkj [fM (x)])∂fi LayerNormkj [fM (x)] σPre (m⊤
                                                                                         i x)x,
                    j=0
       ′        ′
where σPre and σPost denote the derivatives of the activation functions, which are bounded almost
surely from the Lipschitz assumption, hence:
                             ′
                                 (m⊤      ′             k

                            σPre   i x), σPost LayerNormj [fM (x)] = O(1).

Using this, we bound ∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi as:
                                             k−1
                                             X
                    ∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi     ≤                                          ⊤
                                                   O(1)wj ∂fi LayerNormkj [fM (x)] vm i
                                                                                        x.
                                             j=0

Now, as each element fM,i (x) is Lipschitz and defined over a bounded set of parameters mi and
inputs X , it follows that fM,i (x) must be a bounded function. We can thus apply the derivative bound
to ∂fi LayerNormkj [fM (x)] from Proposition 1, yielding:
                                                                         
                                               X   1(i = j) − 1
                                               k−1
                       ∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi ≤         O         √    k
                                                                      wj  vm ⊤
                                                                                i
                                                                                  x,
                                               j=0
                                                               k
                                                                     
                                               X   1(i = j) − 1
                                               k−1
                                                                  k  ⊤
                                          =       O         √           vmi x,
                                               j=0
                                                               k

                                                  1     ⊤
                                          =O √         vm i
                                                            x,
                                                   k


                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we have used the fact that wj = O(1) in deriving the second line. Finally, we use this result to
bound each ∇mi Qkϕ (x′ )⊤ vmi and ∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi term in Eq. (22):
                                                                              2
             ⊤      k    ′       k   ⊤         ⊤    k     2     γLPost ∥vw ∥
          γv ∇ϕ Qϕ (x )∇ϕ Qϕ (x) v − (v ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)) ≤
                                                                     2
                  k−1
                  X
                             ⊤                                                       2
                +        γ vm  i
                                 ∇mi Qkϕ (x′ ) ∇mi Qkϕ (x)⊤ vmi + vm ⊤
                                                                       i
                                                                         ∇mi Qkϕ (x)     ,
                         i=0
                                          k−1
                                       2
                       γLPost ∥vw ∥    1 X         ⊤ ′     ⊤         ⊤     2

               ≤                           +O   γ vm   x vm    x + vm    x     ,
                           2           k i=0         i       i         i


                                 2        k−1            !
                   γLPost ∥vw ∥        1    X          2
                                                           γ∥x′ ∥∥x∥ + ∥x∥2 .

               ≤                   +O           ∥vmi ∥
                       2               k    i=0

Now, it follows from the definition of the euclidean norm:
                                                k−1
                                                X          2          2
                                                      ∥vmi ∥ = ∥vM ∥ ,
                                                i=0

and by the definition of the state-action space of the MDP in Section 2.1:
                                                 ∥x∥, ∥x′ ∥ = O(1),
hence:
                                                                                     2
                                                                                                  ∥vM ∥2

                                                                     γLPost ∥vw ∥
     γv ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x′ )∇ϕ Qkϕ (x)⊤ v − (v ⊤ ∇ϕ Qkϕ (x))2 ≤                                +O                    ,
                                                                         2                          k
as required.
Lemma 4 (Mitigating Nonlinear Instability). Under Assumption 2, using the LayerNorm Q-function
defined in Eq. (5):
                                                                          !
                                                                        2
                           k   ′       k
                                              ⊤ 2 k                ∥v∥
                    r + γQϕ (x ) − Qϕ (x) v ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)v = O √                ,
                                                                      k
almost surely for any test vector and any state-action transition pair x, x′ ∈ X .

Proof. We start by bounding the TD error, second order derivative and test vector separately:
                                                                                           2
   r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x) v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)v ≤ r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x)    ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x) ∥v∥ ,


By the definition of the LayerNorm Q-function:
                               |Qkϕ (x)| ≤ ∥w∥ σPost ◦ LayerNormk [fM (x)] ,
                                           ≤ ∥w∥ LPost .
where the final line follows from Eq. (21). As the reward is bounded by definition and ∥w∥ is bounded
under Assumption 2, we can bound the TD error vector as:
                                   r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x) = O(1),


hence:
                                                                                    2
                         r + γQkϕ (x′ ) − Qkϕ (x) v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)v = ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x) ∥v∥ .


Our result follows immediately by using Lemma 5 to bound the second order derivative:
                                                                        !
                                                                      2
                             k   ′      k
                                             ⊤ 2 k                ∥v∥
                      r + γQϕ (x ) − Qϕ (x) v ∇ϕ Qϕ (x)v = O √            .
                                                                     k



                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 5. Let Assumption 2 hold. ∥∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)∥ = O                  √1        .
                                                                     k


Proof. Using the notation introduced at the start of Appendix B.3, we denote the partial derivative
with respect to the i, j-th matrix element as: ∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)]. Using the chain rule, we
find the partial derivatives with respect to each element as:

               ∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)] = ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] ∂mi,j fi ,
                                                                               ′
                                                   = ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] σpre (m⊤
                                                                                     i x)xj ,


        ′
where σPre denotes the derivatives of the activation function, which is bounded almost surely from
the Lipschitz assumption, hence applying Proposition 1 it follows:

                    ∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)] = O ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] ,


                                                                       1
                                               =O k  − 21
                                                            1(l = i) +      .
                                                                       k

We find a similar result for the second order derivative:


                                                                          i x)xj xt 1(i = s)
                                                                    ′′
       ∂ms,t ∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)] = ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] σpre (m⊤
                                                   + ∂fs ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] ∂ms,t fs ,
                                                                                 i x)xj xt 1(i = s)
                                                                           ′′
                                               = ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] σpre (m⊤
                                                                                   ′
                                                   + ∂fs ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] σpre (m⊤
                                                                                         s x)xt ,


       ′′
where σpre denotes the second order derivative, which is bounded by assumption, hence:


∂ms,t ∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)]
      = O ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] 1(i = s) + O ∂fs ∂fi LayerNormkl [fM (x)] ,


                                      1                                                 1
      = O 1(i = s)k − 21
                           1(l = i) +      +O k − 32
                                                       1(l = i) + 1(i = s) + 1(l = s) +      ,
                                      k                                                 k

We now use these results find the partial derivatives of the LayerNorm Q-function. Starting with
∂wu ∂mi,j Qkϕ (x):

                                               k−1
                                               X
               ∂wu ∂mi,j Qkϕ (x) = ∂ms,t             wl ∂mi,j σPost (LayerNormkl [fM (x)]),
                                               l=0
                        k−1
                        X
                                  ′
                = ∂wu         wl σPost (LayerNormkl [fM (x)])∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)],
                        l=0
                        k−1
                                                      1
                                        1(l = i) + O
                                       − 12
                        X
                = ∂wu     wl O k                          ,
                                                      k
                      l=0
                      1
                                             1
                =O k   −2
                              1(u = i) + O         ,                                                  (23)
                                             k


                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and now for ∂ms,t ∂mi,j Qkϕ (x):

                                   k−1
                                   X
                                             ′
    ∂ms,t ∂mi,j Qkϕ (x) = ∂ms,t          wl σPost (LayerNormkl [fM (x)])∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)],
                                   l=0
         k−1
         X
                   ′
     =         wl σPost (LayerNormkl [fM (x)])∂ms,t ∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)]
         l=0
             ′′
                 (LayerNormkl [fM (x)])∂ms,t LayerNormkl [fM (x)]∂mi,j LayerNormkl [fM (x)] ,

         + σPost
       k−1
                                                1
           wl O 1(i = s)k      − 21
                                     1(l = i) +
       X
     =                                               +
                                                k
       l=0

                                                           1
         + O k − 2 1(l = i) + 1(i = s) + 1(l = s) +
                    3

                                                           k
                                                                  !
                 1                      1                     1
         +O            1(l = s) + O            1(l = i) + O          ,
                 k                      k                     k
                                  1
                                                          1
     = O 1(i = s)k    − 12
                             +O k   −2
                                          1(i = s) + O
                                                          k
           k−1
                         1                    1                    1
                              1(l = s) + O           1(l = i) + O
           X
         +      wl O                                                      ,
                        k                     k                    k
           l=0
           1
                                      1

                                                  1

                                                                    1
     =O k   −2
                    1(i = s) + O          +O         1(i = s) + O 2 ,
                                      k           k                k
           1
                                      1
     =O k   −2
                    1(i = s) + O          ,                                                   (24)
                                      k

       ′′                                                                           ′             ′′
where σPost (x) denotes the second order derivative and we have used the fact that σPost (·) and σPost (·)
are bounded by assumption.

Now, from the definition of the Matrix 2-norm:

                                                             v ⊤ ∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)v
                                   ∥∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)∥ = sup                        ,
                                                       v          v⊤ v

for any test vector. As the Q-function is linear in w, we can ignore second order derivatives with
respect to elements of w as their value is zero. The matrix norm can then be written in terms of the
partial derivatives of Qkϕ (x) as:

                                                  k−1
                                                  X k−1 d−1
                                            1         XX
                    ∥∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)∥ = sup                           vmi,j ∂wu ∂mi,j Qkϕ (x)vwu
                                     v    v⊤ v   u=0 i=0 j=0
                                         k−1 d−1 k−1 d−1
                                                                                              !
                                         XX      XX
                                    +                        vmi,j ∂ms,t ∂mi,j Qkϕ (x)vms,t    .
                                         i=0 j=0 s=0 t=0


We now bound the partial derivatives using:


                                                                       1
                          ∂wu ∂mi,j Qkϕ (x) = O k       1(u = i) + O
                                                      − 21
                                                                            ,
                                                                       k

                                                 1                     1
                        ∂ms,t ∂mi,j Qkϕ (x) = O k − 2   1(i = s) + O        ,
                                                                       k


                                                       32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from Eq. (23) and Eq. (24), yielding:
                                                k−1
                                                X k−1 d−1
                                           1                                    1
                                − 12
                                                        vmi,j vwu 1(u = i) + O
                                                    XX
        ∥∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)∥ =O   k     sup ⊤
                                   v  v v   u=0 i=0 j=0
                                                                                k
                          k−1 d−1 k−1 d−1                               !
                                                                    1
                                          vmi,j vms,t 1(i = s) + O
                          XX      XX
                        +                                                   ,
                          i=0 j=0 s=0 t=0
                                                                    k
                                                k−1         d−1 k−1
                                           1                                        1
                                − 12
                                                             vmi,j 1(u = i) + O
                                                X           X   X
                      =O k      sup ⊤            vwu
                                 v  v    v  u=0      j=0 i=0
                                                                                    k
                         k−1 d−1       k−1 d−1                             !
                                                                         1
                                                vms,t 1(i = s) + O
                         XX            XX
                       +         vmi,j                                         ,
                         i=0 j=0       s=0 t=0
                                                                         k
                                                                              
                                             k−1             k−1 d−1
                          1            1     X               X   X
                      =O k − 2 sup ⊤            vwu O(1) +          vmi,j O(1) ,
                                 v v v
                                             u=0             i=0 j=0
                                                                        
                                               k−1        k−1 d−1
                          1            1       X          X   X
                      =O k − 2 sup ⊤ O             2
                                                   vw   +          2
                                                                  vm     .
                                 v v v
                                                      u              i,j
                                               u=0        i=0 j=0

                                Pk−1           Pk−1 Pd−1
Using the definition v ⊤ v :=           2
                                   u=0 vwu +    i=0
                                                                2
                                                           j=0 vmi,j yields our desired result:
                                                 1         1
                               ∥∇2ϕ Qkϕ (x)∥ =O k − 2 sup ⊤ O v ⊤ v ,

                                                        v v v
                                                 1
                                                  −2
                                             =O k     sup O (1) ,
                                                        v
                                                 1
                                                  −2
                                             =O k     .


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4 D ERIVATION OF RECURSIVE λ- RETURNS .
The original proof can be found in Daley & Amato (2019, Appendix D), which we repeat and adapt
here for convenience. We wish to write Rtλ as a function of Rt+1
                                                             λ
                                                                 . First, note the general recursive
relationship between n-step returns:

                                             (n)             (n−1)
                                           Rk      = rk + γRk+1                                  (25)

Let N = T − t. Starting with the definition of the λ-return,
                    N −1
                               (n)        (N )
                    X
      Rtλ = (1 − λ)      λn−1 Rt + λN −1 Rt
                           n=1
                                            N −1
                    (1)                           n−1 (n)  N −1 (N )
                                            X
          = (1 − λ)Rt +             (1 − λ)      λ   Rt + λ    Rt
                                           n=2
                                N −1
                    (1)                            (n−1)                   (N −1)
                                X
                                      n−1                    N −1
          = (1 − λ)Rt + (1 − λ)      λ      rt + γRt+1     +λ       rt + γRt+1
                                           n=2
                                         N −1
                    (1)                             (n−1)        (N −1)
                                         X
          = (1 − λ)Rt + λrt + γλ (1 − λ)      λn−2 Rt+1 + λN −2 Rt+1
                                                     n=2
                                         N −2
                                                       ′
                    (1)                        n′ −1 (n )    N −2 (N −1)
                                         X
          = (1 − λ)Rt + λrt + γλ (1 − λ)      λ     Rt+1 + λ     Rt+1
                                                     n′ =1
                           (1)              λ
          = (1 − λ)Rt            + λrt + γλRt+1
               (1)          (1)              λ
          = Rt       − λRt        + λrt + γλRt+1
                       Q(s′ , a′ ) − λ rt + γ max Q(s′ , a′ ) + λrt + γλRt+1
                                                                         λ

          = rt + γ max
                    ′                          ′
                       a                              a
          = rt + γ max Q(s′ , a′ ) + γλRt+1
                                          λ
                                             − γλ max    Q(s′ , a′ )
                    a′                                a′
                                               ′ ′
                    λ
          = rt + γ λRt+1 + (1 − λ) max  ′
                                            Q(s , a )  ,
                                             a


                                                      (n)                                      (1)
where we used the recursive relationship for Rt in Equation (25) and the substitution Rt =
rt + γ maxa′ Q(s′ , a′ ). Finally, we note that in our implementation, we replace the true value
function with a function approximator.

C    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
All experimental results are shown as mean of 10 seeds, except in Atari Learning Environment
(ALE) where we followed a common practice of reporting 3 seeds. They were performed on a
single NVIDIA A40 by jit-compiling the entire pipeline with Jax in the GPU, except for the Atari
experiments where the environments run on an AMD 7513 32-Core Processor. Hyperparameters
for all experiments can be found in Appendix E. We used the algorithm proposed in Algorithm 1.
All experiments used Rectified Adam optimiser Liu et al. (2019). We didn’t find any improvements
in scores by using RAdam instead of Adam, but we found it more robust in respect to the epsilon
parameter, simplifying the tuning of the optimiser.
Baird’s Counterexample For these experiments, we use the code provided as solutions to the
problems of (Sutton & Barto, 2018b) 2 . We use a single-layer neural network with a hidden size of 16
neurons, with normalisation between the hidden layer and the output layer. To not include additional
parameters and completely adhere to theory, we don’t learn affine tranformation parameters in these
experiments, which rescale the normalised output by a factor γ and add a bias β. However, in more
complex experiments we do learn these parameters.
  2
    https://github.com/vojtamolda/reinforcement-learning-an-introduction/
tree/main


                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DeepSea For these experiments, we utilised a simplified version of Bootstrapped-DQN (Osband
et al., 2016), featuring an ensemble of 20 randomly initialised policies, each represented by a two-
layered MLP with middle-layer normalisation. We did not employ target networks and updated all
policies in parallel by sampling from a shared replay buffer. We adhered to the same parameters for
Bootstrapped-DQN as presented in Osband et al. (2019).

MinAtar We used the vectorised version of MinAtar (Young & Tian, 2019) present in Gymnax and
tested PQN against PPO in the 4 available tasks: Asterix, SpaceInvaders, Freeway and Breakout. PQN
and PPO use both a Convolutional Network with 16 filters with a 3-sized kernel (same as reported
in the original MinAtar paper) followed by a 128-sized feed-forward layer. Results in MinAtar are
reported in Fig. 9. Hyperparameters were tuned for both PQN and PPO.

Atari We use the vectorised version of ALE provided by Envpool for a preliminary evaluation of
our method. Given that our main baseline is the CleanRL (Huang et al., 2022b) implementation of
PPO (which also uses Envpool and Jax), we used its environment and neural network configuration.
This configuration is also used in the results reported in the original Rainbow paper, allowing us to
obtain additional baseline scores from there. Aitchison et al. (Aitchison et al., 2023) recently found
that the scores obtained by algorithms in 5 of the Atari games have a high correlation with the scores
obtained in the entire suite, and that 10 games can predict the final score with an error lower than
10%. This is due to the high level of correlation between many of the Atari games. The results
we present for PQN are obtained by rolling out a greedy-policy in 8 separate parallel environments
during training, which is more effective than stopping training to evaluate on entire episodes, since in
Atari they can last hundreds of thousands of frames. We did not compare with distributed methods
like Ape-X and R2D2 because they use an enormous time-budget (5 days of training per game) and
frames (almost 40 Bilions), which are outside our computational budget. We comment that these
methods typically ignore concerns of sample efficiency. For example Ape-X (Horgan et al., 2018)
takes more than 100M frames to solve Pong, the easiest game of the ALE, which can be solved in
few million steps by traditional methods and PQN.

Craftax We follow the same implementation details indicated in the original Craftax paper
Matthews et al. (2024a). Our RNN implementation is the same as the MLP one, with an addtional
LSTM layer before the last layer.

Hanabi We used the Jax implementation of environments present in JaxMARL. Our model doesn’t
use RNNs in this task. From all the elements present in the R2D2-VDN presented in Hu et al. (2021),
we only used the duelling architecture Wang et al. (2016). Presented results of PQN are average
across 100k test games.

Smax We used the same RNN architecture of QMix present in JaxMARL, with the only difference
that we don’t use a replay buffer, with added normalisation and Q(λ). We evaluated with all the
standard SMAX maps excluding the ones relative to more than 20 agents, because they could not be
run with traditional QMix due to memory limitations.

Overcooked We used the same CNN architecture of VDN present in JaxMARL, with the only
difference that we don’t use a replay buffer, with added normalisation and Q(λ).

D              F URTHER R ESULTS

1018               LayerNorm
                                                True                             True                           True       LayerNorm
1016               LayerNorm+L2
                   LayerNorm+HigherL2
                                                                                                                           BatchNorm
                   No-Normalization
  Loss (log)


                   No-Normalization+L2
                                                 Solved


                                                                    LayerNorm                      LayerNorm
 101                                                                BatchNorm                      BatchNorm

               0                         5000             0              10000          0               10000          0               10000
                   Episodes                                   Episodes                      Episodes                       Episodes
  (a) Baird’s C.example                          (b) DeepSea, depth 20               (c) DeepSea, depth 30       (d) DeepSea, depth 40

                         Figure 7: Results from theoretical analysis in Baird’s Counterexample and DeepSea.

                                                                                35
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              500                                                           500
                                                                                                                                        100                                                              100
              400                                                           400
                                                                                                                                        200                                                              200
              300                                                           300
    Returns


                                                                                                                              Returns
                                                                  Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                               Returns
                                                                                                                                        300                                                              300
              200                                                           200
                                                                                                                                                                                                         400
              100                                                           100                                                         400
                                          PQN                                                         PQN                                                                   PQN                          500                   cleanrl-DQN-jax
                   0                      cleanrl-DQN-jax                     0                       cleanrl-DQN-jax
                                                                                                                                        500                                 cleanrl-DQN-jax                                    PQN

                        0          100               200                          0        250000             500000                           0    50 100 150 200 250                                         0      250000           500000
                              Time (seconds)                                              Timesteps                                                     Time (seconds)                                              Frames

   (a) CartPole:Training Time                                               (b) CartPole: 10 Seeds                            (c) Acrobot: Training Time                                                 (d) Acrobot: 10 Seeds

    Figure 8: Results in classic control tasks. The goal of this comparison is to show the time boost of PQN relative
    to a traditional DQN agent running a single environment in the cpu. PQN is compiled to run entirely on gpu,
    achieving a 10x speed-up compared to the standard DQN pipeline.


                                 Asterix                                                SpaceInvaders                                                      Freeway                                                 Breakout
                                                                                                                                        60                                                           75
                   60
 Episode Returns


                                                                                                                                        40                                                           50
                   40                                                 100
                   20                                                                                                                   20                                                           25

                    0                                                        0                                                           0                                                               0
                        0.0        0.5                  1.0                       0.0        0.5                        1.0                   0.0                0.5                    1.0                  0.0      0.5                    1.0
                                 Timestep                   1e7                            Timestep                     1e7                                    Timestep                  1e7                        Timestep                     1e7

                                                                                                              PPO                              PQN

                                                                                           Figure 9: Results in MinAtar


                     1.00                                                                                                                                                1.00
Max Normalised IQM


                                         1
                                                                                                                                                    Max Normalised IQM


                                         4
                     0.75                8
                                         16                                                                                                                              0.75
                                         32
                     0.50                64
                                         128                                                                                                                             0.50
                                         256
                     0.25                512
                                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                     0.00                                                                                                                                                0.00
                               0.0                  1.0     0.5                                                                                                                    0                           2000             4000
                                         Timesteps 1e7                                                                                                                              Average Time (s)
   (a) IQM sample effincency on MinAtar tasks                                                                                                          (b) IQM time effincency on MinAtar tasks
   varying the number of parallel environments.                                                                                                        varying the number of parallel environments.

   Figure 10: Ablation study varying the number of parallel environments in Minatar. PQN can learn even with a
   small number of environments but clearly benefits from collecting more experiences in parallel. PQN is also
   significantly more time-efficient when more environments are used in parallel (time is considered for running
   10 seeds in parallel). For a fair comparison, we adjusted the number of minibatches and epochs so that PQN
   performs the same number of gradient steps with the same batch size (or, where not possible, with an adjusted
   learning rate) for every number of parallel environments considered.


                                                                                                                         36
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          20                                             20                                                              20
          10                                             10                                                              10
Returns


                                                                                                               Returns
                                               Returns
           0                                              0                                                               0
          10                                             10                                                              10
                                                                                       PQN                                                   PQN
          20                         PQN                 20                            cleanrl-DQN-jax                   20                  cleanrl-DQN-jax

               0          4              8                    0               300                   600                       0       2                  4
                    Time (minutes)                                    Time (minutes)                                                Frames              1e7

          (a) Atari-Pong: PQN training         (b) Atari-Pong: Time Comparison                                      (c) Atari-Pong: Performances

 Figure 11: Comparison between training a Q-Learning agent in Atari-Pong with PQN and the CleanRL
 implementation of DQN. PQN can solve the game by reaching a score of 20 in less than 4 minutes, while DQN
 requires almost 6 hours. As shown in the plot on the right, this doesn’t result in a loss of sample efficiency, as
 traditional distributed systems like Ape-X need more than 100 million frames to solve this simple game.


                                                          Table 3: Scores in ALE.

               Method (Frames)        Time               Gradient         Atari-10                Atari-57               Atari-57   Atari-57
                                     (hours)              Steps            Score                  Median                  Mean      >Human
               PPO (200M)                2.5               780k                165
               PQN (200M)                 1                780k                191
               PQN (400M)                 2                1.4M                243                       245              1440        40
               Rainbow (200M)            100              12.5M                239                       230              1461        43


                                                          2.5           PQN


                                                                                    Rainbow-Dopamine
                                               IQM


                                                         1.25                         DQN-Dopamine


                                                              0
                                                                  0       4            8            12
                                                                          Hours
 Figure 12: IQM computed over 3 seeds when training PQN with the ALE configuration proposed by Dopamine
 Castro et al. (2018). This configuration incorporates sticky actions and doesn’t set the done flag when an agent
 loses a life. With this setup, PQN can still outperform Rainbow, but it requires significantly more compute time
 (almost 5 hours), corresponding to 800 million frames, indicating a loss of sample efficiency. Sample efficiency
 might be recovered in this configuration by using a larger network or tuning the hyperparameters, but we leave
 this as future work. PQN is still much faster to train than a Dopamine agent, which requires multiple days
 depending on the hardware.


                                                                         37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                20
% of Improvement over Rainbow
                                15

                                10

                                5

                                0

                                 5
                                                             Skiing-v5
                                               MontezumaRevenge-v5
                                                        PrivateEye-v5


                                                        BattleZone-v5
                                                            Asterix-v5
                                                        Jamesbond-v5
                                                            Amidar-v5
                                                               Hero-v5
                                                             Solaris-v5
                                                              Pitfall-v5
                                                          Seaquest-v5
                                                              Alien-v5


                                                            Zaxxon-v5
                                                       Tutankham-v5
                                                          Frostbite-v5
                                                   KungFuMaster-v5
                                                           Gravitar-v5
                                                          Surround-v5
                                                           Bowling-v5
                                                            Gopher-v5
                                                     VideoPinball-v5
                                                        IceHockey-v5
                                                              Qbert-v5
                                                             Tennis-v5
                                                         Kangaroo-v5
                                                      DoubleDunk-v5
                                                    SpaceInvaders-v5
                                                           Freeway-v5
                                                            Boxing-v5
                                                               Pong-v5
                                                    CrazyClimber-v5
                                                           Atlantis-v5
                                                        MsPacman-v5
                                                         BankHeist-v5

                                                            Enduro-v5
                                                     FishingDerby-v5
                                                    DemonAttack-v5
                                                         Robotank-v5
                                                          Breakout-v5
                                                     YarsRevenge-v5
                                                               Krull-v5
                                                       BeamRider-v5
                                                            Assault-v5
                                                          Riverraid-v5
                                                         Centipede-v5
                                                  NameThisGame-v5
                                                    WizardOfWor-v5
                                                      RoadRunner-v5
                                                         TimePilot-v5
                                                           Phoenix-v5
                                                       StarGunner-v5
                                                          Defender-v5
                                                        UpNDown-v5
                                                            Berzerk-v5
                                                ChopperCommand-v5
                                                           Venture-v5
                                                          Asteroids-v5
                                                                                                                                     Game
Figure 13: Improvement of PQN over Rainbow. Results refer to PQN trained for 400M frames, i.e. 2 hours of
GPU time.



                                                                     Amidar-v5              Bowling-v5                           Frostbite-v5           KungFuMaster-v5                 Riverraid-v5
                                           Episode Returns


                                                             2000                                                                                   40000                       20000
                                                                                       50                                 5000
                                                             1000                                                                                   20000                       10000
                                                               0                       0                                     0                          0                           0
                                                                    0             2         0                        2           0              2            0             2            0              2
                                                                        Timestep 1e8            Timestep 1e8                         Timestep 1e8                Timestep 1e8                Timestep 1e8
                                                                    BattleZone-v5       DoubleDunk-v5 NameThisGame-v5                                        Phoenix-v5                     Qbert-v5
                                                                                       0
                                     Episode Returns


                                                       40000
                                                                                       10                                                           100000                      20000
                                                                                                                         10000
                                                       20000
                                                                                       20
                                                               0                                                    0                     0                                         0
                                                                    0             2         0              2          0           2         0           2                               0              2
                                                                        Timestep 1e8             Timestep 1e8           Timestep 1e8          Timestep 1e8                                   Timestep 1e8
                                                                                                PQN           CrossQ        PQN (BatchNorm)       PPO


                                                                                                              Figure 14: Atari 10 Results



                                                                                                                    60       Behaviour Policy
                                                                                                   Atari-10 Score


                                                                                                                             Learned Policy

                                                                                                                    30

                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                         0              1              2
                                                                                                                                 Frames 1e8
Figure 15: PQN learns a policy from an almost random policy. To further test PQN’s off-policiness, we conducted
an experiment on Atari10 games using a highly random policy for collecting data, gradually shifting from 100%
random to 70% random during training. As expected, the resulting policy was less effective compared to one
with more exploitation. However, the key finding is that PQN can still learn a policy even when off-policiness is
extremely high — i.e., when data is collected almost randomly from the environment, without following the
learning policy.


                                                                                                                                 38
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       15                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                        16


                                                                                                                                            Returns (% of Max)
                                                                   Returns (% of Max)
  Returns (% of Max)   10                                                               12                                                                       10
                                                                                         8
                        5                                                                                                                                         5
                                                   PQN                                   4                        PQN-RNN                                                              PQN
                                                                                                                  PPO-RNN                                                              PQN+buffer
                        0                          PPO
                                                                                         0                                                                        0
                            0.0           0.5 1.0                                            0.0               0.5            1.0                                      0           18           36
                                   Timesteps 1e9                                                     Timesteps 1e9                                                          Time (Hours)
     (a) Craftax with MLP networks                                    (b) Craftax with RNN networks                                         (c) Craftax with MLP and Buffer

 Figure 16: Left: comparison between PPO and PQN in Craftax. Center: comparison with RNN versions of the
 two algorithms. Right: time to learn for 1e9 timesteps keeping a replay buffer in GPU.


                                           2s3z                                                       3s_vs_5z                            1.0
                                                                                                                                                                       3s5z_vs_3s6z
                  1.0                                               1.0
                  0.8                                               0.8                                                                   0.8
Win Rate


                  0.6                                               0.6                                                                   0.6

                  0.4                                               0.4                                                                   0.4

                  0.2                                               0.2                                                                   0.2
                  0.0                                               0.0                                                                   0.0
                            0.00   0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00                        0.00       0.25        0.50    0.75     1.00                0.00               0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00
                                          Timestep           1e7
                                                                                                          Timestep                  1e7
                                                                                                                                                                              Timestep              1e7


                                    5m_vs_6m                                                               3s5z                                                             6h_vs_8z
                                                                    1.0                                                                   1.0
                  0.8
                                                                    0.8                                                                   0.8
Win Rate


                  0.6                                               0.6                                                                   0.6
                  0.4                                               0.4                                                                   0.4
                  0.2                                               0.2                                                                   0.2
                  0.0                                               0.0                                                                   0.0
                            0.00   0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00                        0.00       0.25        0.50    0.75     1.00                0.00               0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00
                                          Timestep           1e7
                                                                                                          Timestep                  1e7
                                                                                                                                                                              Timestep              1e7


                                   10m_vs_11m                                                  smacv2_5_units                                                     smacv2_10_units
                                                                    0.8
                  0.8                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                    0.6
                  0.6
Win Rate


                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                    0.4
                  0.4
                                                                    0.2                                                                   0.2
                  0.2

                  0.0                                               0.0                                                                   0.0
                            0.00   0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00                        0.00       0.25        0.50    0.75     1.00                0.00               0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00
                                          Timestep           1e7
                                                                                                          Timestep                  1e7
                                                                                                                                                                              Timestep              1e7



                                          IPPO           MAPPO                               IQL                QMIX                VDN                               PQN

                                                                                    Figure 17: Results in Smax


                                                                                                          39
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                350                   SMAX-QMIX Buffer


                                                            Memory Usage (GB)
                                                                                                      NVIDIA H100 Memory



                                                                                175

                                                                                 0
                                                                                        0                    75             150
                                                                                         Number of Units
                            Figure 18: The buffer size scales quadratically in respect to the number of agents in SMAX.


                        Cramped Room Asymm Advantages                                                 Coord Ring                  Forced Coord              Counter Circuit
                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                         300                                                          200
Episode Returns


                  200                         400
                                                                                         200                               200
                  100                         200                                                                                                     100
                                                                                         100                               100

                    0                           0                                             0                             0                          0
                        0                5          0                              5              0                   5          0               5          0               5
                             Timestep   1e6              Timestep                 1e6                    Timestep    1e6             Timestep   1e6             Timestep   1e6

                                                        IPPO                            IQL                VDN              PQN

                                                                       Figure 19: Results in Overcooked


   E                    H YPERPARAMETERS
                                                           Table 4: Craftax RNN Hyperparameters

                                                        Parameter                                                   Value
                                                        NUM_ENVs                                                    1024
                                                        NUM_STEPS                                                   128
                                                        EPS_START                                                   1.0
                                                        EPS_FINISH                                                  0.005
                                                        EPS_DECAY                                                   0.1
                                                        NUM_MINIBATCHES                                             4
                                                        NUM_EPOCHS                                                  4
                                                        NORM_INPUT                                                  True
                                                        NORM_TYPE                                                   "batch_norm"
                                                        HIDDEN_SIZE                                                 512
                                                        NUM_LAYERS                                                  1
                                                        NUM_RNN_LAYERS                                              1
                                                        ADD_LAST_ACTION                                             True
                                                        LR                                                          0.0003
                                                        MAX_GRAD_NORM                                               0.5
                                                        LR_LINEAR_DECAY                                             True
                                                        REW_SCALE                                                   1.0
                                                        GAMMA                                                       0.99
                                                        LAMBDA                                                      0.5


                                                                                                        40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Table 5: Atari Hyperparameters

                           Parameter                  Value
                           NUM_ENVs                   128
                           NUM_STEPS                  32
                           EPS_START                  1.0
                           EPS_FINISH                 0.001
                           EPS_DECAY                  0.1
                           NUM_EPOCHS                 2
                           NUM_MINIBATCHES            32
                           NORM_INPUT                 False
                           NORM_TYPE                  "layer_norm"
                           LR                         0.00025
                           MAX_GRAD_NORM              10
                           LR_LINEAR_DECAY            False
                           GAMMA                      0.99
                           LAMBDA                     0.65


                                Table 6: SMAX Hyperparameters

                           Parameter                  Value
                           NUM_ENVs                   128
                           MEMORY_WINDOW              4
                           NUM_STEPS                  128
                           HIDDEN_SIZE                512
                           NUM_LAYERS                 2
                           NORM_INPUT                 True
                           NORM_TYPE                  "batch_norm"
                           EPS_START                  1.0
                           EPS_FINISH                 0.01
                           EPS_DECAY                  0.1
                           MAX_GRAD_NORM              1
                           NUM_MINIBATCHES            16
                           NUM_EPOCHS                 4
                           LR                         0.00025
                           LR_LINEAR_DECAY            True
                           GAMMA                      0.99
                           LAMBDA                     0.85


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 7: Overcooked Hyperparameters

                           Parameter                  Value
                           NUM_ENVs                   64
                           NUM_STEPS                  16
                           HIDDEN_SIZE                512
                           NUM_LAYERS                 2
                           NORM_INPUT                 False
                           NORM_TYPE                  "layer_norm"
                           EPS_START                  1.0
                           EPS_FINISH                 0.2
                           EPS_DECAY                  0.2
                           MAX_GRAD_NORM              10
                           NUM_MINIBATCHES            16
                           NUM_EPOCHS                 4
                           LR                         0.000075
                           LR_LINEAR_DECAY            True
                           GAMMA                      0.99
                           LAMBDA                     0.5


                                Table 8: Hanabi Hyperparameters

                            Parameter                  Value
                            NUM_ENVS                   1024
                            NUM_STEPS                  1
                            TOTAL_TIMESTEPS            1e10
                            HIDDEN_SIZE                512
                            N_LAYERS                   3
                            NORM_TYPE                  layer_norm
                            DUELING                    True
                            EPS_START                  0.01
                            EPS_FINISH                 0.001
                            EPS_DECAY                  0.1
                            MAX_GRAD_NORM              0.5
                            NUM_MINIBATCHES            1
                            NUM_EPOCHS                 1
                            LR                         0.0003
                            LR_LINEAR_DECAY            False
                            GAMMA                      0.99


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Game                    Rainbow          PQN
                        Alien                    9491.70      6970.42
                        Amidar                   5131.20      1408.15
                        Assault                 14198.50     20089.42
                        Asterix                428200.30     38708.98
                        Asteroids                2712.80     45573.75
                        Atlantis               826659.50    845520.83
                        BankHeist                1358.00      1431.25
                        BattleZone              62010.00     54791.67
                        BeamRider               16850.20     23338.83
                        Berzerk                  2545.60     18542.20
                        Bowling                    30.00        28.71
                        Boxing                     99.60        99.63
                        Breakout                  417.50       515.08
                        Centipede                8167.30     11347.98
                        ChopperCommand          16654.00    129962.50
                        CrazyClimber           168788.50    171579.17
                        Defender                55105.00    140741.67
                        DemonAttack            111185.20    133075.21
                        DoubleDunk                 -0.30        -0.92
                        Enduro                   2125.90      2349.17
                        FishingDerby               31.30        46.17
                        Freeway                    34.00        33.75
                        Frostbite                9590.50      7313.54
                        Gopher                  70354.60     60259.17
                        Gravitar                 1419.30      1158.33
                        Hero                    55887.40     26099.17
                        IceHockey                   1.10         0.17
                        Jamesbond               20000.00      3254.17
                        Kangaroo                14637.50     14116.67
                        Krull                    8741.50     10853.33
                        KungFuMaster            52181.00     41033.33
                        MontezumaRevenge          384.00         0.00
                        MsPacman                 5380.40      5567.50
                        NameThisGame            13136.00     20603.33
                        Phoenix                108528.60    252173.33
                        Pitfall                     0.00       -89.21
                        Pong                       20.90        20.92
                        PrivateEye               4234.00       100.00
                        Qbert                   33817.50     31716.67
                        Riverraid               20000.00     28764.27
                        RoadRunner              62041.00    109742.71
                        Robotank                   61.40        73.96
                        Seaquest                15898.90     11345.00
                        Skiing                 -12957.80    -29975.31
                        Solaris                  3560.30      2607.50
                        SpaceInvaders           18789.00     18450.83
                        StarGunner             127029.00    331300.00
                        Surround                    9.70         5.88
                        Tennis                      0.00        -1.04
                        TimePilot               12926.00     21950.00
                        Tutankham                 241.00       264.71
                        UpNDown                100000.00    308327.92
                        Venture                     5.50        76.04
                        VideoPinball           533936.50    489716.33
                        WizardOfWor             17862.50     30192.71
                        YarsRevenge            102557.00    129463.79
                        Zaxxon                  22209.50     23537.50

                       Table 9: ALE Scores: Rainbow vs PQN (400M frames)

                                               43
