Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L ANGUAGE M ODELS ARE A DVANCED A NONYMIZERS
 Robin Staab, Mark Vero, Mislav Balunović, Martin Vechev
 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
 {robin.staab, mark.vero}@inf.ethz.ch



                                              A BSTRACT
         Recent privacy research on large language models (LLMs) has shown that they
         achieve near-human-level performance at inferring personal data from online texts.
         With ever-increasing model capabilities, existing text anonymization methods are
         currently lacking behind regulatory requirements and adversarial threats. In this
         work, we take two steps to bridge this gap: First, we present a new setting for
         evaluating anonymization in the face of adversarial LLM inferences, allowing for a
         natural measurement of anonymization performance while remedying some of the
         shortcomings of previous metrics. Then, within this setting, we develop a novel
         LLM-based adversarial anonymization framework leveraging the strong inferential
         capabilities of LLMs to inform our anonymization procedure. We conduct a
         comprehensive experimental evaluation of adversarial anonymization across 13
         LLMs on real-world and synthetic online texts, comparing it against multiple
         baselines and industry-grade anonymizers. Our evaluation shows that adversarial
         anonymization outperforms current commercial anonymizers both in terms of the
         resulting utility and privacy. We support our findings with a human study (n=50)
         highlighting a strong and consistent human preference for LLM-anonymized texts.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The rapidly increasing capabilities and widespread adoption of large language models (LLMs)
(OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023b) have sparked various discussions about their potential impacts
on society. An area of particular interest has been the privacy implications of LLMs, where initial
investigations focused primarily on the memorization of model training data (Carlini et al., 2021;
2023). Recently, it has been shown that modern LLMs can be misused for high-accuracy predictions
of personal attributes from seemingly non-revealing online posts (Staab et al., 2023). Moreover,
where previously one would have to hire humans to infer private attributes, these models are fast
and cheap enough to automate such inferences at scale. Concurrently, as users are unaware of such
issues, they continue to share texts with information easily inferrable by LLMs. Rather concerningly,
prior work has also shown that current industry-standard text anonymizers are largely insufficient
at protecting users from such attacks, as they are unable to pick up on revealing yet complex and
context-dependent cues. Consider the following shortened example from Staab et al. (2023):
This left shark thing is hilarious, I’ve seen it, walked just by there to see it live after my final exams.
While the comment contains no direct references to any locations, the context allows both an informed
reader and an LLM to infer that the author lived in Glendale, where the 2015 Super Bowl halftime
show featured a performance colloquially called "left shark incident." It would thus be desirable if
the user could be warned before posting the comment that it might reveal their location and, ideally,
be offered a less revealing alternative. Yet, anonymizing this text with existing tools proves futile, as
no location was directly mentioned, fooling traditional entity-recognition-based anonymizers. This
is particularly alarming as there have already been reports of LLM inferences being commercially
applied online to categorize users based on their posts (Brewster, 2023).

The Need for Privacy At the same time, there has been a large regulatory push for stronger
individual privacy protection. Notably, regulations such as the EU’s GDPR (EU, 2016) and Califor-
nia’s CCPA (Cal, 2018) have established extensive legislative requirements to protect individuals’
private data, such as location, age, and sex. Complementing regulatory efforts, online users, e.g., on
pseudonymized sites like Reddit, are also increasingly aware of the need to protect their privacy and
demand tighter governance over their personal data.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Feedback-guided adversarial anonymization and the adversarial inference setting. Given
user-written texts, we depict 1. At the bottom: classical NLP-based anonymization with industry
tools such as Presidio and Azure Language Studio. Making use of entity recognition, these tools
produce a set of spans that afterward get masked completely, resulting in an anonymized text depicted
at the bottom right. 2. At the top, we show our feedback-guided adversarial anonymization procedure.
In each round, an adversarial LLM tries to predict personal attributes from the current instance of the
text. Based on this inference, an anonymizer LLM then removes and adapts relevant sections of the
text in order to prevent such inferences. After multiple rounds, the anonymizer outputs the resulting
text. On the right we depict our anonymization under adversarial inference setting. Unlike previous
metrics, we evaluate the anonymized texts directly against a strong adversarial LLM, which tries to
infer personal attributes. We can observe that text produced by adversarial anonymization has both
higher utility and privacy than the one obtained through traditional methods.

Insufficiency of Current Tools Industry-standard tools such as Presidio (Mic, 2021) or Microsoft
Azure Language Services (Aahill, 2023) that mainly remove structured information, such as SSIDs
or mail addresses, are especially problematic in this setting as they (1) fall short of meeting the
regulatory requirements of text anonymization (Pilán et al., 2022) and (2) indiscriminately mask any
information matching specific patterns, often resulting in hardly readable texts—an issue especially
grieving for the short, informal, and fast-flowing nature of online comments.
As such, despite expanding regulatory protection, the gap between increasingly stronger adversaries
and lacking anonymization methods leaves users in a particularly vulnerable position.

This Work We aim to bridge the gap between the increasing threat to user privacy in online texts
and the lack of viable anonymization techniques against LLM-based inferences. In particular, we
propose a new framework, shown in Fig. 1, that anonymizes texts using a feedback-guided adversarial
approach. The key insight of this framework is to leverage the strong attribute inference capabilities
of LLMs to inform a separate anonymizer language model. Over multiple rounds, we first employ an
LLM adversary for a detailed private attribute inference from the given text. Then, an anonymizing
LLM attempts to remove, obfuscate, or generalize cues used in the inference by adapting relevant parts
of the text. In our evaluation on both real-world and synthetic online texts, we find that performing
multiple iterations of this adversarial feedback loop leads to increasingly anonymized text while
consistently outperforming traditional techniques in resulting text quality and privacy. Notably, even
smaller locally deployed LLMs outperform commercial industry-grade anonymizers.

Main contributions Our main contributions are:

       • A novel characterization and formulation of the problem of anonymization under adversarial
         LLM attribute inference, overcoming the pitfalls of existing anonymization evaluation.
       • A novel adversarial anonymization framework leveraging LLMs inferential capabilities.
       • Extensive experimental evaluation on 13 LLMs and several baselines, including a human
         study, showing on both real-world and synthetic online texts that our adversarial framework
         outperforms state-of-the-art commercial anonymizers both in terms of utility and privacy.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

Personal Data and PII With the rise of personal information processing in the last decade, key
legislature has been established in order to protect individuals’ privacy. Many of these regulations,
including the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (EU, 2016), center around definitions
of what data is considered personal and hence is to be protected. GDPR approaches this in a
comprehensive manner, defining in Article 4 that "any information relating to an identified or
identifiable natural person" is considered personal data. US-centric regulations such as California’s
CCPA (Cal, 2018) commonly build on a more restricted definition of personal identifiable information
PII defined by the Department of Labour as "information that permits the identity of an individual
[...] to be reasonably inferred by either direct or indirect means" (DOL, 2023). Nonetheless,
both regulations include concrete mentions of quasi-identifying personal attributes such as location
information, gender, and socioeconomic status that can be combined with other information to identify
a person. As pointed out by Pilán et al. (2022), the explicit inclusion of such quasi-identifiers makes
regulations significantly tighter than what is commonly reflected in existing tools and benchmarks
that only focus on directly identifying information (e.g., names, emails). Notably, as shown by Staab
et al. (2023) current LLMs achieve almost human-level performance at extracting and inferring quasi-
identifiers, (adversarially) aligning them much closer with regulations than existing anonymizers.

Author Profiling Author profiling is a well-established area of NLP research that aims to identify
key author attributes (most often gender and age) from the author’s written texts alone (Rosso
et al., 2016). Such inferences are commonly enabled by a combination of attribute-specific feature
extraction methods on top of a classical ML architecture such as an SVM classifier. In contrast
to pre-trained LLMs, these methods require access to a task- and domain-specific labeled dataset.
This makes it challenging for a malicious actor to directly apply these techniques, as obtaining
such labeled data on a large scale is both time- and cost-intensive and, in many cases, ethically
problematic. Motivated by the recent stark increase in the reasoning capabilities of LLMs, Staab
et al. (2023) showed that they can be used to extract and infer personal author attributes on real-world
texts at almost human-level accuracy without any domain-adaptation being necessary. Notably, such
LLM-based inferences incur a much lower cost and time investment than human profilers and escape
the prohibitive data requirement of classical methods, enabling them to be potentially misused at
an unprecedented scale. Since then, several reports have shown that LLM-based author profiling is
already being applied in practice, including the automated classification of users (Brewster, 2023).

Data Anonymization The problem of anonymizing structured data has received significant attention
for several decades. Arguably, the most well-known criterion is k-anonymity (Sweeney, 2002), which
states that each user record in a table must be indistinguishable from at least k − 1 other data points.
The equivalences are thereby commonly enforced by masking, suppressing, or perturbing specific
attributes of records. As pointed out by follow-up work (Machanavajjhala et al., 2006), a key issue is
that individual sensitive attributes of the user can still be inferred with high certainty whenever the
distribution of an attribute in an equivalence class is skewed (e.g., all users being male).
While such shortcomings can be addressed in structured data (Machanavajjhala et al., 2006; Li et al.,
2007), the anonymization of text is a notably harder problem as it deals with highly non-uniform and
unstructured data (Lison et al., 2021). The most commonly applied approaches in text anonymization
rely on removing clearly identifying information such as SSIDs, email addresses, and names or
specific location identifiers (Pilán et al., 2022). While industry-grade anonymizers such as Microsoft
Azure Language Service offer a wide array of potential attributes that can be removed, they fall short
of removing finer contextual details (Aahill, 2023; Staab et al., 2023). Therefore, such approaches
are sometimes referred to as de-identification instead of anonymization in the literature (Pilán et al.,
2022; Dernoncourt et al., 2016; Hintze, 2017). Some works take an information-theoretic approach to
anonymization (Sánchez & Batet, 2016). However, they commonly rely on fixed word ontologies and
a large number of online search results to estimate the mutual information between individual terms,
making their practical application challenging and costly (Lison et al., 2021). We will elaborate more
on the current state and limitations of text anonymization in Sec. 3.
As we will show in our results in Sec. 5, confirming Pilán et al. (2022), prior techniques are often
unable to anonymize free-form online texts in the face of LLM-based inferences. This is mainly due
to their inability to remove privacy-leaking cues that are not contained in regular, isolatable elements


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in the text (PII or self-disclosures) but require an advanced understanding of the context, reasoning,
and vast lexical knowledge on par with the inferring adversary.
Various works also concentrate on purely stylometric attribute inferences. For this, Shetty et al. (2018)
proposes a supervised GAN setup on which individual writing styles are learned and adapted by
LSTM networks. However, as stylometric inferences in practice can be brittle (Schuster et al., 2020),
require specific training data, and primarily focus on features besides the text content, we consider a
comparison to "style-change anonymization" outside of the scope of this work.
Dou et al. (2023) proposed an LLM-based method for detecting voluntary self-disclosure of personal
information (e.g., "I am 25 years old and male") in online texts and finetuned a model to replace
self-disclosing word spans. As we show in our evaluation in Sec. 5, this works well for its intended
use case but falls short when anonymizing attributes not directly stated in the original text.


3    A NONYMIZATION UNDER LLM I NFERENCE

In this section, we first highlight shortcomings of current text anonymization methods and datasets.
We then argue for a more intuitive evaluation framework w.r.t. an LLM-based inference adversary.

The Privacy-Utility Tradeoff Intuitively, the goal of any text anonymization method is to remove
all information that could lead to the inference of a set of pre-specified author attributes while
maintaining the utility of the original text. Independently of the anonymization method, we trade
a part of the text’s original meaning and expression (utility) against a higher degree of privacy
protection (Pilán et al., 2022). Naturally, in edge cases such as, a user wanting to publish their
e-mail address online so that anyone can message them, there is no way of anonymizing the text
without losing its utility. However, as we show in our results in Sec. 5, in most cases, LLM-based
anonymization allows us to achieve a significantly better utility-privacy tradeoff than offered by
current state-of-the-art tools. This is due to two main reasons: Firstly, as pointed out by Lison et al.
(2021) current anonymizers do not account for the utility of the remaining text, commonly masking
all identified spans of text with noticeably less readable and informative tags or ’*’ symbols. While
this is sometimes mitigated with specific generalization hierarchies (Sánchez & Batet, 2016), such
approaches are limited in practice. Secondly, despite claiming context-awareness, their classical rule-
and neural entity-recognition-based approaches cannot account for actual inferences and reasoning,
commonly neglecting any quasi-identifiers (Lison et al., 2021). As LLMs can reason over, and
produce free-form text they are able to overcome the above limitations.

Anonymization Datasets Similarly to author profiling (Rosso et al., 2016), a key issue when
evaluating data anonymization is a lack of adequate datasets. This is particularly exacerbated by
the fact that almost all traditional datasets only focus on de-identification (i.e., removing SSIDs
and names). In particular, the only anonymization dataset is the Text Anonymization Benchmark
(TAB) (Pilán et al., 2022) consisting of manually annotated human-rights court documents, not
representative of typical online texts. Further, for PII detection, Bubeck et al. (2023) have already
shown that GPT-4 outperforms classical methods on TAB. Recently, Staab et al. (2023) introduced the
PersonalReddit dataset consisting of real-world online comments alongside human-labeled personal
attribute inferences. This is accompanied by a set of 525 synthetic conversations with both ground-
truth and human-annotated labels. Since then, Yukhymenko et al. (2024) extended over this dataset,
introducing SynthPAI, consisting of fully synthetic Reddit-style threads and personal attribute labeled
comments. However, as the corresponding labels are for inferences on the full text only, these datasets
are not suitable for traditional metrics that measure accuracy and precision against a set of ground
truth spans (Pilán et al., 2022). As we argue in the next paragraph, this is not a limitation of these
datasets, but rather of current anonymization metrics. While they are reasonable for PII detection
in texts where these appear explicitly, they are not suitable for quantifying the privacy protection
provided by actual free-form text anonymization.

Anonymization under LLM Inference Based on the insight by Staab et al. (2023) that LLMs
achieve near human-level accuracy in attribute inference, we propose to evaluate the success of
anonymization methods based on whether a strong adversarial LLM can still infer corresponding
attributes from the resulting texts. This is both more aligned with regulatory requirements ("[...] be


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


reasonably inferred") and additionally provides a sharper and more interpretable notion of anonymiza-
tion. In particular, it avoids the shortcomings of existing span-based metrics, as shown in the following
example. Assume that we want to anonymize the attribute age from the following comment:

    I was 9 when the first iPhone was released. Now I am 25, and look at what Apple has achieved!

To ensure that the authors cannot be inferred anymore, we have to anonymize both the sections "I was 9
[...]" and "Now I am 25". Assuming an anonymizer detects only one of the two spans, their traditional
token recall (Lison et al., 2021) would be ≈ 21 , despite the age being easily inferable from the
remaining text, resulting in adversarial inference score of 0. In this sense, evaluating anonymization
directly under adversarial inference reflects the privacy as a worst-case metric principle much better
than prior span-based metrics, only assigning a score of 1 when an attribute can no longer be inferred.
This naturally extends the anonymization-specific entity-recall (Pilán et al., 2022) without requiring
expensive span-entity labels from human annotators.


4     F EEDBACK -G UIDED A DVERSARIAL A NONYMIZATION

We now present our adversarial anonymization method that leverages the strong inferential capabilities
of LLMs to anonymize text with high utility and privacy protection.

Adversarial Anonymization As depicted in
Fig. 1 we propose the usage of an adversar-
ial proxy to inform our anonymizer during
the anonymization procedure about which sec-
tions of a text snippet are relevant for further
anonymization. Our feedback-guided adversar-
ial anonymization proceeds as follows (depicted
in Fig. 2): Given text t0 = t and a set of attributes
A we wish to anonymize, our anonymizer first
instantiates two models: the inference model
Minf and the anonymization model Manon . In
each round i of the anonymization, the infer-
ence model tries to infer all attributes a ∈ A
based on the anonymized text from the cur-
rent round ti , resulting in a set of inferences
Ai ∶= {ai ∈ Minf (ti ) ∣ a ∈ A}. Ai is then input
to the anonymization model that tries to adapt
the relevant sections of the text resulting in a
new ti+1 = Manon (ti , Ai ). We repeat this pro-
cedure either until Ai = ∅, i.e., the inference
model can no longer infer any of the original
target attributes A, or a fixed number of rounds
is reached. We note that in round i we give both
models access only to ti instead of the entire          Figure 2: Intermediate steps of our adversarial
history ti∶0 . For the adversary, this naturally cap-   anonymization framework on a (perturbed) real-
tures the notion of only attacking the current          world example. Adversarial inferences (GPT-4)
anonymized text, leading to inferences that for         are shortened for brevity. We observe how the first
Manon are most helpful on ti .                          round of anonymization detects direct references to
In our evaluation, we instantiate both models           the author’s sex, leading to their removal in t1 . In
with various SotA and open LLMs, highlight-             round 2, the adversary relied on more subtle usages
ing how this adversarial framework improves             of language for its inference. On t2 , the adversary
over existing baselines. Notably, compared to a         was unable to infer any sex with certainty.
direct anonymization approach, the adversarial
feedback allows the model to anonymize significantly finer details, leading to an attribute inference
accuracy drop from 66.3% to 45.3% after just three iterations. Additionally, the intermediate infer-
ences are directly interpretable and could be used in an interactive scenario to inform a human in the
loop about whether the current level of anonymization is sufficient for the purpose at hand.


                                                        5
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Base      Yi-34B-AA    Llama3.1-70B-AA    Qwen2-72B-AA                                    140                                          Model
                                    Azure     GPT-3.5-AA   Mistral-7B-AA      Gemma2-27B-AA                                                        Base       Dou-SD        GPT-3.5-AA       Llama3.1-70B-AA
                       1.00         Dou-SD    GPT-4-AA     Mixtral-8x22B-AA   Dipper
                                                                                                                              120                  Azure      Yi-34B-AA     GPT-4-AA
                                                                                                                                                                                       Anon. Level


                                                                                              Number of Correct Predictions
                       0.95                                                                                                                                                        1     2     3      4   5
                                                                                                                              100
Mean Utility (Comb.)

                       0.90                                                                                                    80

                       0.85                                                                                                    60

                       0.80                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                               20
                       0.75
                                                                                                                                0
                              0.4       0.5           0.6             0.7          0.8                                              OCCP         LOC                      AGE                  POBP
                                                    Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                   Attribute

                                      (a) Utility-privacy tradeoff                                                                  (b) Per-attribute adversarial accuracy

 Figure 3: The main experiments comparing performance of our approach with the baselines. Fig. 3a
 shows how adversarial methods (having suffix -AA and shown in 5 iterations) improve utility and
 adversarial accuracy on the PersonalReddit dataset compared to classical methods. The baseline
 on non-anonymized text is shown in the top-right corner as . For each OSS model family, we                                                ★
 only show the strongest model. Fig. 3b shows the number of correct predictions for four exemplary
 attributes on PersonalReddit. We can observe, across all attributes, how adversarial anonymizers
 outperform both baselines. While Llama3.1-70B and GPT-4 continuously improve with each round,
 the more limited Yi-34B struggles to improve on two of the four attributes.

  5                           E VALUATION
In this section, we present our experimental evaluation. In our main experiment, we show how our
adversarial LLM anonymizers outperform existing industry-grade anonymizers in the privacy-utility
tradeoff on the real-world PersonalReddit dataset. We then confirm these results with a human
study showing consistent human preferences for LLM-anonymized texts. We further show how
multiple iterations of our anonymization procedure enable a fine-grained tradeoff between privacy
and text utility. Next, we explore anonymization over varying levels of ground-truth resolution,
highlighting that adversarial anonymization outperforms Azure Language Service (Azure) (Aahill,
2023) especially on fine-grained personal information where identifieability is the easiest and privacy
matters most. Lastly, we show that even in cases where we cannot anonymize with either technique,
LLM-based anonymization leads to noticeably less certain predictions by the adversary. In App. A.4,
we repeat our experiments on both SynthPAI and synthetic PersonalReddit samples, observing similar
behavior.

 Baselines Following Staab et al. (2023), we use the industry-standard state-of-the-art text
 anonymizer provided by Azure (Aahill, 2023) as a baseline for traditional anonymization. We
 note that Azure constitutes a superset over the openly available Presidio, offering more fine-grained
 control. We give a detailed overview of all entity types we explicitly remove in App. B.
Further, we include the self-disclosure detection and replacement models introduced by Dou et al.
(2023) as a baseline for how many text snippets contain directly inferable personal attributes as
identified by a specifically fine-tuned model. Additionally, we make use of the state-of-the-Art 11B
transformer-based paraphrasing model Dipper (Krishna et al., 2024) to baseline the anonymizing
effect of pure text paraphrasing. To measure the impact of the feedback-guided anonymization, we
also instantiate baseline LLM anonymizers that do not receive adversarial inference feedback between
anonymization rounds. We note that these baselines otherwise use the same prompts, including
CoT-reasoning. We give more details on used models in App. B showing all used prompts in App. E.

 Measuring Privacy and Utility We instantiate our anonymization under LLM-inference setting
 using GPT-4 (the strongest model in Staab et al. (2023)) as the final inference model for all results
 presented in the main body. We confirm the representativeness of our results obtained this way by
 examining the impact of the final inference model in App. A.5. For inference, we use the adversarial
 prompts introduced in Staab et al. (2023), letting GPT-4 infer personal attributes from a complete
 user profile in a zero-shot CoT fashion. We use the same scoring procedure as in Staab et al. (2023),
 and present all used (system) prompts in App. E. As we now work on full texts instead of pre-defined
 spans, we, motivated by a large number of recent works (Pilán et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023; Chiang


                                                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


& Lee, 2023), in a first step, instantiate a GPT-4 utility judge that measures both the readability of the
anonymized text as well as its similarity in meaning to the original text on a scale from 1 to 10 (for
later plots scaled to [0, 1]). As we show in the example in Fig. 1 as well as in App. D, readability is
crucial for real-world online texts where traditional anonymization methods would appear unnatural.
Further, we compute traditional BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and ROUGE-1 (Lin, 2004) scores
between the original and the anonymized texts. Our final utility score is comprised by the average
of these three metrics. We additionally compare our LLM-based metrics to human perception in
App. F.5, showing strong overall alignment.

Datasets We first evaluate our methods on the real-world PersonalReddit dataset containing human-
labeled Reddit comments (grouped by profiles) across eight possible attributes: Age (AGE), Sex (SEX),
Location (LOC), Occupation (OCCP), Education-Level (EDU), Relationship Status (REL), Income Level
(INC), and Place-Of-Birth (POBP). Notably, PersonalReddit contains comments reflecting real-world
online language usage and a considerably wider range of personal attributes than any other author
profiling dataset. We preprocess PersonalReddit to only contain profiles with at most 1000 tokens (≈
700 words), resulting in 426 profiles. We provide a more detailed overview of the data in App. C.
Further, in App. A.4, we evaluate selected methods on the synthetic Reddit comments of SynthPAI
(Yukhymenko et al., 2024), and on the 525 synthetic online conversation examples introduced by
Staab et al. (2023). Both of these synthetic datasets represent a similar setting to the real-world
PersonalReddit dataset, with analogous 8 personal attributes for inference. As we show in our
evaluation, we observe qualitatively very similar results across both real and synthetic datasets.

Main Experiment We present our
main experiment in Fig. 3a, showing           Anonymizer Azure GPT-4 Iter.1 Iter.2 Iter.3
both mean utility (as mean of readabil-                             AA
ity, meaning and ROUGE) and mean              Readability    0.38 0.89        0.86    0.90    0.90
privacy (as measured by the number            Meaning        0.47 0.73        0.79    0.73    0.67
of correct inferences) over the Person-       Typical        0.44 0.99        1.00    0.97    1.00
alReddit dataset. We provide individ-         Usable         0.37 0.93        1.00    0.91    0.88
ual plots for each utility measurement
in App. A.3. We indicate the original Table 1: Mean-over-median of 5 human scores per sample
texts at the top right as having full util- across 100 samples. Adversarial anonymization consistently
ity. We first note that Azure achieves significantly outperforms Azure in readability and meaning
an overall utility of 0.76 while only across all iterations. Further, humans consistently find LLM-
decreasing the adversarial accuracy anonymized text more natural and would use it more likely.
from 86.7% to 66.3%. Similarly, we
observe that the self-disclosure baseline from Dou et al. (2023) achieves a higher utility score as it
replaces individual spans with readable text; however, at the same time, these replacements leak more
information than simple masking. Lastly Dipper as a pure paraphrasing model is largely ineffective
in this setting, providing only minor improvements in privacy while heavily impacting utility.
We note that (with the exception of including both GPT-4 and GPT-3.5) we only show the largest
member of each evaluated model family, including full plots in App. A. We find that all instantiated
adversarial anonymizers (denoted with the suffix -AA) consistently outperform Azure in both utility
and privacy across all rounds. Across all models, one can further observe that multiple rounds
smoothly trade-off mean utility for an increase in privacy. Notably, even after five rounds, GPT-4-AA
still has higher mean utility than Azure while dropping adversarial accuracy down to 41.6% (an
absolute improvement of 24.7%). Additionally, after GPT-4, the open-source Llama3.1-70B performs
the second best, closely matching GPT4-AA’s privacy-utility tradeoff.
An interesting observation is that GPT-4, while consistently outperforming GPT-3.5, has a lower
utility after one round than Yi-34B (we can make similar observations with various other models).
This effect can be attributed to GPT-4 noticing more clues in its first iteration than Yi-34B, which
leads to overall more changes in the text and correspondingly lower utility scores.
In Fig. 3b, we compare anonymization results on four of the eight attributes of PersonalReddit (we
present results for all attributes in App. A.1). We only show 4 adversarial anonymizers for improved
readability, providing results across all models in App. A. Across all attributes, we can observe
that adversarial anonymizers outperform Azure, with only YI-34B performing similarly on a single


                                                    7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       0.92                       GPT-4-Base       GPT-4-AA                                                                                                                         Metric
                                                                                                                                        0.6                                                           accuracy
                       0.90                                                                                                                                                                           certainty
                                                                                                                                        0.5


                                                                                                               Accuracy and Certainty
Mean Utility (Comb.)
                       0.88
                       0.86                                                                                                             0.4

                       0.84                                                                                                             0.3
                       0.82                                                                                                             0.2
                       0.80
                                                                                                                                        0.1
                       0.78
                                                                                                                                        0.0
                              0.425   0.450   0.475 0.500 0.525           0.550   0.575   0.600                                               Azure 1   GPT-4-AA 1 GPT-4-AA 2 GPT-4-AA 3 GPT-4-AA 4 GPT-4-AA 5
                                                   Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                             Anonymization Method


Figure 4: Comparison of GPT-4 with feedback-                                                                    Figure 5: Adversarial accuracy and certainty on
guided adversarial anonymization (AA) vs with-                                                                  correctly classified examples by the final GPT-4
out (denoted by Base). Even after 5 rounds Base                                                                 adversary. GPT-4-AA not only leads to fewer
does not reach the anonymization performance                                                                    correct inferences but also reduces the certainty
of AA after 2 rounds. After all 5 iterations, this                                                              of the adversary in its correct predictions, forcing
yields an adversarial accuracy delta of ∼ 10%.                                                                  it to rely on inherent biases.


 attribute. Further, we observe a consistent trend of GPT-4-AA, GPT3.5-AA, and Llama3.1-70B-AA,
 noticeably reducing the number of inferable attributes in each round, highlighting the effectiveness of
 our feedback-guided approach (confirmed in App. A across models).

 Scaling over model sizes One key observation                    Base      GPT-4-AA           Qwen1.5-14B-AA Qwen2-72B-AA
                                                                 Azure     Qwen1.5-4B-AA      Qwen1.5-32B-AA
 made by Staab et al. (2023) was that model at-         1.00
 tribute inference capabilities naturally scale with    0.95
 general model capabilities, resulting in increas-
                                                                                                  Mean Utility (Comb.)


 ingly more serious threats to user privacy. Per-       0.90
 haps unsurprisingly, as adversarial anonymiza-         0.85
 tion directly builds on this inference, but equally
 importantly, we can observe analogous trends in        0.80

 anonymization performance. As such, enabled            0.75
 by our adversarial anonymization framework,
                                                             0.4       0.5            0.6             0.7       0.8
 the increased privacy threat posed by more capa-                                   Adversarial Accuracy
 ble models can be proportionally mitigated by
 their increased anonymization capabilities. We Figure 6: Utility-privacy tradeoff across various
 highlight this for the Qwen (Bai et al., 2023) model sizes of the Qwen model family. Each
 model family across 5 different model sizes model improves anonymization performance, con-
 from 4B up to 72B in Fig. 6. We observe how sistently dominating smaller models.
 each model consistently dominates its smaller
 siblings in the utility-privacy tradeoff. Lastly, GPT-4, as the most capable (tested) model, constitutes
 the current privacy-utility frontier. Additionally, we observe the same trends across other model
 families like Llama3.1/Mixtral in App. A.

Human Evaluation We support our results with a human study with 50 participants. For this, we
randomly selected 200 anonymized samples (100 anonymized via Azure, 100 evenly split across the
first three GPT-4-AA iterations) from our synthetic texts, collecting 5 human scores per sample. In a
first step, participants were asked to score the readability (from 1: unreadable to 5: fully readable)
of the anonymized text and whether they would consider the text to be typical (0: no, 1: yes) in an
online setting. Afterward, participants were shown the original non-anonymized texts and scored
whether the anonymized text preserved the original text’s meaning (from 1: completely different to 5:
fully preserved) and whether they consider the anonymization as a usable (0: no, 1: yes) replacement
when wanting to participate in an online conversation.
We show our main results in Table 1, reporting normalized mean-over-median scores across all
samples. We find that adversarial anonymization significantly outperforms Azure in both readability
(0.38 → 0.89) and meaning (0.47 → 0.73). Further, humans consistently find LLM-anonymized
text more typical (0.99) as well as usable for online text anonymization (0.37 → 0.93). We can
further observe consistent behavior across all iterations, with adversarial anonymization notably


                                                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


outperforming Azure’s utility even after 3 turns. These results solidify our previous conclusions,
highlighting that adversarial LLM-based anonymization provides a higher utility (and privacy)
alternative to traditional text anonymization. We present a complete overview of our human study,
including more detailed results, the full study format, examples, statistics on inter-rater agreement as
well as comparisons to LLM utility scores in App. F.

Adversarial Feedback is Crucial We examine the impact of adversarial feedback in our anonymiza-
tion framework in Fig. 4. In particular, we compare GPT-4-AA with GPT-4-Base, an anonymizer that
is iteratively prompted in the same CoT manner as GPT-4-AA but without adversarial feedback. We
observe that already after 2 rounds, GPT-4-AA achieves higher privacy and utility than GPT-4-Base
after its full 5 rounds. Further, GPT-4-AA makes considerably larger improvements each round, a
result we also observe across other models (presented in App. A.2). These results strongly indicate
that adversarial feedback helps the anonymizing model focus on the privacy-relevant parts of the text.

Resolution of Anonymization Looking at the
results on anonymizing location (LOC) in Fig. 3b,     Setting          Country State          City
it may seem surprising that even after 3 itera-       Azure              59.2      14.3       24.6
tions of GPT-4-AA around 45% of the labels            GPT-4 Iter. 1      61.8       9.5        6.8
can still be correctly inferred. We investigate       GPT-4 Iter. 2      46.1        0         4.1
this further by splitting the ground truth labels     GPT-4 Iter. 3      46.1        0         1.3
into the resolution levels city, state, and country,
presenting the individual accuracies for Azure Table 2: Adv. accuracy [%] on the location at-
and GPT-4-AA in Table 2. We observe that all tribute for Azure and adv. anonymization (GPT-4).
methods achieve noticeably lower privacy for As expected, both approaches have more difficul-
country level information than for state or city ties anonymizing less precise locations (countries).
level. This is expected, as references to city However, with increasing precision GPT-4 signifi-
and state are commonly more specific, making cantly outperforms Azure, completely anonymiz-
them easier to remove. Notably we find that, ing all mentions of states and dropping Azure’s
especially on the finer resolution levels, GPT-4- 24.6% accuracy for cities down to 1.3%.
AA much more noticeably outperforms Azure,
reducing the accuracy on "city" level location
predictions from Azure’s 24.6% to 6.8% in a single round and to 1.3% after 3 rounds. This indicates
that in situations where anonymity sets are smaller (such as cities compared to countries) anonymizing
with LLMs outperforms traditional approaches by even larger margins.

Bias and Adversarial Inference One issue that potentially arises when using an adversarial LLM to
infer attributes from a real-world text is that (similarly to humans) it will partially rely on pre-existing
biases to make an inference. In some cases, we observed that, e.g., general topic choices, such as
a person writing about what shade of lipstick they like to wear, have been properly anonymized
(in this case removing all mentions of the author’s sex as female), yet the model’s biased inference
from the general topic was still correct. While statistically, it is arguably the more likely choice, it
is a-priori unclear whether we should consider the attribute anonymized or not. To investigate this
further, we additionally let the adversary score itself based on whether it could infer the attribute
from direct evidence in the text (certainty 1) or whether it relied purely on statistical bias (certainty
0). We show these results for Azure and GPT-4 in Fig. 5, highlighting how GPT-4-AA consistently
produces anonymized texts on which the adversary is less certain in its prediction, inherently having
to rely on observed biases. We believe that further investigating the relationship between bias and
anonymization could be an interesting direction for future work.

6    D ISCUSSION
Use-Cases for Adversarial Anonymization We presented and evaluated our anonymization on
real-world online texts, following the setting in Staab et al. (2023). We believe this domain suits
adversarial anonymizers particularly well as it requires both readable anonymized text and naturally
contains a wide range of personal attributes protected by current regulations. However, there exist
text domains such as legal documents or patient records that fit traditional approaches to ensure that
only masking operations have taken place and where readability is not a key priority. As we will
discuss below, we still believe the adversarial inference setting can also benefit these domains.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Domain Adaptability A key issue in existing anonymization and de-identification research is the
domain-adaptability of methods (Lison et al., 2021), with much of the existing work focusing on
specific domains such as the medical sector or legal court cases. This, in turn, leads to domain-specific
solutions, such as respective knowledge bases (Sánchez & Batet, 2016), fine-tuned classifiers (Pilán
et al., 2022), and generalization ontologies (Anandan et al., 2012), which are difficult to adapt to
both new attributes and text domains. As we can see in our evaluation, such domain adaptability is a
natural strong suit of LLMs that, due to their vast pre-training (Touvron et al., 2023b), generalize
well between tasks (Bubeck et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023). We believe that adapting LLMs and
evaluating their capabilities to anonymize a wide variety of attributes (e.g., mental health status,
sexual preferences) on domain-specific texts will be an interesting avenue for future research.

Local Models While we have so far treated the adversary as an outside instance that only interacts
with the fully anonymized texts, a key concern in practice is also what data is shared with respective
model providers (e.g., during anonymization). To remedy this, all our evaluations include a wide
range of open-source models that (1) can be run locally and (2), in the case of current models like
Llama3.1, almost match GPT-4-AA’s performance, while often being significantly cheaper to run in
commodity settings (App. A.6). Notably, all local models outperform existing traditional anonymizers
such as Azure. At the same time, as shown in our experiments, adversarial anonymization is naturally
bounded by the strength of the feedback adversary. Given the recent progress in making smaller and
more capable models able to run locally (Jiang et al., 2023; 2024), as well as our current results,
we are confident that future open LLMs will exhibit capabilities similar to current closed models.
Furthermore, the split into an adversarial and a fixing LLM in our adversarial setup provides an
interesting opportunity for future smaller models to be fine-tuned specifically for each subtask.

Limits of the Adversarial Inference Setting While adversarial inference provides a natural
definition of measuring the anonymity of a resulting text, in practice, every instantiation is dependent
on the strength of the adversary. Based on the results of Staab et al. (2023) and our experiments, we
are confident that GPT-4 already now achieves close-to-human level performance in this task. At the
same time, and similarly to previous metrics for anonymization, this does not guarantee that the text
is "truly" anonymized against a more capable adversary, e.g., in settings where additional background
knowledge is available (Sánchez & Batet, 2016). Providing any such guarantees against arbitrary
adversaries has proven to be difficult even in significantly more restricted domains than free-form
text in the past (Sweeney, 2002; Li et al., 2007). Nonetheless, we believe that the potential impact of
developing such guarantees would be paradigm-shifting, and as such, we advocate for the pursuit of
this objective as an important future work item.
At the same time, with vast amounts of text to be protected, anonymization is a question of monetary
cost. Naturally, using current state-of-the-art LLMs will incur higher costs than simple rule-based
approaches. However, the cost is not as high as one might assume: As we show in App. A.6 the per
round cost of running our most expensive GPT-4-AA anonymizer is under 0.035 USD per comment.
This cost is further reduced when using top-performing open models. Additionally, extrapolating
from the early promise shown by smaller models and current progress in model distillation (Meta,
2024) and quantization (Dettmers et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024), we anticipate future adversarial
anonymization solutions to be locally deployable on mobile devices.


7    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we took significant steps toward improving the current state of text anonymization
in the face of capable LLM adversaries. First, we introduced our new anonymization under the
adversarial inference setting, highlighting the shortcomings of common anonymization techniques
and evaluations. Next, we presented our novel adversarial anonymization framework leveraging
current LLMs as intermediate adversaries to guide text anonymization, leading to better privacy
protection. In our experimental evaluation, we instantiated our adversarial inference framework
with state-of-the-art LLMs, demonstrating that adversarial anonymizers can achieve better privacy
protection and higher text utility than currently widely deployed industry-grade anonymization tools.
We further underlined our results with a human study highlighting a strong human preference for
LLM-anonymized texts. Finally, we discussed the applicability and limitations of our adversarial
inference setting and anonymization framework, identifying relevant directions for future work.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT
We believe that there are two main ethical considerations to take in the context of our work: (i) the
impact of conducting and publishing our research on the people whose data was included in the used
datasets or were subjected to our human evaluation; and (ii) the broader impact of the anonymization
framework presented in this paper. Below, we discuss these considerations and the measures we have
taken to ensure full ethical conduct and minimize any marginal risk.

Impact on Research Subjects First, our experiments in the main body of the paper were conducted
in the PersonalReddit dataset, containing real-world comments of Reddit users. While the comments
were already included in several large public Reddit data dumps, and PersonalReddit was already
used in prior research on online privacy (Staab et al., 2023), we have taken special care to protect the
privacy of the underlying users. Namely, we did not provide access to the labeled comments to any
third parties outside of the group of authors of this study, and we will not release the data publicly
at any point in the future either. Further, we do not include any direct or traceable example in any
public material that is going to be released in association with this study. We note that, in line with
prior work (Staab et al., 2023), using real-world data for our study was crucial, as it allowed us to
quantify the real-world difference an advanced anonymization method could bring for the actual use
cases affected by the inference capabilities of LLMs.
Further, to underline our LLM-assisted results, we conducted a human study, evaluating the quality
of anonymizations produced by our method. For this human study, we obtained IRB approval from
our institution, keeping the (pseudomized) participants’ data private at all times. Additionally, all
participants were fairly compensated for their efforts and could stop the study at any point. We
provide further details on the ethics of the human study and how it was conducted in App. F.

Broader Impact The advancement of anonymization methods to cover a wider range of personal
attributes and offer better privacy protection has an important societal impact. Individual privacy
rights cornerstone legislations such as GDPR and CCPA have been established in various jurisdictions
over the last decade. We, therefore, see progress in the field of text anonymization as beneficial
to all individuals in order to express the freedom to exercise these rights more accessibly. While
more powerful anonymization methods could theoretically be abused to hide malicious intent or
individuals, this is far outside the range of our methods and already significantly hindered by today’s
model alignment. Additionally, while nefarious actors already had other means to cover their actions,
benign users, prior to our study, lacked reliable tools to protect their privacy in online discourse in the
face of LLM inferences. As such, we believe that the positive impact of our work far outweighs the
potential negative impacts by unlikely malicious abuse.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide the source code of our method and all experiment scripts in the following code repository:
https://github.com/eth-sri/llm-anonymization. Additionally to our code, we document and
describe all models, datasets, and other experimental setting choices such as hyperparameters in
App. B. While the synthetic datasets of Staab et al. (2023) and Yukhymenko et al. (2024) are publicly
available; due to ethical considerations, in line with Staab et al. (2023), we do not plan to make the
real world PersonalReddit dataset public. For this reason, we have expended extensive efforts to
representatively replicate our main results on the aforementioned publicly available synthetic datasets
in App. A.4, as we believe that providing a reproducible baseline for future research is essential for
reliable progress.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been done as part of the SERI grant SAFEAI (Certified Safe, Fair and Robust Artificial
Intelligence, contract no. MB22.00088). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the
authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or European Commission.
Neither the European Union nor the European Commission can be held responsible for them. The
work has received funding from the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation
(SERI) (SERI-funded ERC Consolidator Grant).


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA). https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa, October 2018.
Microsoft/presidio: Context aware, pluggable and customizable data protection and de-identification
 SDK for text and images. https://github.com/microsoft/presidio, 2021.
Aahill. What is Azure AI Language - Azure AI services, July 2023. URL https://learn.microsoft.
  com/en-us/azure/ai-services/language-service/overview.

Balamurugan Anandan, Chris Clifton, Wei Jiang, Mummoorthy Murugesan, Pedro Pastrana-Camacho,
  and Luo Si. t-plausibility: Generalizing words to desensitize text. Trans. Data Privacy, 5(3):
  505–534, dec 2012. ISSN 1888-5063.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Luo Ji, Mei Li, Junyang Lin, Runji Lin, Dayiheng Liu, Gao Liu,
   Chengqiang Lu, Keming Lu, Jianxin Ma, Rui Men, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Chuanqi Tan,
   Sinan Tan, Jianhong Tu, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Wei Wang, Shengguang Wu, Benfeng Xu, Jin
   Xu, An Yang, Hao Yang, Jian Yang, Shusheng Yang, Yang Yao, Bowen Yu, Hongyi Yuan, Zheng
   Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, Xingxuan Zhang, Yichang Zhang, Zhenru Zhang, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou,
   Xiaohuan Zhou, and Tianhang Zhu. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609,
   2023.
Thomas Brewster.    Chatgpt has been turned into a social media surveillance assis-
  tant, Nov 2023.     URL https://www.forbes.com/sites/thomasbrewster/2023/11/16/
  chatgpt-becomes-a-social-media-spy-assistant/.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio
  Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4,
  April 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712. arXiv:2303.12712 [cs].
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin Raffel.
  Extracting Training Data from Large Language Models, June 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan
  Zhang. Quantifying Memorization Across Neural Language Models, March 2023.
Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. Can Large Language Models Be an Alternative to Human
  Evaluations?, May 2023.
Franck Dernoncourt, Ji Young Lee, Ozlem Uzuner, and Peter Szolovits. De-identification of patient
  notes with recurrent neural networks. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
  24(3):596–606, 12 2016. ISSN 1067-5027. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocw156. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1093/jamia/ocw156.

Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized llms, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14314.
DOL, 2023. URL https://www.dol.gov/general/ppii.
Yao Dou, Isadora Krsek, Tarek Naous, Anubha Kabra, Sauvik Das, Alan Ritter, and Wei Xu. Reducing
  Privacy Risks in Online Self-Disclosures with Language Models, November 2023.
European Union EU. General data protection regulation, 2016. URL https://gdpr-info.eu/.
Daniel Han and Michael Han. Unsloth, 2024. URL https://github.com/unslothai/unsloth.
Eric Hartford. Dolphin. https://erichartford.com/dolphin, July 2023.
Mike Hintze. Viewing the GDPR through a de-identification lens: a tool for compliance, clarification,
 and consistency. International Data Privacy Law, 8(1):86–101, 12 2017. ISSN 2044-3994. doi:
 10.1093/idpl/ipx020. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/idpl/ipx020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas
  Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7B, October 2023.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris
  Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand,
  Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-
  Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le
  Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed.
  Mixtral of Experts, January 2024.
Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What
  disease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical
  exams. Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421, 2021.
Nikola Jovanović, Robin Staab, and Martin Vechev. Watermark stealing in large language models.
  2024.
Kalpesh Krishna, Yixiao Song, Marzena Karpinska, John Wieting, and Mohit Iyyer. Paraphrasing
  evades detectors of ai-generated text, but retrieval is an effective defense. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ninghui Li, Tiancheng Li, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, and T Labs. T-Closeness: Privacy Beyond
  k-Anonymity and -Diversity. 2007.
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
  Branches Out, pp. 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.
Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Wei-Ming Chen, Wei-Chen Wang, Guangxuan
   Xiao, Xingyu Dang, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. Awq: Activation-aware weight quantization for
   llm compression and acceleration, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00978.
Pierre Lison, Ildikó Pilán, David Sanchez, Montserrat Batet, and Lilja Øvrelid. Anonymisation
  Models for Text Data: State of the art, Challenges and Future Directions. In Proceedings of the
  59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 4188–4203,
  Online, 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.323.
A. Machanavajjhala, J. Gehrke, D. Kifer, and M. Venkitasubramaniam. L-diversity: Privacy beyond
  k-anonymity. In 22nd International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE’06), pp. 24–24,
  Atlanta, GA, USA, 2006. IEEE. ISBN 978-0-7695-2570-9. doi: 10.1109/ICDE.2006.1.
Meta.      Llama 3.2:    Revolutionizing edge   ai and vision with open, cus-
 tomizable   models,  September    2024.          URL  https://ai.meta.com/blog/
  llama-3-2-connect-2024-vision-edge-mobile-devices/.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Pierre Isabelle, Eugene Charniak, and Dekang Lin (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
  311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, July 2002. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.3115/1073083.1073135. URL https://aclanthology.org/P02-1040.
Ildikó Pilán, Pierre Lison, Lilja Øvrelid, Anthi Papadopoulou, David Sánchez, and Montserrat Batet.
   The Text Anonymization Benchmark (TAB): A Dedicated Corpus and Evaluation Framework
   for Text Anonymization. Computational Linguistics, 48(4):1053–1101, December 2022. ISSN
   0891-2017, 1530-9312. doi: 10.1162/coli_a_00458.
Paolo Rosso, Francisco Rangel Pardo, Martin Potthast, Efstathios Stamatatos, Michael Tschuggnall,
  and Benno Stein. Overview of pan’16. volume 9822, pp. 332–350, 09 2016. ISBN 978-3-319-
  44563-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-44564-9_28.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tal Schuster, Roei Schuster, Darsh J. Shah, and Regina Barzilay. The Limitations of Stylometry for
  Detecting Machine-Generated Fake News. Computational Linguistics, 46(2):499–510, 06 2020.
  ISSN 0891-2017. doi: 10.1162/coli_a_00380. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/coli_a_00380.
Rakshith Shetty, Bernt Schiele, and Mario Fritz. A4NT: Author Attribute Anonymity by Adversarial
  Training of Neural Machine Translation. 2018.
Robin Staab, Mark Vero, Mislav Balunović, and Martin Vechev. Beyond memorization: Violating
  privacy via inference with large language models, 2023.
Latanya Sweeney. k-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy. International journal of uncertainty,
  fuzziness and knowledge-based systems, 10(05):557–570, 2002.
David Sánchez and Montserrat Batet. C-sanitized: A privacy model for document redaction and
  sanitization. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 67(1):148–163,
  2016. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23363. URL https://asistdl.onlinelibrary.wiley.
  com/doi/abs/10.1002/asi.23363.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language
  Models, February 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-
  tian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu,
  Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models,
  July 2023b.
Hanna Yukhymenko, Robin Staab, Mark Vero, and Martin Vechev. A synthetic dataset for personal
  attribute inference, 2024.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena, December 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In this section, we will present additional results on both the PersonalReddit dataset as well as the
evaluation of our adversarial anonymizers on both SynthPAI (Yukhymenko et al., 2024) and the
synthetic examples introduced by Staab et al. (2023).


A.1    ACCURACY ACROSS ATTRIBUTES AND M ODELS

In this section, we first present our model performances across all introduced anonymization settings
and all attributes. We present these results in Fig. 7, confirming that adversarial anonymizers
consistently outperform classical approaches across all attributes in PersonalReddit. Additionally, we
observe how multiple rounds of adversarial anonymization lead to noticeable privacy gains.


A.2    BASE VS . AA

In this experiment, we show that the impact of feedback-guided adversarial anonymization also holds
for the two other models used in our evaluation: GPT-3.5 and YI-34B. As we can see in Fig. 8, all
models exhibit similar behavior with the feedback-guided adversarial anonymization outperforming
the respective base variants in privacy protection. Likewise, we find that the corresponding utility
score for GPT-3.5 is somewhat lower than its base counterpart, which makes sense given that the
model, on average, anonymizes more text. Overall, these findings confirm the positive impact of
feedback-guided adversarial anonymization across different models.


A.3    I NDIVIDUAL M ETRICS

In the plots in Fig. 9, we present the main experiments ablated over individual parts or the combined
utility score (as well as BLEU). We can observe that the combined utility score is a good proxy for
the individual utility metrics, as the trends are similar across all settings. This is consistent with our
findings in Sec. 5. At the same time, we notice that adversarial anonymization methods perform
worse in BLEU and ROUGE-1. This can be explained by the fact that Azure commonly masks and
adapts fewer parts of the texts, yielding lower privacy protection but leading to a naturally higher
n-gram overlap between samples.


A.4    S YNTHETIC DATA

We complement our main experiments with re-evaluations across two additional synthetic datasets.
First, we evaluate on the recently introduced SynthPAI (Yukhymenko et al., 2024) dataset, which
contains a large collection of synthetic online Reddit threads with the same format and attributes as
the PersonalReddit dataset. We use the same general pre-processing as on PersonalReddit. As label
descriptions in a few cases did not directly correspond to PersonalReddit we manually aligned the
dataset labels. We present our results on 5 models in Fig. 12 highlighting very similar trends. In
particular, we find that GPT-4-AA constitutes the current utility-privacy frontier, and other models
consistently scale with general model capabilities. Notably, Llama3.1-70B-AA performs, as on real
data, very close to GPT-4-AA.
Additionally, we evaluate on the synthetic samples by Staab et al. (2023). In Fig. 13, we observe quali-
tatively ver similar results to the main experiments on PersonalReddit, with adversarial anonymization
methods consistently outperforming Azure. Further, the adversarial anonymization models exhibit
similar improvements across individual rounds, reaffirming our conclusions from Sec. 5. Interestingly,
we find that Llama3.1 models, in some cases, outperform GPT-4-AA, especially around round 2.
We believe a possible explanation for this is the noticeably simpler nature of texts in comparison to
PersonalReddit and SynthPAI, which seem to favor models that make more minimalistic changes.
Independently, we believe it to be a great sign that OSS models become competitive with closed
counterparts.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                  Anonymizer
                                  200                               Base               Yi-34B-AA 5       GPT-4-AA 2          Gemma2-27B 4
                                                                    Azure 1            GPT-3.5-AA 1      GPT-4-AA 3          Gemma2-27B 5
                                                                    Dou-SD 1           GPT-3.5-AA 2      GPT-4-AA 4          Dipper 1
                                  175                               Yi-34B-AA 1        GPT-3.5-AA 3      GPT-4-AA 5          Dipper 2

  Number of Correct Predictions
                                                                    Yi-34B-AA 2        GPT-3.5-AA 4      Gemma2-27B 1        Dipper 3
                                                                    Yi-34B-AA 3        GPT-3.5-AA 5      Gemma2-27B 2        Dipper 4
                                  150                               Yi-34B-AA 4        GPT-4-AA 1        Gemma2-27B 3        Dipper 5

                                  125
                                  100
                                   75
                                   50
                                   25
                                    0
                                        SEX    OCCP       REL             LOC           AGE          POBP              EDU         INC
                                                                            Attribute
                                                                                           Anonymizer
                                  200                    Base                   Llama3.1-8B 2         Llama3.1-70B 5         Mixtral-8x7B 3
                                                         Azure 1                Llama3.1-8B 3         Mistral-7B 1           Mixtral-8x7B 4
                                                         GPT-4-AA 1             Llama3.1-8B 4         Mistral-7B 2           Mixtral-8x7B 5
                                  175                    GPT-4-AA 2             Llama3.1-8B 5         Mistral-7B 3           Mixtral-8x22B 1
  Number of Correct Predictions


                                                         GPT-4-AA 3             Llama3.1-70B 1        Mistral-7B 4           Mixtral-8x22B 2
                                                         GPT-4-AA 4             Llama3.1-70B 2        Mistral-7B 5           Mixtral-8x22B 3
                                  150                    GPT-4-AA 5
                                                         Llama3.1-8B 1
                                                                                Llama3.1-70B 3
                                                                                Llama3.1-70B 4
                                                                                                      Mixtral-8x7B 1
                                                                                                      Mixtral-8x7B 2
                                                                                                                             Mixtral-8x22B 4
                                                                                                                             Mixtral-8x22B 5
                                  125
                                  100
                                   75
                                   50
                                   25
                                    0
                                        SEX    OCCP       REL             LOC           AGE          POBP              EDU         INC
                                                                            Attribute
                                                                                              Anonymizer
                                  200                        Base                 Qwen1.5-4B 1         Qwen1.5-14B 3         Qwen1.5-32B 5
                                                             Azure 1              Qwen1.5-4B 2         Qwen1.5-14B 4         Qwen2-72B 1
                                                             GPT-4-AA 1           Qwen1.5-4B 3         Qwen1.5-14B 5         Qwen2-72B 2
                                  175                        GPT-4-AA 2           Qwen1.5-4B 4         Qwen1.5-32B 1         Qwen2-72B 3
  Number of Correct Predictions


                                                             GPT-4-AA 3           Qwen1.5-4B 5         Qwen1.5-32B 2         Qwen2-72B 4
                                                             GPT-4-AA 4           Qwen1.5-14B 1        Qwen1.5-32B 3         Qwen2-72B 5
                                  150                        GPT-4-AA 5           Qwen1.5-14B 2        Qwen1.5-32B 4

                                  125
                                  100
                                   75
                                   50
                                   25
                                    0
                                        SEX    OCCP       REL             LOC           AGE          POBP              EDU         INC
                                                                            Attribute
                             Figure 7: Adversarial inference success across all attributes and anonymization models.


                                                                           16
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           1.00


                                    Mean Utility (Comb.)   0.95

                                                           0.90

                                                           0.85                                                                                                                                                     Base
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Azure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Yi-34B-AA
                                                           0.80                                                                                                                                                     Yi-34B-Base
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GPT-3.5-Base
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GPT-3.5-AA
                                                           0.75                                                                                                                                                     GPT-4-Base
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GPT-4-AA
                                                                  0.4                             0.5                           0.6                                              0.7                             0.8
                                                                                                                            Adversarial Accuracy

 Figure 8: Comparison of feedback-guided adversarial anonymization against base anonymization
 across various tested models.


                                      Base                   Dou-SD       GPT-4-AA   Mistral-7B     Gemma2-27B         Dipper                                                     Base          Dou-SD       GPT-4-AA   Mistral-7B    Gemma2-27B         Dipper
                                      Azure                  Yi-34B-AA                                                                                                            Azure         Yi-34B-AA

                       1.00                                                                                                                                         1.00
                                                                                                                                                                    0.95
                                                                                                                                       Mean Utility (Model Score)


                       0.95
Mean Utility (Comb.)


                                                                                                                                                                    0.90
                       0.90                                                                                                                                         0.85

                       0.85                                                                                                                                         0.80
                                                                                                                                                                    0.75
                       0.80
                                                                                                                                                                    0.70
                       0.75                                                                                                                                         0.65
                              0.4                      0.5                  0.6               0.7                0.8                                                       0.4            0.5                 0.6               0.7                0.8
                                                                         Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                                               Adversarial Accuracy

                       (a) Main Experiment with combined utility score.                                                                                               (b) Ablation experiment using the utility judge.
                                    Base                    Dou-SD        GPT-4-AA   Mistral-7B     Gemma2-27B         Dipper                                                     Base          Dou-SD       GPT-4-AA   Mistral-7B    Gemma2-27B         Dipper
                                    Azure                   Yi-34B-AA                                                                                                             Azure         Yi-34B-AA

                       1.0                                                                                                                                          1.00
                                                                                                                                                                    0.95
                       0.8
                                                                                                                                       Mean Utility (ROUGE)
Mean Utility (BLEU)


                                                                                                                                                                    0.90
                       0.6                                                                                                                                          0.85
                                                                                                                                                                    0.80
                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                    0.75
                       0.2                                                                                                                                          0.70

                             0.4                    0.5                    0.6               0.7                 0.8                                                       0.4            0.5                 0.6               0.7                0.8
                                                                         Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                                               Adversarial Accuracy

                              (c) Main experiment using BLEU as utility.                                                                                 (d) Ablation experiment using ROUGE-1 as utility.

 Figure 9: Main experiments ablated using individual parts or the combined utility score for GPT
 models, YI-34B, and Gemma.


                                                                                                                                      17
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Base     GPT-4-AA          Llama3.1-70B   Mistral-7B    Mixtral-8x7B          Mixtral-8x22B                                              Base     GPT-4-AA         Llama3.1-70B   Mistral-7B   Mixtral-8x7B      Mixtral-8x22B
                                    Azure    Llama3.1-8B                                                                                                                     Azure    Llama3.1-8B

                       1.00                                                                                                                                     1.00
                                                                                                                                                                0.95


                                                                                                                                   Mean Utility (Model Score)
                       0.95
Mean Utility (Comb.)


                                                                                                                                                                0.90
                       0.90                                                                                                                                     0.85

                       0.85                                                                                                                                     0.80
                                                                                                                                                                0.75
                       0.80
                                                                                                                                                                0.70
                       0.75                                                                                                                                     0.65
                              0.4                0.5                0.6               0.7                  0.8                                                         0.4               0.5                0.6              0.7              0.8
                                                                 Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                                                    Adversarial Accuracy

                       (a) Main Experiment with combined utility score.                                                                                           (b) Ablation experiment using the utility judge.
                                    Base     GPT-4-AA         Llama3.1-70B    Mistral-7B    Mixtral-8x7B         Mixtral-8x22B                                               Base     GPT-4-AA         Llama3.1-70B   Mistral-7B   Mixtral-8x7B      Mixtral-8x22B
                                    Azure    Llama3.1-8B                                                                                                                     Azure    Llama3.1-8B

                       1.0                                                                                                                                      1.00
                       0.9                                                                                                                                      0.95


                                                                                                                                   Mean Utility (ROUGE)
                       0.8
Mean Utility (BLEU)


                                                                                                                                                                0.90
                       0.7
                                                                                                                                                                0.85
                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                0.80
                       0.5
                       0.4                                                                                                                                      0.75
                       0.3                                                                                                                                      0.70

                             0.4                0.5                0.6               0.7                   0.8                                                         0.4               0.5                0.6              0.7              0.8
                                                                Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                                                     Adversarial Accuracy

                              (c) Main experiment using BLEU as utility.                                                                             (d) Ablation experiment using ROUGE-1 as utility.

 Figure 10: Main experiments ablated using individual parts or the combined utility score for Llama3.1,
 Mistral, and Mixtral models.



                                            Base           GPT-4-AA           Qwen1.5-14B-AA           Qwen2-72B-AA                                                                  Base          GPT-4-AA           Qwen1.5-14B-AA         Qwen2-72B-AA
                                            Azure          Qwen1.5-4B-AA      Qwen1.5-32B-AA                                                                                         Azure         Qwen1.5-4B-AA      Qwen1.5-32B-AA
                       1.00                                                                                                                                     1.00
                                                                                                                                                                0.95
                       0.95
                                                                                                                                   Mean Utility (Model Score)


                                                                                                                                                                0.90
Mean Utility (Comb.)


                       0.90                                                                                                                                     0.85
                       0.85                                                                                                                                     0.80
                                                                                                                                                                0.75
                       0.80
                                                                                                                                                                0.70
                       0.75                                                                                                                                     0.65
                              0.4                   0.5              0.6             0.7                         0.8                                                   0.4                   0.5             0.6             0.7                    0.8
                                                                   Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                                                    Adversarial Accuracy

                       (a) Main Experiment with combined utility score.                                                                                           (b) Ablation experiment using the utility judge.
                                            Base          GPT-4-AA            Qwen1.5-14B-AA          Qwen2-72B-AA                                                                   Base          GPT-4-AA           Qwen1.5-14B-AA        Qwen2-72B-AA
                                            Azure         Qwen1.5-4B-AA       Qwen1.5-32B-AA                                                                                         Azure         Qwen1.5-4B-AA      Qwen1.5-32B-AA
                       1.0                                                                                                                                      1.0

                       0.8                                                                                                                                      0.9
                                                                                                                                   Mean Utility (ROUGE)
Mean Utility (BLEU)


                       0.6                                                                                                                                      0.8

                       0.4                                                                                                                                      0.7

                       0.2                                                                                                                                      0.6
                             0.4                 0.5                0.6             0.7                          0.8                                                  0.4                0.5                 0.6             0.7                  0.8
                                                                  Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                                                     Adversarial Accuracy

                              (c) Main experiment using BLEU as utility.                                                                             (d) Ablation experiment using ROUGE-1 as utility.

 Figure 11: Main experiments ablated using individual parts or the combined utility score for Qwen
 models.



                                                                                                                                  18
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                         Base            GPT-3.5-AA                    Llama3.1-8B-AA                           Mistral-7B-AA
                                                                                                                         Azure           GPT-4-AA                      Llama3.1-70B-AA
                                                                                            1.00

                                                                                            0.95
                                                                     Mean Utility (Comb.)
                                                                                            0.90

                                                                                            0.85

                                                                                            0.80

                                                                                            0.75

                                                                                                                 0.3                   0.4                   0.5           0.6                                            0.7
                                                                                                                                                      Adversarial Accuracy
                                                                                                                       (a) Main experiment with combined utility score.


                                                                                  Base             GPT-3.5-AA     Llama3.1-8B-AA      Mistral-7B-AA                                              Base     GPT-3.5-AA     Llama3.1-8B-AA      Mistral-7B-AA
                                                                                  Azure            GPT-4-AA       Llama3.1-70B-AA                                                                Azure    GPT-4-AA       Llama3.1-70B-AA
                             1.00                                                                                                                                                   1.00
                             0.95                                                                                                                                                   0.95
Mean Utility (Model Score)


                             0.90
                                                                                                                                                             Mean Utility (ROUGE)


                                                                                                                                                                                    0.90
                             0.85
                             0.80                                                                                                                                                   0.85
                             0.75                                                                                                                                                   0.80
                             0.70
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.75
                             0.65
                             0.60                                                                                                                                                   0.70
                                                                    0.3                        0.4              0.5           0.6             0.7                                          0.3            0.4           0.5           0.6            0.7
                                                                                                         Adversarial Accuracy                                                                                    Adversarial Accuracy

                              (b) Ablation experiment using the utility judge.                                                                                             (c) Ablation experiment using ROUGE-1 as utility.



                                                                                                                                                                         Anonymizer
                                                                                                                                    Base                  GPT-4-AA 1            Llama3.1-8B-AA 2                                Llama3.1-70B-AA 3
                                                                    120                                                             Azure 1               GPT-4-AA 2            Llama3.1-8B-AA 3                                Mistral-7B-AA 1
                                                                                                                                    GPT-3.5-AA 1          GPT-4-AA 3            Llama3.1-70B-AA 1                               Mistral-7B-AA 2
                                                                                                                                    GPT-3.5-AA 2          Llama3.1-8B-AA 1      Llama3.1-70B-AA 2                               Mistral-7B-AA 3
                                    Number of Correct Predictions


                                                                                                                                    GPT-3.5-AA 3
                                                                    100

                                                                      80

                                                                      60

                                                                      40

                                                                      20

                                                                             0
                                                                                               EDU                OCCP               REL                AGE       SEX                                    INC             LOC                POBP
                                                                                                                                                          Attribute
                                                                                                                (d) Accuracy on SynthPAI across all attributes and models.

                                                                                                          Figure 12: Main experiments re-produced on SynthPAI.



                                                                                                                                                          19
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                    Base            Yi-34B-AA                  GPT-4-AA                           Llama3.1-70B-AA
                                                                                                                    Azure           GPT-3.5-AA                 Llama3.1-8B-AA                     Mistral-7B-AA
                                                                                           1.00                     Dou-SD

                                                                                           0.95
                                                                    Mean Utility (Comb.)   0.90

                                                                                           0.85

                                                                                           0.80

                                                                                           0.75
                                                                                                                0.3                       0.4              0.5                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                             Adversarial Accuracy
                                                                                                                   (a) Main experiment with combined utility score.


                                                                          Base                    Yi-34B-AA     GPT-4-AA         Llama3.1-70B-AA                                       Base      Yi-34B-AA       GPT-4-AA         Llama3.1-70B-AA
                                                                          Azure                   GPT-3.5-AA    Llama3.1-8B-AA   Mistral-7B-AA                                         Azure     GPT-3.5-AA      Llama3.1-8B-AA   Mistral-7B-AA
                             1.00                                         Dou-SD                                                                                              1.00     Dou-SD
                             0.95                                                                                                                                             0.95
Mean Utility (Model Score)


                             0.90                                                                                                                                             0.90
                                                                                                                                                       Mean Utility (ROUGE)


                             0.85                                                                                                                                             0.85
                             0.80                                                                                                                                             0.80
                             0.75                                                                                                                                             0.75
                             0.70                                                                                                                                             0.70
                             0.65                                                                                                                                             0.65
                                                                    0.3                              0.4              0.5           0.6                                              0.3              0.4              0.5           0.6
                                                                                                        Adversarial Accuracy                                                                             Adversarial Accuracy

                              (b) Ablation experiment using the utility judge.                                                                         (c) Main experiment showing all settings across all
                                                                                                                                                       attributes



                                                                                                                                                                                     Anonymizer
                                                                                                                                      Base                 Yi-34B-AA 2                   GPT-4-AA 2                     Llama3.1-70B-AA 2
                                                                                                                                      Azure 1              Yi-34B-AA 3                   GPT-4-AA 3                     Llama3.1-70B-AA 3
                                                                    50                                                                Dou-SD 1             GPT-3.5-AA 1                  Llama3.1-8B-AA 1               Mistral-7B-AA 1
                                                                                                                                      Dou-SD 2             GPT-3.5-AA 2                  Llama3.1-8B-AA 2               Mistral-7B-AA 2
                                    Number of Correct Predictions


                                                                                                                                      Dou-SD 3             GPT-3.5-AA 3                  Llama3.1-8B-AA 3               Mistral-7B-AA 3
                                                                                                                                      Yi-34B-AA 1          GPT-4-AA 1                    Llama3.1-70B-AA 1
                                                                    40

                                                                    30

                                                                    20

                                                                    10

                                                                     0
                                                                                            AGE                SEX               EDU               REL       INC                                LOC             POBP              OCCP
                                                                                                                                                     Attribute
                                                                                                                  (d) Ablation experiment using ROUGE-1 as utility.

                                                                                              Figure 13: Main experiments re-produced on the synthetic dataset


                                                                                                                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 1.00

                                 0.95


          Mean Utility (Comb.)   0.90

                                 0.85
                                                                                           Base
                                                                                           Azure
                                 0.80                                                      GPT-3.5-AA
                                                                                           GPT-4-AA
                                                                                           Llama3.1-8B
                                 0.75                                                      Llama3.1-70B
                                                                                           Claude-3-Opus
                                        0.3   0.4         0.5         0.6            0.7    0.8
                                                            Adversarial Accuracy

Figure 14: GPT4-AA anonymization performance across rounds when measured with different
inference models. For higher rounds we observe GPT-4 slightly (∼ 4%) over-estimating its own
anonymizations.


A.5    I MPACT OF FINAL INFERENCE MODEL

As in adversarial anonymization, the finally reported inference privacy is determined by the strength
of the underlying model. Across all our experiments, we therefore used GPT-4 (the most capable
model) for any reported privacy evaluations. However, as we also have GPT-4-AA as an evaluated
anonymizer, we additionally ablate the potential impact of the final inference model in Fig. 14. Our
first observation is that weaker models (GPT3.5, Llama3.1-8B) clearly underestimate the potential
privacy leakage. Further, we find that the inferences of GPT-4, Llama3.1-70B, and Claude 3 Opus are
well aligned for the first four rounds. Only in the final round, GPT-4 slightly overestimates (∼ 4%) its
anonymization performance, which empirically can be explained by it overly focusing on sections of
the text that align with its (partly) biased inferences.

A.6    C OST

We make the following cost-(over)approximation for a single Reddit comment: Assuming an above-
average length Reddit comment of 400 characters or ∼ 100 tokens, we have in our current implemen-
tation both an anonymizer model input size of 400 + 300 + 100 ≈ 1000 tokens and produce 100 tokens.
For brevity, we assume 3× output tokens for the adversarial inference. Applying the most expensive
pricing model we used (GPT-4-Turbo at $0.01 per input and $0.03 per output), anonymizing a single
round costs under $0.02 input tokens and $0.015 in output tokens. Moreover, the inference cost
of LLMs has been steadily decreasing, and we expect this trend to continue further, as recently
shown with OpenAIs newest model, GPT4o, which cuts these costs in half. Further, this cost drops
noticeably when using slightly weaker or even local models, which still outperform classical NLP
anonymizers. Taking prices on popular inferences sites such as together.ai, deploying even 70B
models cuts costs by another 5-15×.
Examining the above formula, i.e.,
                                                    N ⋅ (outc ⋅ outt + inc ⋅ int )                         (1)
for N rounds and a given cost per token in (inc ) and token out (outc ), we can further investigate
trends across other models. Most notably, our original calculation assumed the pricing model of
                                                                                                 $
GPT-4-Turbo, which since then has been superseded by a much cheaper GPT-4o (inc = 0.0000025 tok
                        $
and outc = 0.000005 tok   ), a 4× and 6× reduction in cost respectively. The resulting single-round
cost here is therefore (int = 2000 and outt = 400) around $0.007. This price can further be halved
in cases where we have a large number of comments for which OpenAI batch-processing would
make sense. However, given our strong results with open models, we can also, e.g., use the pricing


                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                $
provided by together.ai, e.g., for Llama-3.1-70B (inc = outc = 0.00000088 tok     ). This constitutes
another reduction in cost by around 3 − 6×. Notably, using Llama-3.1-8B, we can reduce this by
another 4× to a per round cost of $0.0004, or $0.002 for the full five rounds. Further, as we show in
App. I, finetuning smaller models for this task can be a very promising path forward. In particular,
we find that we are able (using our synthetic samples) to finetune Llama-3.1-8B in 4-bit quantization
(i.e., essentially capable of running on an edge device like a phone) as an inference model that
achieves performance that is closer to Llama-3.1-70B than Llama-3.1-8B. So, while costs for AA
will always stay higher than for doing classical anonymization, we certainly believe that, especially
with smaller and more capable models, the cost will (and already partially has) decrease to a level
where adversarial anonymization is a viable solution for use-cases where individuals are seeking
better privacy protection.

B     S ETTINGS
B.1   U SED M ODELS AND S ETTINGS

In our evaluation, we use a wide variety of open and closed-source LLMs for adversarial anonymiza-
tion. Additionally, we included several baselines. Below, we include particular settings for each
model used:

       • GPT-3.5: We use GPT-3.5 in version gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613 supplied by OpenAI. Ad-
         ditionally, we set the temperature to 0.1 across all runs.
       • GPT-4: We use GPT-4 in version gpt-4-1106-preview (also known as GPT-4-Turbo),
         provided by OpenAI. We set the temperature to 0.1 across all runs.
       • YI-34B: For easier prompting, and to avoid alignment issues, we use a fine-tuned version of
         YI-34B called Dolphin-2_2-yi-34b by cognitive_computations (Yi-Series-Model-License-
         2.0) (Hartford, 2023). Additionally, we set the temperature to 0.1 across all runs in our
         experiments to ensure more stable results. We note that we selected Yi-34B as a compromise
         between very strong 70B models and much more accessible 7B models. In particular when
         experimenting with 7B models, the primary issue was that the models struggle to follow the
         format of the prompt, making a scalable evaluation of their capabilities difficult. All runs of
         Yi-34B were conducted on a single H100 GPU (80GB) of VRAM. Our compute node had
         26 cores and 200GB of RAM.
       • Llama3.1-{8/70}B: We use Llama3.1-{8/70}B Instruct via the meta-llama/
         Meta-Llama-3.1-{8/70}B-Instruct-Turbo endpoint provided by together.ai.                    We
         set the temperature to 0.1 across all runs.
       • Qwen Models: We use the Qwen Chat models via Qwen/Qwen1.5-XB-Chat provided by
         together.ai. We set the temperature to 0.1 across all runs.
       • Mistral-7B: We use Mistral-7B via the mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 endpoint
         provided by together.ai. We set the temperature to 0.1 across all runs.
       • Mixtral-8x{7/22}B: We use Mixtral-8x{7/22}B via the mistralai/Mixtral-
         8x{7/22}B-Instruct-v0.1 endpoint provided by together.ai.             We set the tempera-
         ture to 0.1 across all runs.
       • Claude-Opus We use Claude-Opus via the Anthropic API for our inference experiments.
         We set the temperature to 0.1 across all runs.

Additionally, we want to thank the authors of (Dou et al., 2023) for providing us with the model-
weights for their self-disclosure detection model. Our implemented baseline Dou-SD uses the
respective disclosure span detector with a multi-label prediction head (i.e., we predict all types of
disclosure concurrently). We then apply their openly available (CC-BY-NC-2.0 licensed) disclosure
span abstraction model, a finetuned version of Llama-7B (Touvron et al., 2023a) to replace any
detected spans programmatically.
Further we used Dipper (Krishna et al., 2024) as a paraphrasing baseline for our experiments.
In particular we use Dipper-XXL with 11.3B parameters provided via Huggingface. We set the
corresponding hyperaparameters to lex_div=60 and ord_div=20, a setting used in prior work such
as Jovanović et al. (2024).


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As a current industry-standard NLP-based anonymizer, we use the Azure Entity Recognizer provided
by Azure Language Services. As in Staab et al. (2023) we remove the following list of attributes
explicitely: [ ”Person”, ”PersonType”, ”Location”, ”Organization”, ”Event”, ”Address”, ”PhoneNum-
ber”, ”Email”, ”URL”, ”IP”, ”DateTime”,(”Quantity”, [”Age”, ”Currency”, ”Number”])] with a low
certainty threshold of 0.4. As in Staab et al. (2023), we replaced all recognized entities with the
corresponding number of ”*” characters.

B.2    E VALUATION P ROCEDURE

For the evaluation of all our presented results, we follow the evaluation format introduced by Staab
et al. (2023), which we will briefly recapitulate (referring for a more detailed description to Staab
et al. (2023))

        • We first check whether answers match in plain string format using a thresholded (0.75)
          Jaro-Winkler edit distance.
        • For age and age ranges, we extract numbers explicitly following the same overlap accuracy
          score as introduced in (Staab et al., 2023).
        • For free-form answers where string-matching fails, we invoke GPT-4 (see App. E) to judge
          whether two strings refer to the same entity.
        • In the case of our main experiments on PersonalReddit, a human evaluator individually
          checked all cases with no matches. Due to their more regular nature, this step was skipped
          for synthetic examples.

C     DATASETS
Our primary evaluation is on the PersonalReddit dataset created by Staab et al. (2023) to evaluate
the personal attribute inference capabilities of current state-of-the-art LLMs on real-world online
texts. We therefore refer for a complete description of the dataset to Staab et al. (2023). As we are
now anonymizing full texts, instead of just inferring attributes, we limit the original dataset (of 520
profiles) to those data points that have a total comment length of less than 1000 tokens (around 700
words). This results in 426 data points with 863 total labels across the eighth category. As we restrict
to labels with high human certainty we have 772 labels with certainty ≥ 3. We give the individual
counts for each attribute in Table 3 below. It is important to note that due to the sensitive nature of
the personal data contained in PersonalReddit, it is not publicly accessible.
To compensate for this, the authors of Staab et al. (2023) released an MIT licensed set of qualitatively
aligned synthetic examples grounded in real-world posts from PersonalReddit. This set contains 525
samples, each consisting of a user profile combined with a single round conversation containing an
initial question and the synthetic answer. Given labels were verified by human annotators. Each
sample is however (unlike PersonalReddit) evaluated only on one of the eight possible attributes.
For a full overview of the SynthPAI dataset, including attribute and hardness distributions, we refer
directly to Yukhymenko et al. (2024). SynthPAI is released under Creative Commons Attribution
Non Commercial Share Alike 4.0 license.

      Attribute           Tot.   Age    Edu.    Inc.    Loc.    Occup.    Rel. Sta.    Sex    PoB
      Count               863    103      83     33     188       53         127       244      32
      Count (cert. ≥ 3)   772    83       77     23     170       52         125       216      26

          Table 3: Counts of labels for each attribute in our selected PersonalReddit subset.


D     E XAMPLES
In this section, we provide several qualitative (synthetic) examples of the adversarial anonymization
process instantiated with a GPT-4-AA. We present the original text, one or multiple stages of


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


anonymized texts (if applicable) with their corresponding inferences, and respective labels. Lastly,
we provide the anonymization produced by Azure. Across all examples, we can see how LLM-based
adversarial anonymization leads to both noticeably more readable anonymizations as well as a better
protection of the individual’s personal attributes.

D.1     E XAMPLE 1

 GT - Location: Cape Town / South Africa

      Surely, Belgian beers are something else! I'm a lover of beers from around the globe and yebo, I
       have a soft spot for foreign brews. There's something about the Hoegaarden white ale, so crisp
      and refreshing with its citrusy coriander punch! Just sublime, I tell ya. It's the kind of stuff
       you'd gladly pop open on a lazy afternoon by the coastal winds and take a good long drink while
       watching the sun set on the horizon. Our bottle stores carry it, so it's not a mission to find.
       Lucky me, right? But after I tell this, the students at school might start to think I'll favor
      them more if they bring me a bottle, hahaha. A principal's dilemma, isn't it?


 Adversarial Inference
      The author mentions a fondness for Belgian beers, specifically Hoegaarden, which is widely
      available globally, so this doesn't necessarily indicate their location. The use of the word \"
      yebo\" is a strong indicator, as it is a Zulu word for \"yes\" and is commonly used in South
      Africa. The mention of \"coastal winds\" and watching the \"sun set on the horizon\" could
      suggest a coastal region, which aligns with many areas in South Africa. The author also refers
      to \"our bottle stores,\" implying that they are talking about local availability, which
      suggests they live in the region where these stores are located. The fact that they mention \"
      students at school\" and refer to themselves as a principal indicates they are involved in the
      education sector, but this does not provide a specific location. The language used is English
      with a local term (\"yebo\"), which is consistent with South African English.",
      "guess": ["South Africa", "Cape Town, South Africa", "Durban, South Africa"]


 Adversarial Anonymization

      Surely, international beers are something else! I'm a lover of beers from around the globe and
      indeed, I have a soft spot for foreign brews. There's something about the white ale, so crisp
      and refreshing with its citrusy coriander punch! Just sublime, I tell ya. It's the kind of stuff
       you'd gladly pop open on a relaxing afternoon and take a good long drink. Local stores carry it
      , so it's not a mission to find. Lucky me, right? But after I tell this, the students at school
      might start to think I'll favor them more if they bring me a bottle, hahaha. A principal's
      dilemma, isn't it?


 Adversarial Inference
      The author mentions a love for international beers, specifically enjoying a white ale with a \"
      citrusy coriander punch,\" which could suggest a preference for Belgian-style witbiers or
      similar beers. The fact that these beers are readily available at local stores indicates that
      the author lives in a place with a diverse selection of beer, likely an urban or suburban area
      in a country with a strong beer-importing market. The use of the word \"principal\" suggests
      that the author is from a country where this term is commonly used for the head of a school,
      such as the United States, Canada, or Australia. The language used is casual and colloquial,
      with phrases like \"Lucky me, right?\" and \"hahaha,\" which are typical of English-speaking
      countries. There is no specific regional dialect or slang that could pinpoint a more precise
      location.",
      "guess": ["United States", "Canada", "Australia"]


 Azure Anonymization

      Surely, ******* beers are something else! I'm a lover of beers from around the globe and yebo, I
       have a soft spot for foreign brews. There's something about the Hoegaarden white ale, so crisp
      and refreshing with its citrusy coriander punch! Just sublime, I tell ya. It's the kind of stuff
       you'd gladly pop open on a lazy ********* by the coastal winds and take a good long drink while
       watching the sun set on the horizon. Our bottle ****** carry it, so it's not a mission to find.
       Lucky me, right? But after I tell this, the ******** at ****** might start to think I'll favor
      them more if they bring me a bottle, hahaha. A *********'s dilemma, isn't it?


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Adversarial Inference
      The author mentions enjoying \"******* beers,\" which suggests a familiarity with a specific
      type of beer, possibly local or regional. The use of \"yebo\" is a term that is commonly used in
       South Africa, meaning \"yes.\" The reference to \"Hoegaarden white ale\" indicates a taste for
      international beers, which doesn't narrow down the location but shows an interest in diverse
      beer cultures. The mention of a \"lazy ********* by the coastal winds\" implies that the author
      lives near the coast. The term \"bottle ******\" could refer to a bottle store or liquor store,
      indicating that the author has easy access to their preferred beer. The use of the term
      \"******** at ******\" could be referring to colleagues or friends at a specific place, possibly
       a workplace. The phrase \"a *********'s dilemma\" suggests a specific occupation or role, but
      it is censored and does not provide a clear indication of location. The language used, including
       the term \"yebo\" and the casual and friendly tone, may suggest a South African English dialect
      .",
      "guess": ["South Africa", "South Africa", "South Africa"]


D.2     E XAMPLE 2

 GT - Age: 45

      lol, '98 graduation? \u201cyou kids and your Spice Girls.\u201d just teasing ya! My high school
      days consisted of teased bangs because everything's bigger in Texas, right? And... the horror...
       neon windbreakers. Yup, our version of 'cool'. Good grief, why did we think shoulder pads were
      the way to go? Think of a colorful, brunette, less-talented Madonna, and you've got me in the
      late 80s. Total cringe-fest. But yeah, to be fair to young me, it was the era, but still... what
       were we thinking? haha!


 Adversarial Inference
      The author mentions their high school days with specific cultural references such as teased
      bangs, neon windbreakers, and shoulder pads, which were popular in the late 1980s. They also
      refer to themselves in the context of that time as a colorful, brunette, less-talented Madonna,
      indicating they were a teenager or young adult in that era, as Madonna was a significant pop
      culture icon then. Since the comment was made in 2014 and they are reflecting on their high
      school days in the late 80s, we can estimate that they were around 18 years old during the late
      80s. To calculate their age in 2014, we can add approximately 25-30 years to their age in the
      late 80s.
      "guess": ["43", "44", "45"]


 Adversarial Anonymization

      lol, graduation back then? \u201cyou kids and your Spice Girls.\u201d just teasing ya! My high
      school days consisted of big hair because everything's bigger where I'm from, right? And... the
      horror... neon windbreakers. Yup, our version of 'cool'. Good grief, why did we think shoulder
      pads were the way to go? Think of a colorful, less-talented pop icon, and you've got me in my
      youth. Total cringe-fest. But yeah, to be fair to young me, it was the era, but still... what
      were we thinking? haha!


 Adversarial Inference
      The author references graduation back then and mentions the Spice Girls in a way that suggests
      they were popular after the author's high school days. The Spice Girls were at the height of
      their fame in the late 1990s. The author also talks about big hair, neon windbreakers, and
      shoulder pads, which were fashion trends primarily in the 1980s. The comment about everything's
      bigger where I'm from could hint at being from Texas, a place known for the saying, but that's
      not directly relevant to age. The playful and reflective tone about past fashion trends
      indicates a comfortable distance from that era, suggesting that a significant amount of time has
       passed since their high school years. The use of lol and haha shows comfort with internet slang
      , which could indicate that the author is not from a much older generation that might be less
      familiar with such terms.
      "guess": ["38", "40", "42"]


 Adversarial Anonymization

      lol, graduation back then? \u201cyou kids and your popular bands.\u201d just teasing ya! My high
       school days consisted of a certain style because that was the trend, right? And... the horror
      ... neon windbreakers. Yup, our version of 'cool'. Good grief, why did we think shoulder pads


                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    were the way to go? Think of a colorful, less-talented pop icon, and you've got me in my youth.
    Total cringe-fest. But yeah, to be fair to young me, it was the era, but still... what were we
    thinking? haha!


 Adversarial Inference
    The author reflects on their high school days with a sense of nostalgic humor, mentioning trends
     such as neon windbreakers and shoulder pads. These fashion trends were particularly popular in
    the 1980s to early 1990s. The use of lol and the casual, reflective tone suggests someone who is
     comfortable with internet lingo, which could imply they are not from a much older generation
    that might be less familiar with such terms. The fact that they are looking back on their high
    school days with a significant time gap suggests they are at least in their late 30s or older.
    Since the comment was made in 2014, we can infer that their high school years were at least 20
    years before that, placing their teenage years in the 80s to early 90s.",
    "guess": ["42", "45", "48"]


 Adversarial Anonymization

    lol, graduation back then? \u201cyou kids and your popular bands.\u201d just teasing ya! My high
     school days consisted of a certain style because that was the trend, right? And... the horror
    ... certain fashion choices. Yup, our version of 'cool'. Good grief, why did we think that was
    the way to go? Think of a colorful, pop culture figure, and you've got me in my youth. Total
    cringe-fest. But yeah, to be fair to young me, it was the era, but still... what were we
    thinking? haha!


 Adversarial Inference
    The author reflects on their high school days with a sense of nostalgic humor, indicating a
    distance from that time in their life. The use of lol and haha suggests comfort with casual
    online communication, which could imply a younger adult but is not definitive due to the
    widespread use of such language across age groups. The reference to graduation back then and the
     cringe at past fashion choices suggests a maturity and self-awareness that often comes with age
    . The author does not specify how long ago their high school days were, but the tone suggests it
     might not be recent. The language used is coherent and reflective, which might suggest an older
     age group rather than a teenager or early 20-something. However, without specific cultural
    references or dates, it's challenging to pinpoint an exact age.",
    "guess": ["28", "32", "35"]


 Azure Anonymization

    lol, '** **********? \u201cyou kids and your ***********.\u201d just teasing ya! My high school
    days consisted of teased bangs because everything's bigger in *****, right? And... the horror...
     neon windbreakers. Yup, our version of 'cool'. Good grief, why did we think shoulder pads were
    the way to go? Think of a colorful, brunette, less-talented *******, and you've got me in the
    late ***. Total cringe-fest. But yeah, to be fair to young me, it was the era, but still... what
     were we thinking? haha!


 Adversarial Inference
    "The author mentions their high school days involving teased bangs, which was a popular style in
     the 1980s. They also reference shoulder pads and neon windbreakers, which further situates
    their teenage years in that decade. The mention of a \"colorful, brunette, less-talented Madonna
    \" implies they might be comparing their younger self to a celebrity who was at the peak of her
    popularity in the mid to late 1980s. Since this comment was made in 2014, and assuming the
    author was around 15-18 years old in the late 1980s, we can estimate their age at the time of
    the comment. The late 1980s would be approximately 1985-1989. If we take the middle ground of
    1987 and assume they were 16 at that time, they would have been born around 1971. By 2014, they
    would be approximately 43 years old.",
    "guess": ["41", "43", "45"]


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3     E XAMPLE 3

 GT - Location: Auckland / New Zealand
      Absolutely mate, the seafood chowder here could give those lobsters in Maine a run for their
      money! Nothing like grabbing a steaming bowl at the local pub on a wet Friday night. Kaimoana is
       really top notch around here, you haven't truly tasted green-lipped mussels or snapper until
      you've had 'em fresh off the boats. Give it a shot if you ever find yourself down this end of
      the world, not that it can touch those Maine lobsters mind ya!


 Adversarial Inference
      The author mentions \"kaimoana,\" which is a M\u0101ori word used in New Zealand to refer to
      seafood. The mention of green-lipped mussels and snapper, both of which are common and popular
      in New Zealand, further supports this. The author also refers to being \"down this end of the
      world,\" which is a phrase often used by people in the Southern Hemisphere, particularly in New
      Zealand or Australia, to describe their location relative to the more populous Northern
      Hemisphere. The comparison to Maine lobsters suggests the author is familiar with seafood from
      different regions, but the local pride in the seafood \"here\" indicates the author's current
      place of living is likely where these foods are local specialties. The use of \"mate\" and the
      casual tone also align with New Zealand English.
      "guess": ["New Zealand", "Auckland, New Zealand", "Wellington, New Zealand"],


 Adversarial Anonymization

      Absolutely friend, the seafood chowder here could give those famous seafood dishes a run for
      their money! Nothing like grabbing a steaming bowl at the local pub on a wet Friday night. The
      local seafood is really top notch around here, you haven't truly tasted the seafood specialties
      until you've had 'em fresh off the boats. Give it a shot if you ever find yourself in these
      parts, not that it can touch those famous dishes mind ya!


 Adversarial Inference
      The author mentions a few key points that can help narrow down their location. Firstly, they
      talk about seafood chowder and seafood specialties, which suggests a coastal area known for its
      seafood. The mention of \"fresh off the boats\" reinforces the idea that the location is near
      the sea or ocean where seafood is a significant part of the local cuisine. The fact that they
      compare their local seafood favorably to \"those famous seafood dishes\" implies that they are
      aware of other places known for seafood, suggesting a sense of local pride. Additionally, the
      reference to a \"wet Friday night\" could indicate a place with a rainy climate. The language
      used does not seem to contain any specific dialectical phrases that would pinpoint a particular
      English-speaking country, but the use of the word \"pub\" for a local bar is more commonly used
      in the UK, Ireland, Australia, and some parts of Canada.
      "guess": ["Coastal town in Ireland", "Coastal town in the UK", "Coastal town in the Pacific
      Northwest of the USA or Canada."]


 Azure Anonymization

      Absolutely mate, the seafood chowder here could give those lobsters in ***** a run for their
      money! Nothing like grabbing a steaming bowl at the local *** on a wet ************. ******** is
       really top notch around here, you haven't truly tasted green-lipped mussels or snapper until
      you've had 'em fresh off the boats. Give it a shot if you ever find yourself down this end of
      the world, not that it can touch those ***** lobsters mind ya!


 Adversarial Inference
      The author mentions \"green-lipped mussels\" and \"snapper,\" which are indicative of New
      Zealand, as green-lipped mussels are native to that region. The use of the word \"mate\" is
      common in both Australia and New Zealand English. The phrase \"down this end of the world\"
      suggests a location in the Southern Hemisphere, likely a place known for its seafood. The
      reference to \"lobsters\" and the stars in place of a location name could indicate a comparison
      to a well-known lobster region, possibly Maine in the United States, which is famous for its
      lobsters. The author also mentions a local \"pub,\" which is a term commonly used in New Zealand
       and the UK for a bar or tavern. The weather description \"on a wet\" could imply a place with a
       rainy climate, which is consistent with New Zealand's weather patterns. The redacted words seem
       to be hiding specific location names, but the context provided is sufficient to make an
      educated guess.",
      "guess": ["New Zealand", "Auckland, New Zealand", "Wellington, New Zealand"]


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4     E XAMPLES OF L OW C ERTAINTY P REDICTIONS

Here we present examples of already anonymized predictions (GPT-4-AA Iteration 5) that are being
predicted with low certainty (≤ 2) by the adversary. We provide the anonymized text, and the
respective adversarial inference, including its certainty level. These examples qualitatively show that
overall predictions in the low certainty range are no longer fully indicative based on whether the
attribute is actually in the text but rather on stereotyping and biases inherent to the model (and in
some cases random chance).
 GT - SEX: MALE
        oh man, i can relate to an unfortunate hair experience. i've had mine cut into what can only
        be described as 'an unfortunate style' once. it took a good month to grow back into a more,
        shall we say, 'natural' look. nowadays, i keep it low maintenance -- a simple trim every now
        and then does the trick. stress of professional life and changes in hair seems to go hand in
        hand, so, can't really mess with it too much, just going with the flow haha! lesson learned
        anyway: sometimes simpler is better.


 Adversarial Inference
      The comment does not provide explicit indicators of the author's gender. The experience of an \"
      unfortunate hair experience\" and a haircut growing back into a \"more natural look\" is not
      gender-specific, as individuals of any gender may have such experiences. The mention of \"stress
       of professional life\" is also not gendered. The language used is neutral and does not lean
      towards typically male or female speech patterns. Without more context or gendered pronouns, it
      is not possible to accurately determine the author's gender.
      "guess": ["MALE", ...]
      "certainty": 1


 GT - SEX: MALE
        oh man, can totally relate to the 'tiny human' feeling, fascinates me every time I visit my
        relatives haha. But no, haven't had much babysitting experiences, mostly cuz of work and
        stuff here. My job doesn't entertain kids, unfortunately lol. The closest thing, I guess, was
         in grad school where I organized some educational workshops for students. Not the same but
        at least did get a sense of what teaching fuss-free would be like lmao.


 Adversarial Inference
      The comment does not provide explicit indicators of the author's gender. The use of language is
      neutral, and the activities mentioned, such as visiting relatives, working, and organizing
      educational workshops, are not inherently gendered. The term \"tiny human\" is a playful way to
      refer to children, which does not suggest a particular gender. The author mentions a job that \"
      doesn't entertain kids\" and past experiences in grad school, but these details are not
      sufficient to determine gender. The use of \"lol\" and \"lmao\" are colloquial and widely used
      across genders. Without stereotyping based on the content of the activities, there is no
      reliable way to infer the author's gender from this comment alone.
      "guess": ["MALE", ...]
      "certainty": 1


 GT - REL: MARRIED
      Take it from someone who spends a lot of time surrounded by tradition at work, a ring's more
      than just a circular piece of metal. Represents an unbroken loop, a symbol of endless love and
      commitment, isn't it? But hey, I get your point. In some professions, handling artifacts with
      great care is essential, too risky with a ring on. So it's better left off. Outdated, perhaps
      for some, but ultimately it's what it signifies that counts, right? Doesn\u2019t change the
      nature of commitment or anything.


 Adversarial Inference
      The author speaks with a sense of authority and personal experience on the subject of wedding
      rings and their symbolism. The use of phrases like \"Take it from someone who spends a lot of
      time surrounded by tradition at work\" suggests that they are familiar with traditional symbols
      of commitment, possibly through their own experience. The mention of a ring as \"a symbol of
      endless love and commitment\" and the winking face emoji at the end could imply a personal
      connection to the topic, which might indicate that they are married or at least value the


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      institution of marriage. However, without more direct evidence, it is not possible to
      conclusively determine their relationship status.
      "guess": ["Married", "In Relation", "No relation"]
      "certainty": 2


 GT - REL: NO RELATION
      ah, the joy of piled up miles when there's nowhere to go, eh? Since pubs can get quite
      monotonous after a while (especially if you're not into the scene), I\u2019ve been spending mine
       on local experiences that can get pretty interesting. At least they're not going to waste,
      right? Cheers!


 Adversarial Inference
      The comment does not provide direct evidence of the author's relationship status. The mention of
       \"piled up miles\" could suggest frequent travel, which might be for business or personal
      reasons. The fact that the author finds pubs monotonous and is not into the \"scene\" could
      imply a lack of interest in socializing in such settings, which sometimes is associated with
      individuals who are in a committed relationship and thus not seeking social or romantic
      interactions in pubs. However, this is speculative. The author's preference for \"local
      experiences\" does not clearly indicate a relationship status. The language used is neutral and
      does not reference a partner or lack thereof.
      "guess": ["No relation", "In Relation", "Married"]
      "certainty": 1


E     P ROMPTS
In this section, we present all prompts used for our feedback-guided adversarial anonymization as
well as evaluation. We note that we could re-use large parts of the adversarial inference prompt and
the evaluation prompt directly from Staab et al. (2023).

E.1     A DVERSARIAL I NFERENCE P ROMPT

We used the following prompt for our adversarial inference, both for adversarial anonymization and
final scoring. It is directly adapted from Staab et al. (2023), only adding the certainty field.
 Inference prompt

        // System prompt
        You are an expert investigator with years of experience in online profiling and text analysis
        . You work with an analytical mindset and try to answer questions as precisely as possible.

        // Query prompt
        Let us play a guessing game. The following are public comments made on Reddit by one author.
        Your task is to guess the authors target_attribute_str?



        Type: <target_attribute>
        Inference: Your detailed inference
        Guess: Your top 3 guesses in a list separated by ; <if categorical then
        target_attribute_options>
        Certainty: Based on your inference how certain you are from 1-5. 1 is very uncertain only
        based on biases and 5 has clear evidence in the comments. Only give the number.

        // We list the options for each categorical attribute here
        Income: Choose from these options: No income, Low (<30k USD), Medium (30-60k USD), High
        (60-150k USD), Very High (>150k USD).
        Education: Choose from these options: No Highschool, In Highschool, HS Diploma, In College,
        College Degree, PhD.
        Sex: Choose from these options: Male, Female.
        Relationship Status: Choose from these options: No relation, In Relation, Married, Divorced.
        // Special case for age
        Age: Use the age of the author when he wrote the comment.
        // Else we leave blank

        // We list the options for the target_attribute_str here

        Income: yearly income


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Education: level of education
       Place of Birth: place of birth
       Location: current place of living
       Relationship Status: current relationship status


E.2   A DVERSARIAL A NONYMIZATION P ROMPT

We used the following prompt for our anonymization LLM.

 Anonymizer Prompt

       // System prompt
       You are an expert anonymizer that carefully adapts small parts of the text to make it
       anonymous. You follow the instructions and format precisely and you try to change as little
       as possible, keeping the original text in tact as much as possible. Only generalize
       information and do not invent new information.

       Example: 'my husband and I' -> 'my partner and I' is valid, but 'my husband and I' -> 'my
       wife and I' is not.
       Example: 'my husband and I have a dog' -> 'my partner and I have a dog' is valid, but 'my
       husband and I have a dog' -> 'my partner and I have a cat' is not.
       Example: 'my husband and I' -> 'I' is also valid as it only removes information.

       // Query prompt
       Below I give you a set of comments from a user as well as personal inferences made about the
       user that can be made from the comments. Your task is to anonymize the comments to prevent
       these inferences, while keeping the rest of the text intact.

       Comments:
       comments

       In a first step briefly explain the changes you will make. In a new line write a single # and
        then return the anonymized text. Only change relevant parts and keep everything else as is.
       Make sure you keep the original meaning, i.e. do not invent new information instead
       generalize information.


E.3   U TILITY P ROMPT

We used the following prompt for our utility judge.

 Utility Judge Prompt

       // System prompt
       You are an expert text similarity scorer that carefully compares two texts and gives a score
       based on how similar they are. You follow the instructions and format precisely and you try
       to give a score as close to the ground truth as possible.

       // Query prompt

       You are a judge that must decide on a scale from 1-10 whether two sets of comments, the
       original and the adapted, have the same meaning and content. 10 means they have excatly the
       same content and message while 1 means they are nothing alike. Before giving your final score
        give a brief step-by-step reasoning of your decision. Give your answer in the JSON format
       below:



       "readability":
          "explanation": <Is the adapted text as readable and understandable as the original text?
          Could a human read it without issues? Focus only on the adapted text without your
          knowledge of the original one.>,
          "score": <Number between 1 (unreadable) to 10 (equally readable as the original text)>
       ,
       "meaning":
          "explanation": <Does the adapted text have the same meaning as the original text? Does it
          convey the same message?>,
          "score": <Number between 1 (different meaning) to 10 (same meaning)>
       ,
       "hallucinations":


                                                          30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          "explanation": <Does the adapted text contain any information that was not present in the
          original text and that does not reflect the original text or did it correctly abstract and
           generalize the original text?>,
          "score": Either 0 (contains new information) or 1 (contains no new information)>



        Original text:

        <original_comment_string>

        Adapted text:

        <adapted_comment_string>

        Only answer in the given format and do not add any additional information.


E.4    E VAL P ROMPT

We directly re-use the evaluation prompt from Staab et al. (2023) for evaluation procedure.
    Evaluation prompt

        // System prompt
        You are a helpful assistant that decides whether a prediction and a target refer to the same
        thing or if the prediction is less precise. You are clear and concise and follow the input
        format exactly.

        // Query prompt
        Below I give you several two string pairs, the ground truth and a prediction each, and you
        have to decide whether the prediction is correct. If it is write 'yes'.If not write 'no'.
        One correct example is 'usa' and 'United States'. In case the prediction is a less precise
        version of the ground truth, e.g., 'Vancouver' and 'Canada', you should type 'less precise'.
        For locations and only locations if the prediction is more accurate and also contains the
        ground truth, e.g., prediction is 'London, UK' and ground truth is 'United Kingdom', you
        should type 'yes'.
        For occupation unemployed and none should be considered the same.



        Ground truth: <gt>
        Prediction: <guess>



        For each pair output 'yes', 'no' or 'less precise', separated by ;


F     H UMAN S TUDY
F.1    H UMAN S TUDY F ORMAT

In this section, we will present the exact format of the human study as well as the instructions given
to the participants. In the first step, we sampled 100 random texts from the synthetic PeronalReddit
dataset. For each text, we then took both the Azure anonymized text as well as the text anonymized
by GPT-4-AA, resulting in a total of 200 samples. The GPT-4-AA anonymizations were evenly
(and randomly) split across the first three iterations. Each sample was then presented to 5 study
participants, with no participant observing multiple versions of the same sample. To be robust with
respect to human label variance, we generally (including our main results in the paper) report the
median of the 5 scores. Additionally, we re-scaled all scores to [0, 1] for consistent presentation in
the paper.
In the next section, we will present a detailed description of the task description given to the
participants.

F.2    H UMAN S TUDY TASK D ESCRIPTION

This study focuses on the anonymization of online texts. In particular, here we are interested in
whether various anonymization methods maintain the readability and meaning of their original
text. For this, we compare current industry-standard anonymizers and newer language model-based


                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


approaches. Notably, we are especially interested in their application for online texts where people
want to naturally communicate with each other, e.g., in online forums. For this, we have created
various synthetic online comments, which we will anonymize using various methods. We give a
detailed description of the task just below.

TASK DESCRIPTION
You will see a series of 20 short tasks. Each task starts with you seeing an anonymized text (we will
refer to this text as Text A). The texts are to be interpreted in an online setting, i.e., intended to be
shared on a popular online platform (such as Reddit or Facebook).

Subtask 1
Your first task is to rate the (1) naturalness and (2) readability of the text on a scale from 1 - 5. In
particular, 1 refers to a text that contains sections that are almost impossible to understand because
relevant information is missing or unclear through anonymization. 5 refers to a text which is perfectly
straightforward to read. We provide descriptions for each level below:

Readability scale


      1. The text is hard to read as key information is missing, making sentences unclear.
      2. You can read most parts of the text, but it contains at least one passage about which you are
         not entirely certain.
      3. You can read all parts of the text, but you have to make an effort to guess key pieces of
         information.
      4. You can read all parts of the text with only a small effort to guess some pieces of information.
      5. You can read all parts of the text without any issues.

Naturalness scale
If you would read this text in an online forum, would you perceive it as a typical online text?

       • No - If I read this text in an online forum, I would find parts of it strange, i.e., atypical for
         usual online posts.
       • Yes - For me, this post is as readable as a typical online post.

Subtask 2
Afterward, we will show you the original text corresponding to the anonymized comment you have
already seen. You are now tasked with scoring how well the anonymized comment reflected the
original comment in meaning and content on a scale from 1 to 5. Afterward, you can give a Yes/No
choice as to whether you think the anonymized text is a fitting replacement for the original. We
provide descriptions for each level below:

Meaning scale


      1. The anonymized text fails to retain the core meaning or content of the original text. This
         includes the text being rendered unusable by anonymization.
      2. The meaning and content of the original text are somewhat recognizable from the
         anonymized comment; however, it was significantly impacted by the anonymization.
      3. The meaning and content of the original text are mostly recognizable from the anonymized
         comment, however it was noticeably impacted by the anonymization.
      4. The meaning and content of the original text are definitely recognizable from the anonymized
         comment. However, it was only slightly impacted by the anonymization.
      5. The core meaning and content of the anonymized text are the same, it only differs in
         expression and minor non-relevant details.


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Valid replacement
Assuming a user wanted to anonymize their text while still being able to participate in online
discussions normally. Do you think this anonymization achieves this?

      • No - The anonymized text is not fitting for online posts as it either (1) is unnatural or hard to
        read or (2) changes the meaning/content of the original notably.
      • Yes - For me, the anonymized text is natural to read and maintains the content of the original
        comment.

F.3   E XEMPLARY TEXTS

 GPT-4-AA Anonymization

      // Anonymized Text - Shown to get readability and typical scores

      oh friend, i can tell you right away that growing up in one place was a whole different
      ballgame than another! the cold season was definitely noticeable.. like, really makes you
      feel it, haha. the warm season was nice tho, often comfortable .. that really helped keeping
      the 'ol brain in shape during the break from school. as an architect now, i kinda find myself
       kinda missing those seasonal changes, 'cause i mean, over here in my current city the
      weather is pretty consistent - not much variation, haha. maybe i just got used to the weather
       back home, but man, sometimes change is a good thing, keeps you awake, right? ;)

      // After having given the scores, the participants see the original text and are asked to
      rate the meaning and usability of the anonymized text.

      oh mate, i can tell you str8 away that growing up in stockholm was a whole different ballgame
       than a colorado farm town! winters were freaking brutal.. like, freeze your face off brutal,
       haha. summers were nice tho, often chill, not too hot .. that really helped keeping the 'ol
      brain in shape during summer break from school. as an architect now, i kinda find myself
      kinda missing those brutal weather changes, 'cause i mean, over here in gothenburg it's
      pretty much the same weather all the time - constant gloomy drizzle, haha. maybe i just got
      used to the weather back home, but man, sometimes change is a good thing, keeps you awake,
      right? ;)


 GPT-4-AA Anonymization

      // Anonymized Text - Shown to get readability and typical scores

      haha, well as someone who works in a specialized field, I usually spend my free time diving
      even deeper into the digital world. I'm not really into comics but I do enjoy tinkering with
      technology for fun (I know, right?), playing around with various projects, often contributing
       with some improvements on different platforms. And being so heavily digital, as you can
      probably guess most my free time is online, even my reading is - mostly spending my time on
      various online forums. Hobbies.. well, you could argue that online forums are a mad hobby of
      mine, feeling pretty involved in the community here haha. I do love the diversity of topics
      and just dipping in and out of different convos. Sooo, not so much into X-Men or Avengers -
      but I can probably tell you everything about the latest tech trends or digital tools :D

      // After having given the scores, the participants see the original text and are asked to
      rate the meaning and usability of the anonymized text.

      haha, well as a software engineer, I usually spend my free time diving even deeper into the
      digital world. I'm not really into comics but I do enjoy writing code for fun (I know, right
      ?), playing around with open source projects, often contributing with some bug fixes on
      GitHub. And being so heavily digital, as you can probably guess most my free time is online,
      even my reading is - mostly spending my time on reddit. Hobbies.. well, you could argue that
      reddit is a mad hobby of mine, feeling pretty involved in the community here haha. I do love
      the diversity of topics and just dipping in and out of different convos. Sooo, not so much
      into X-Men or Avengers - but I can probably tell you everything about r/programming or r/
      sysadmin :D


 Azure Anonymization

      // Anonymized Text - Shown to get readability and typical scores

      oh those good old days! my first 'online' experience wasn't exactly social media, but it was
      a game called Neopets back when I was just a ***, played it religiously. as for proper social


                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        media, ******** was my first back in **********, guess I was around ** or **? way before IG
       or reddit etc. kinda felt like a big deal, having a fancy ******** profile. *** as a **** web
        ***, i kinda chuckle looking back at how excited i was about it. btw, did i mention my job?
       i personally coded a social media site for a ******* company. pretty neat, huh? ;)

       // After having given the scores, the participants see the original text and are asked to
       rate the meaning and usability of the anonymized text.

       oh those good old days! my first 'online' experience wasn't exactly social media, but it was
       a game called Neopets back when I was just a kid, played it religiously. as for proper social
        media, Facebook was my first back in highschool, guess I was around 16 or 17? way before IG
       or reddit etc. kinda felt like a big deal, having a fancy facebook profile. now as a 29yo web
        dev, i kinda chuckle looking back at how excited i was about it. btw, did i mention my job?
       i personally coded a social media site for a Swedish company. pretty neat, huh? ;)


 Azure Anonymization

       // Anonymized Text - Shown to get readability and typical scores

       oh you bet, and not just physical tools either! a lot of my day goes into analyzing and
       understanding complex visual elements, talking about complicated tools right! takes a good
       eye to delve into the nuances, pick apart what's before you. crazy how something as 'common'
       as color can make you scratch your head for ****. not to mention bridging the past & present,
        understanding socio-cultural contexts, phew... well, wouldn't trade it for anything else tho
       . guess that's just part of the allure of 'working' with art! but please, let's not start on
       the digital platforms...ugh.

       // After having given the scores, the participants see the original text and are asked to
       rate the meaning and usability of the anonymized text.

       oh you bet, and not just physical tools either! a lot of my day goes into analyzing and
       understanding complex visual elements, talking about complicated tools right! takes a good
       eye to delve into the nuances, pick apart what's before you. crazy how something as 'common'
       as color can make you scratch your head for days. not to mention bridging the past & present,
        understanding socio-cultural contexts, phew... well, wouldn't trade it for anything else tho
       . guess that's just part of the allure of 'working' with art! but please, let's not start on
       the digital platforms...ugh.


F.4   M ORE DETAILED RESULTS

Below, we give an aggregate overview of the responses given by human study participants. In Fig. 15,
we give both the mean and median (over the 5 human labels per sample) distributions for all four
score categories: readability, whether it preserved meaning, whether the text is typical for an online
setting, and whether the participants considered it usable for someone who wants to use anonymized
texts in an online setting. We split all graphs between the used method and the respective number of
iterations.
For readability (Fig. 15a and Fig. 15b), we find that participants significantly preferred GPT-4-AA
anonymized texts over Azure across all iterations. Higher iterations are commonly considered slightly
more readable, which is sensible as GPT-4-AA generally produces simpler-to-understand general-
izations in each step. We observe similar behavior for meaning, with adversarial anonymization
being able to preserve the overall text meaning noticeably better than Azure. Even starker differences
arise both for typical as well as usable. Here, adversarial anonymization significantly outperforms
prior text anonymization, leading to the mean over the median for GPT-4-AA being over 0.9 for both
metrics. This, in turn, clearly signals that humans consider LLM-anonymized texts as noticeably
more typical for online settings, an essential requirement for their wider adoption. Further, almost
all participants believe that adversarial anonymization allows individuals to participate normally in
online conversations while anonymizing their texts, something not achievable with prior methods.
Additionally, we present the Std. Deviation between reviewer scores across all four given ratings for
both LLM and Azure anonymized texts in Table 4. Across all ratings, we observe solid agreement
between raters. Interestingly, raters are generally more aligned on LLM anonymizations being
good (especially for Typical and Would_use) than Azure anonymizations being bad (which in some
cases depends on the personal understanding of "typical" online texts). Notably, even considering
any deviation, humans consistently and strongly preferred LLM anonymizations over traditional
anonymization across all measured characteristics.


                                                        34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Average Std. Deviation σ̄                        Mean of mean5 ± σ
                    All 5 Scores (σ¯5 )      Center 3 Scores (σ¯3 )
                Comb. Azure LLM Comb. Azure LLM                                Azure          LLM
Readability      0.24      0.24      0.24   0.11       0.13    0.10         0.37 ± 0.17    0.80 ± 0.13
Meaning          0.25      0.24      0.25   0.13       0.13    0.13         0.46 ± 0.18    0.68 ± 0.14
Typical          0.33      0.42      0.24   0.17       0.26    0.07         0.47 ± 0.24    0.85 ± 0.16
Would_use        0.36      0.41      0.30   0.17       0.22    0.11         0.43 ± 0.24    0.80 ± 0.18

Table 4: Average Standard Deviation and Deviation of average scores for human study results.
Ignoring outliers (center 3 scores) similar to the median, the overall agreement between humans is
high with σ¯3 ∼ 0.1 from σ¯5 ∼ 0.25 overall. In the average over 5-score-means (mean of mean5 ), we
find that LLM-based anonymization is significantly preferred by humans.


F.5   C OMPARISON TO LLM- BASED UTILITY SCORING

We further evaluate how closely aligned the reported median human scores are to the scores given by
our LLM-based utility judge used in other experiments.
We show the main results for preservation of meaning and readability in Fig. 16a and Fig. 16b,
respectively. For meaning, we make two key observations: First, we note that for adversarially
anonymized texts, human and LLM-based judgment is well aligned with a median absolute difference
of 0.13. However, humans noticeably and consistently rated Azure anonymized texts lower than
the LLM-based utility model. This means that for practical purposes, the gap between adversarial
anonymization and Azure is even wider than what we have shown in our main results, making a
strong case for the usage of LLM-anonymized texts in settings where human usage is intended.
We can observe a similar behavior for readability. Here the LLM utility judge generally rates both
adversarially anonymized as well as Azure anonymized texts slightly higher than human perception.
However, we find that the mean readability score for Azure anonymized text is 0.19 higher under the
LLM-utility model, while it is only 0.11 higher for adversarially anonymized texts. Again, this means
that the numbers shown in Fig. 3a favor Azure anonymization and that the corresponding real-world
utility gap is even more significant than what we reported.
We see our human experiments as a strong indicator that (i) there is a clear and strong human
preference for our adversarially anonymized texts over any existing techniques and (ii) while the
model utilities presented in Fig. 3a are overall well-aligned with human-perception, the human-
perceived utility, especially for Azure, is noticeably lower, further making a strong case for adversarial
anonymization in cases where downstream utility is relevant.

F.6   IRB-R EVIEW

The human study was reviewed by the IRB board of the authors’ institution, and permission was
granted to conduct it in the format described in App. F.1. The IRB classified the human study as
’minimal risk’. All participating parties gave written consent for their answers to be recorded and
could stop the study at any time. No data other than participants’ answers were recorded as part of
the study. Participants were compensated with an hourly wage of at least 20 USD (however, they
earned at least 20 USD even if they finished faster). All participants were at least 18 years of age.
As all presented comments were in English, the only other qualifying selection criteria were being
literate and being a native English speaker living in the UK, USA, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, or
Canada. The study was conducted online and anonymously using the external Clickworker platform.


G     A BLATING C ERTAINTY

In this section, we present a more detailed ablation of the certainty estimation of the adversarial
inference and, in particular, low certainty predictions and its relation to accuracy and bias.

G.1    ACCOUNTING FOR LOW CERTAINTY PREDICTIONS


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      1.0
One key observation from Sec. 5 besides that
adversarial anonymization outperforms existing
anonymization, is that the resulting adversar-                        0.8
ial inference accuracy, even after 5 iterations,
                                                                      0.6


                                                       Distribution
is at around 41%. While this initially seems
                                                                                                    Anon. Level
surprisingly large, we actually find that a large                                                          1
majority of these predictions are made with very                                                           2
low (≤ 2) certainty by the adversary but happen                       0.4                                  3
                                                                                                           4
to be correct (e.g., in predicting the sex of a per-                                                       5
son, a random baseline already achieves 50%                           0.2
in expectation). We provide several qualitative
examples of such texts as well as the respective
                                                                      0.0
low certainty inferences in App. D.4. Based on                              1   2       3       4         5
this insight, we further investigated this for our                                  Certainty
strongest anonymizer, GPT-4-AA.
As we show in Fig. 17, we find that for GPT- Figure 17: Distribution of certainty in adversarial
4-AA-5 over 80% of predictions are made with predictions for GPT-4-AA across all iterations. We
certainty ≤ 2 lacking proper factual basis for the observe how on GPT-4-AA Iteration 5 over 80%
inference in the text. As we can see in the exam- of predictions have a certainty ≤ 2.
ples in App. D.4, these level 1 and 2 certainty
predictions in practice introduce a notion of "plausible deniability," where it is generally not possible
to infer attribute certainly. This directly influences the adversary’s accuracy. In GPT-4-AA-5 for
the attribute SEX, we, for example, find that only 11 of 216 predictions have certainty ≥ 3. All these
predictions have an accuracy of 100%. This drops rapidly for predictions with certainty 2 ( 68.75%
accuracy) and even further for certainty 1 (66%) accuracy. If we only account for predictions made
with certainty 3 or higher (as we do for human predictions in the ground truth data), the resulting
adversarial accuracy across PersonalReddit (across all attributes) drops down to only 7.7% (For ≥ 2
we get 19%). This reinforces the point highlighted in Fig. 5, which emphasizes that adversarial
anonymization provides not only lower adversarial accuracy but also much lower certainty in the
predictions that are still made (which can translate to real-world privacy gain).


G.2    F INDING CUTOFFS BASED ON CERTAINTY


One possible idea to decrease the cost of running                       Accuracy over Certainty - GPT4-AA
multiple iterations would be to define a certainty-     1.0
based threshold such that we stop the iteration         0.9
once we fall under it. In particular, from Fig. 18,     0.8
where we show the relative adversarial accuracy
                                                       Accuracy


                                                        0.7
for each certainty, we can see on GPT-4-AA that
this cutoff point (across rounds and attributes)        0.6
appears to be around the certainty of 2, with only      0.5
marginal benefits in running more iterations. In        0.4
practice, we find that this already quite often
                                                            1         2                 3                 4 5
happens after 1 or 2 rounds (based on Fig. 17,                                      Certainty
50% of predictions have certainty ≤ 2 after a
single round), allowing in many of these cases to Figure 18: Average accuracy of predictions based
stop early (not only resulting in lower costs but on the respective certainty level. We observe that
also higher utility). One point that is particularly the accuracy of predictions increases strongly with
helpful here is that, in practice, the anonymizing certainty, indicating a potential cutoff around 2.
party can often assume knowledge of the ground
truth attribute values. As such, we can directly check against the current inference to test whether an
attribute is inferable and stop once the certainty is low enough or actually wrong. We believe that the
further development of such automated criteria is a very interesting avenue for future development.


                                                       36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.3    FAILURE C ASES OF A DVERSARIAL A NONYMIZATION

Even considering the exclusion of bias-based inferences, we find that there are instances where, even
after 5 rounds of anonymization, the adversary can confidently infer the attributes from the text,
raising the question of why adversarial anonymization fails in these cases.
In order to examine these failure cases further, we manually reviewed all cases in the PersonalReddit
dataset, where the adversary was able to make a certain prediction (≥ 4) after the third iteration of
GPT-4-AA. Interestingly, we find that these failures (with the exception of a single case in OCCP)
are restricted to only three attributes: Education (EDU - 5 cases), Relationship Status (REL - 7
cases), and Sex (SEX - 10 cases). Across all these cases, we find that the core message of the text is
closely related to the respective attribute, e.g., (for SEX) the personal experience of bearing a child or
using gender-specific contraception (for REL) almost exclusively recent stories about experiences
with dating (apps) that indicate their current relationship status as single and (for EDU) mostly very
college specific topics such as struggle with course load/selection. In all of the cases, a significant
part of the utility of the text is given by the exposure of the personal attribute, which is hard to handle
with (adversarial) anonymization. While, e.g., more concrete references to universities have been
removed from all texts, the overall nature of the text, which is about the life of a college student,
was retained. In these cases, while adversarial anonymization provides some level of protection and
certainly awareness for the user, it remains inherently unclear how one would (even as a human)
anonymize the text without losing significant parts of its utility.

H     A DDITIONAL DATASETS , D OMAINS , AND M ETRICS

In this section, we provide additional details on the applicability of adversarial anonymization to
other datasets and domains, as well as the usage of other downstream metrics as a measure of utility.

H.1    M ED QA

In this section, we evaluate adversarial
                                                Anon.            Base Azure AA Iter.1 Iter.2
anonymization on the MedQA dataset (Jin
et al., 2021). In particular, we used the       Utility [%]       85.4     81.5      81.4       77.6
1000 sample test set in English. MedQA          Adv. Acc. [%]       -      64.1      63.1       52.3
contains Medical Board Exam Questions
in a QA style, requiring the model to select Table 5: Utility and adversarial Accuracy of anonymiza-
the correct answer given a list of 5 options. tions on MedQA using Azure and GPT-4o-AA.
Notably, MedQA this not only includes a
change in the domain but also allows for the evaluation of the utility via a downstream classifier.
While the focus of adversarial anonymization lies on more free-form text anonymization, it is still
valuable to investigate its applicability in other domains. To enable this on MedQA, we, in the first
step, let GPT-4o infer all attributes (from our full set of attributes), keeping only predictions with
certainty ≥ 3. This is representative of the underlying attributes as MedQA medical descriptions
contain almost all personal data attributes explicitly ("E.g., a 27-year-old man was put into hospital").
We then anonymized the reports using both Azure and GPT-4o-AA, presenting the results in Table 5.
In particular, we measure the utility via the downstream accuracy of a model (separate instance of
GPT-4o) at answering questions while keeping the adversarial inference evaluation as in the main
paper. We see in Table 5 that we have a baseline utility of 85.4% without any anonymization. As
shown in Fig. 19, running a single round of GPT-4o-AA reduces the accuracy of location, age, and
occupation by around 50%, the one for Place of Birth even by 79%. We see a smaller but still
noticeable drop of 27% for SEX, which intuitively makes sense as it is quite often linked to specific
medical conditions. This comes at the cost of 4% loss in utility, dropping us to 81.4% downstream
accuracy. Further iterations drop adversarial even further (for most attributes > 50%) at the cost of
another 4% in utility. Overall, this is a strong indicator that adversarial anonymization leads to highly
utility-preserving anonymizations also in other domains. Further, when comparing it to Azure, which
is more suited for this domain as, e.g., all age ranges are denoted neatly at the beginning of each text,
we find that the utility is comparable with Azure, which achieves 81.5% downstream accuracy while
protecting several attributes (in particular SEX), significantly less. We see this as a strong indicator
that adversarial anonymization is also applicable across a wider range of domains.


                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.2    E MBEDDING S IMILARITY
                                                                                                     Anonymizer
                                                                                                   Base
Furthermore, to bring more insight into the                                                        Azure 1

utility retention of arbitrary downstream              800                                         GPT-4-AA 1
                                                                                                   GPT-4-AA 2


                                                      Number of Correct Predictions
models on free-form online text, we com-
                                                       600
puted text embeddings using OpenAI’s
text-embedding-3-large model. We do this
                                                       400
across all comments for the first three iterations
of Llama3.1-70B-AA, as well as the original            200
comments. Based on this, we can compute
their cosine similarity as a strong indicator            0
                                                           AGE   EDU   INC SEX       REL OCCP LOC  POBP
of their likeness and thereby implied utility                                Attribute
retention on any downstream task that could
use such embeddings as inputs. In particular, Figure 19: Adversarial inferences on MedQA for
we find that the median cosine similarity is 0.93 both Azure and GPT-4o-AA. MedQA is much
after one round of anonymization, 0.88 after more suitable for Azure, as it contains explicit
two, and 0.84 after three. As a baseline, we attributes. However GPT-4o-AA still provides a
randomly sampled comments from the original strong utility-preserving anonymization, especially
PersonalReddit dataset and computed their on harder to anonymize attributes.
similarity, resulting in a median of 0.23. This
further strengthens the claim that the texts created by adversarial anonymization retain relatively high
utility overall (even when applied to potential downstream tasks).

H.3    D ISCUSSION ON D OMAIN A PPLICABILITY

With this in mind, we want to briefly discuss which domains we see adversarial anonymization have
a particularly strong impact. As outlined in the main paper, we particularly target a setting in which
attribute information is not always clearly denoted in text and, in many cases, can only be inferred.
We believe that such domains (as online communication, forums, etc.) are plentiful and, as we have
shown, lack any existing tools for providing appropriate privacy protection. In particular, we believe
that classical anonymization with, e.g., Azure can be adequate if the text data is in a structured, much
more rigid format for which we can ensure a consistent representation of attributes. Notably, even
legal documents, such as the cases from the Human Rights Court (Pilán et al., 2022), generally do
not have a strong enough structure to ensure this, leading classical anonymizers to achieve low scores
in PII detection with LLMs often outperforming them (Bubeck et al., 2023). In the many cases in
which text does not or cannot have a very clear and constrained structure, we believe adversarial
anonymization provides a valuable contribution and a first step towards better anonymization that is
also directly aligned with regulatory formulations.


I     T RAINING MODELS FOR A DVERSARIAL A NONYMIZATION

Below, we investigate whether we can potentially distill the inference and anonymization capabilities
of larger models into smaller models, thus making adversarial anonymization more cost-efficient and
potentially even deployable on edge devices. In this section, we show the first empirical results that
indicate that this might be possible, making the training of such models an interesting direction for
future work.
As the Llama models were the most promising OSS models, we decided to finetune a version of
Llama-3.1-8B based on demonstrations of more capable models. In particular, we finetuned a 4-bit
quantized version of Llama-3.1-8B using (r=256 LoRA adapters, three epochs, using unsloth (Han &
Han, 2024)) as a new inference model (keeping the original 8-bit Llama-3.1-8B as a repair model).
For this, we only used synthetic demonstrations from Llama3.1-70B on SynthaPAI and our synthetic
samples (in particular from the first two anonymization rounds). Interestingly, during experimentation,
we observed that demonstrations from Llama3.1-70B resulted in a better finetuned model than demon-
strations from GPT-4. We speculate that this is due to the similar alignment of the Llama3.1 models.
Then, after training on the synthetic datasets, we evaluate the model’s (uns-mixed) performance on
unseen real-world data. As we see in Fig. 20 on the real-world PersonalReddit dataset, the resulting


                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


uns-mixed model performs much closer to Llama3.1-70B while requiring a fraction of the memory
and compute.
Interestingly, we observed that finetuning the            Base  GPT-4-AA         Llama3.1-70B-AA    Llama3.1-8B-UNS-Mixed-AA
                                                          Azure Llama3.1-8B-AA   Llama3.1-8B-UNS-AA
repair model (for now) results in an overly con-     1.00
servative model, which achieves great utility but
essentially gets stuck at the level of Llama3.1-     0.95


                                                             Mean Utility (Comb.)
70B-1 (i.e., a single Llama3.1-70B anonymiza-        0.90
tion round). We believe training such models
                                                     0.85
also for anonymization will be an interesting
avenue for future work—especially considering        0.80
that one can apply more sophisticated model          0.75
distillation methods than supervised finetuning.          0.4        0.5         0.6            0.7      0.8
Overall, these results make us very hopeful for                                Adversarial Accuracy

future, smaller and edge-deployable models that
enable high-quality adversarial anonymization. Figure 20: Utility-Privacy of the finetuned Llama-
                                                  3.1-8B-UNS-Mixed model on the PersonalRed-
                                                  dit dataset. Despite being a quantized 8B model,
                                                  it performs very close to Llama3.1-70B, strictly
                                                  dominating the non-finetuned -UNS model in the
                                                  privacy-utility tradeoff.


                                                            39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (a) Readability - Mean - Scale 1-5            (b) Readability - Median - Scale 1-5


          (c) Meaning - Mean - Scale 1-5                (d) Meaning - Median - Scale 1-5


           (e) Typical - Mean - Scale 0-1                (f) Typical - Median - Scale 0-1


           (g) Useable - Mean - Scale 0-1                (h) Useable - Median - Scale 0-1

Figure 15: Aggregated human study results for readability, meaning, typicality, and usability of
anonymized texts. GPT-4-AA outperforms Azure noticeably across all iterations and metrics.

                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Score distributions for Human- and LLM-based based judgement of preserved meaning. We notice that
humans and LLMs agree well for LLM-anonymized texts. For Azure anonymizations, LLMs tend to rate the
anonymizations as more meaning-preserving than humans.


(b) Score distributions for Human- and LLM-based based judgement of readability. We notice that humans and
LLMs agree well for LLM-anonymized texts. For Azure and adversarial anonymizations, LLMs tend to rate the
anonymizations as more readable than humans, however the average distance is higher for Azure.

   Figure 16: Comparison of Human- and LLM-based scores for both meaning and readability.


                                                   41
