Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RRM: ROBUST R EWARD M ODEL T RAINING M ITI -
GATES R EWARD H ACKING

 Tianqi Liu1∗, Wei Xiong2†, Jie Ren1 , Lichang Chen3†, Junru Wu1 , Rishabh Joshi1 , Yang Gao1 ,
 Jiaming Shen1 , Zhen Qin1 , Tianhe Yu1 , Daniel Sohn1 , Anastasiia Makarova1 , Jeremiah Liu1 ,
 Yuan Liu1 , Bilal Piot1 , Abe Ittycheriah1 , Aviral Kumar1 , Mohammad Saleh1
 Google DeepMind1 , University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign2 , University of Maryland, College Park3



                                             A BSTRACT

            Reward models (RMs) play a pivotal role in aligning large language models
            (LLMs) with human preferences. However, traditional RM training, which relies
            on response pairs tied to specific prompts, struggles to disentangle prompt-driven
            preferences from prompt-independent artifacts, such as response length and for-
            mat. In this work, we expose a fundamental limitation of current RM training
            methods, where RMs fail to effectively distinguish between contextual signals
            and irrelevant artifacts when determining preferences. To address this, we intro-
            duce a causal framework that learns preferences independent of these artifacts and
            propose a novel data augmentation technique designed to eliminate them. Ex-
            tensive experiments show that our approach successfully filters out undesirable
            artifacts, yielding a more robust reward model (RRM). Our RRM improves the
            performance of a pairwise reward model trained on Gemma-2-9b-it, on Reward-
            Bench, increasing accuracy from 80.61% to 84.15%. Additionally, we train two
            DPO policies using both the RM and RRM, demonstrating that the RRM signifi-
            cantly enhances DPO-aligned policies, improving MT-Bench scores from 7.27 to
            8.31 and length-controlled win-rates in AlpacaEval-2 from 33.46% to 52.49%.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has become a cornerstone in aligning large
language models (LLMs) with human preferences to produce responses that are more helpful, hon-
est, and harmless (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a). This approach involves training a reward
model (RM) on human feedback, which then guides the LLM to generate high-quality responses
through reinforcement learning. The success of RLHF is evident in various AI systems, such as
Gemini (Team et al., 2023) and GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023). Despite its effectiveness, RLHF faces
the fundamental issue of reward hacking (Gao et al., 2023), where the model maximizes the reward
function without truly aligning with the intended human preferences. This hacking issue occurs be-
cause the RM, while a powerful tool, is an imperfect proxy for human judgment and often struggles
with out-of-distribution generalization (Eisenstein et al., 2023).
The reward hacking problem manifests in several ways, with verbosity being a common issue: LLMs
tend to generate longer responses to appear more detailed or explanatory, exploiting human raters’
bias towards lengthier content (Shen et al., 2023b; Singhal et al., 2023). In recognition of this
challenge, extensive efforts have been made in the literature. ODIN (Chen et al.) designs a two-
head approach to learn the quality reward that is orthogonal to length. Similarly, length-controlled
Alpaca (Dubois et al., 2024a) estimates the controlled direct effect (VanderWeele, 2011) through
logistic regression by adjusting the length. To mitigate the length bias, an improved version (Park
et al., 2024) of DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024) introduces length as penalty to the reward score. In prac-
tice, there are more reward hacking patterns beyond length, such as format (markdowns, bold-faces)
and patterns (certain n-grams or emojis). This is largely due to the large output space of language
with limited preference data, as well as the diverse and subjective nature of human preferences.
    ∗
        Correspondence to Tianqi Liu, tianqiliu@google.com.
    †
        Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              REWARD MODEL TRAINING                                           REWARD MODEL INFERENCE
      INSTRUCTION PERMUTATIONS                                    DATA AUGMENTATIONS

         Instruction     Response (chosen)
                                                                             Original                                Instruction
                        𝒚𝒊𝒘: “**Random
                        Access Memory**”                                                                      𝒙𝒎: “What does
      𝒙𝒊 : “What does                            Non-Contextuals        𝒙𝒊         𝒊
                                                                                  𝒚𝒘   ≻ 𝒚𝒍𝒊                  TPU stand for
      RAM stand for     Response (rejected)                                                                   in computing”
                                                                                                                                                 Chosen
      in computing”
                        𝒚𝒍𝒊 : “Royal Air         𝒙𝒊   𝒚𝒊𝒘   ≻ 𝒚𝒋𝒘                                Vanilla RM
                        Maroc”                                                                                                                    𝒚𝒎
                                                                                                                                                   𝒍

                                                      𝒚𝒊𝒘   ≻   𝒚𝒌𝒘          Neutrals
                         Response (chosen)
                                                                                                              Response (chosen)     Vanilla RM
                         𝒋
                        𝒚𝒘: “**Central                           𝒋     𝒙𝒊         𝒋
                                                                                 𝒚𝒘    ≈ 𝒚𝒌𝒘
                                                      𝒚𝒊𝒘   ≻   𝒚𝒍
      𝒙𝒋 : “What does
                        Processing Unit**”                                                                    𝒚𝒎
                                                                                                               𝒘 : “Tensor
                                                                                  𝒋                           Processing Unit”
      CPU stand for
      in computing”
                        Response (rejected)           𝒚𝒊𝒘   ≻   𝒚𝒌𝒍              𝒚𝒘    ≈ 𝒚𝒋𝒍
                         𝒋
                        𝒚𝒍 : “Central                                                                                                            Chosen
                                                                                  𝒋
                        Policy Unit”
                                                      𝒚𝒊𝒍   ≻    𝒋
                                                                𝒚𝒘               𝒚𝒘    ≈   𝒚𝒌𝒍   Robust RM
                                                                                                                                                  𝒚𝒎
                                                                                                                                                   𝒘
                         Response (chosen)
                                                                                            𝒋
                                                      𝒚𝒊𝒍   ≻ 𝒚𝒘𝒌                𝒚𝒌𝒘   ≈   𝒚𝒘                 Response (rejected)
                        𝒚𝒌𝒘: “**Graphical
                        Processing Unit**”                                                                                          Robust RM
      𝒙𝒌: “What does                                                                                          𝒚𝒍𝒎:
      GPU stand for                                   𝒚𝒍𝒊   ≻    𝒋
                                                                𝒚𝒍               𝒚𝒌𝒘   ≈ 𝒚𝒌𝒍                  “**Thermoplastic
                        Response (rejected)                                                                   polyurethane**”
      in computing”
                        𝒚𝒌𝒍 : “Ground power                                      𝒚𝒌𝒘   ≈ 𝒚𝒋𝒍
                                                      𝒚𝒍𝒊   ≻   𝒚𝒍𝒌
                        unit”


Figure 1: The pipeline of our proposed robust reward model (RRM), which aims to decouple contex-
tual preference quality signal and context-free artifacts. Suppose a proportion of chosen responses
have certain artifact (bold-face wrapped with “∗∗” in this figure), the reward model can hack the
pattern and choose the response with the artifact instead of carefully reading the prompt. With
our data augmentations, we can effectively balance the context-free artifacts in chosen and rejected
responses, thus ensuring a more robust reward model during inference.


It is challenging to identify and mitigate all potential exploitation patterns. We may consider the
causal perspective to explain this phenomena. Given a prompt x and a pair of responses (y1 , y2 ), the
human preference can be caused by the real quality s(x, y1 , y2 ) that is associated with the prompt,
or by the context-free artifacts a(y1 , y2 ) in the responses that do not depend on prompt. Traditional
reward model training cannot differentiate the above two factors. There are two reasons for this.
First, the pair of responses are always contextual and on-topic to the prompt, thus no counterfactual
prompt (prompt from another examples) is used. The reward model may learn the artifacts existing
in the responses by ignoring the prompt. If we use the counterfactual prompt, it can help estimate
the level of artifact bias (P(y1   y2 |x0 ) with x0 6= x) existing in the preference dataset (Zhao
et al., 2021). Second, even if we adjust a few common artifacts, not all artifacts are observable and
thus there is no easy way to control all the artifacts explicitly to answer the question “what will the
preference be if both responses share the same artifacts?”.
In response to these challenges, we propose a simple and effective method to improve reward model-
ing. We first formulate the reward model training in a causal framework, then we augment the reward
model training data based on the causal rules. By doing so, we can effectively adjust the artifacts
and only learn the real quality. Our pipeline is illustrated in Figure 1, where we augment the reward
model training data by using responses from other examples to effectively balance the artifacts in
chosen and rejected responses. To summarize, the contributions of this paper are three-fold:
       • We identify a key issue with traditional reward model training: it often fails to distinguish
         between genuine contextual preference signals and spurious context-free artifacts.
       • To address this, we propose a causal graph for human preference modeling and introduce
         data augmentation to mitigate artifacts learned by the reward model.
       • We further demonstrate that policies trained on these robust reward models consistently
         outperform those based on baseline reward models.


2   P RELIMINARIES
In preference learning, we assume that there exists a preference oracle that determines the probability
P(y1   y2 |x) that response y1 is preferred over y2 given the prompt x. Our goal is to optimize the
preference by querying the preference oracle within certain budget constraint. In what follows, we
first review the major ways to approximate and estimate the oracle based on a human preference
                        (i) (i)                                                                (i) (i)
dataset Dhf = {x(i) , yw , yl }Ni=1 . where x
                                               (i)
                                                   represents prompt for example i, and (yw , yl )
represents the chosen and rejected response, respectively.


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reward models Bradley-Terry pointwise reward model (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Ouyang et al.,
2022) is a widely adopted method, which additionally assumes that there exists a reward function
r(x, y) ∈ R and the preference oracle satisfies
                                           exp(r(x, y1 ))
                P(y1   y2 |x) =                                     = σ r(x, y1 ) − r(x, y2 ) .
                                    exp(r(x, y1 )) + exp(r(x, y2 ))
Then, we can fit the Bradley-Terry model by maximizing the log-likelihood on the training set:
                        L(rφ , Dhf ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dhf [log σ (rφ (x, yw ) − rφ (x, yl ))] .        (1)

The second predominant approach is the pairwise ranking model (Zhao et al., 2023; Jiang et al.,
2023), which takes a prompt and a pair of responses as the input, and directly predicts the probability
P(y1   y2 |x), which subsumes the BT model as a subclass. In the literature, the pairwise preference
model has shown to outperform pointwise BT reward both empirically (Zhao et al., 2023; Jiang
et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2024) and theoretically (Ye et al., 2024) due to its flexibility and larger
function class capacity. Specifically, we denote the pairwise ranking model and leverage the next
token prediction ability of the language model to format the sample as:

                     “[CONTEXT] {x} [RESPONSE A] {y1 } [RESPONSE B] {y2 }”

Then, the model outputs either “A” or “B” as preferred one. We use the probability of decoding “A”
as estimation of the preference probability P̂(y1   y2 |x)1 . In this work, we use the pairwise ranking
model for its superior performance and flexibility.

Alignment Algorithms Start with a reward function r(x, y), a reference policy πref , and input
prompt distribution P, a policy π is trained to optimize for the following objective:

                     max Ex∼P Ey∼π(·|x) r(x, y) − βDKL [π(·|x)kπref (·|x)] ,               (2)
                            π

where β > 0 is the KL penalty coefficient. Several algorithms have been proposed to solve the
above optimization, including PPO (Schulman et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019), SLiC (Zhao et al.,
2023), DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024), RSO (Liu et al., 2024b), and IPO (Azar et al., 2024). For a
stable evaluation process, we use DPO in this work for preference alignment. For a given preference
dataset Dp 2 , DPO uses the following loss function:

                                                             πθ (yw |x)           πθ (yl |x)
        LDPO (πθ |πref , Dp ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dp log σ β log              − β log                 (3)
                                                             πref (yw |x)         πref (yl |x)

Reward Hacking Reward model is not perfect due to its limited model size, limited training data,
and distribution shift between training data and alignment prompts and responses (Eisenstein et al.,
2023; Gao et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024; Xiong et al.). Several works have been proposed to mitigate
reward hacking. One line of works focus on observable artifacts such as length (Chen et al.; Dubois
et al., 2024a; Shen et al., 2023b). Shen et al. (2023a) propose to enforce the consistency in reward
model via data augmentation. To improve generalization, reward model ensembles can mitigate (but
do not eliminate) reward hacking (Coste et al., 2023; Eisenstein et al., 2023; Ramé et al., 2024b).
Reward hacking can also be mitigated during policy training with post-adjusted reward (Park et al.,
2024) or with post-training model merge (Lin et al., 2023). We focus on improving the reward model
by addressing reward hacking from a causal perspective.

Causal Inference Causal inference can be embedded in graphical model frameworks as a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) G = (V, E) with variables represented as nodes in V and causal relationship
represented as a directed edge (Pearl, 2009; Lee et al., 2020) in E. We say a random vector X to be
faithful with respect to a DAG G = (V, E) if for any i, j ∈ V, and any subset S ⊆ V\{i, j},
                           X i ⊥ X j | X S ⇔ i and j are d-separated by S under G,                    (4)
            i       j        S             i         j                                           S
where X ⊥ X | X denotes X and X are independent conditional on X . The “d” in d-
separation stands for dependence. Thus if X i and X j are d-separated relative to a set of variables
   1
       We randomly flip response pairs and associated labels to remove positional bias.
   2
       Dp can be Dhf or can be generated responses labeled by reward model as in Liu et al. (2024b)


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


X S in a directed graph, then they are independent conditional on X S in all probability distributions
such a graph can represent. The definition of d-separation is as follows: suppose we are given a
DAG G; then, for two nodes i, j ∈ V, a subset S of V\{i, j} d-connects i and j if there exists a path
L between i and j such that every collider in L either belongs to S or has a descendent in S, and
no other node in L belongs to S. If S does not d-connect i and j, then it d-separates i and j. See
Appendix A.4 for more details.


3     ROBUST R EWARD M ODEL T RAINING

We first formulate the reward model training in a causal framework, then we augment the reward
model training data based on the causal rules.

3.1   C AUSAL FRAMEWORK


                                        𝑋        𝑌!         𝑌"

                                             𝑆          𝐴
                                                        ?
                                                    𝐶

Figure 2: Causal graph of reward model. X is the prompt. Y1 , Y2 are two responses. S is the
contextual signal that depends on input prompt and two responses. A is the context-free artifact
that only depends on two responses. C is the preference label. Traditional reward model cannot
differentiate the two DAGs on whether there is a causal edge from A to C. Our work uses the
augmented dataset to eliminate the edge from A to C.

We formulate a DAG G to model the causal relationships among different quantities (Figure 2).
X is the prompt, and Y1 , Y2 are two responses. S ∈ R is the contextual signal that depends on
input prompt and two responses. A ∈ R is the context-free artifact that only depends on two
responses. C ∈ {0, 1} is the preference label, where C = 1 means Y1 is preferred over Y2 and
C = 0 means the other way around. We assume the distribution of (X, Y1 , Y2 , S, A, C) to be
faithful to the DAG. We assume the preference label C can be captured by S and A, which is to say
P(C|X, Y1 , Y2 ) = P(C|S, A). We assume the S to be the sufficient statistic (Lehmann & Casella,
2006) that captures the contextual effect that one response fulfills the need of the prompt better
than the other. We assume A to the sufficient statistic that captures the context-free artifacts that
only depend on two responses. Such artifacts can include length, format (bold faces, bullet points,
markdown, etc), and certain patterns (n-grams such as “Sure, here is the response:”). In traditional
reward model training, the model may hack the patterns in (Y1 , Y2 ). Suppose 80% of winning
responses to be longer, then the reward model can get 80% accuracy by just counting the number of
tokens. Formally, we construct two hypothesis:

       • H0 : there is no causal edge from A to C.
       • H1 : there is a causal edge from A to C.
Proposition 3.1. In traditional reward model training, H0 and H1 are not always distinguishable.

Proof. As an example of the hypotheses being indistinguishable, let’s consider a special case of A
and S being perfectly correlated. More formally, assume S = s(X, Y1 , Y2 ) +  s with certain non-
linear function s and  s ∼ N (0, σs ), and similarly A = a(X, Y1 , Y2 ) +  a with non-linear function
a and  a ∼ N (0, σa ). Suppose P(C = 1|X, Y1 , Y2 ) = σ(βs S + βa A + α +  c ) with constants
βs , βa , α ∈ R and random error  c ⊥ (S, A). If βa = 0, then H0 is true. If βa = 1, then H1 is
true. In extreme case that Corr(S, A) = 1, then A = βas S + αa for some constants αa ∈ R and
βas ∈ R+ . Then the model cannot tell if βa = 0 or not. This is because when βa = 0, we can still
reparametrize it as P(C = 1|X, Y1 , Y2 ) = σ((βs − βas )S + A + (α − αa ) +  c ).


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The desired behavior of a reward model is to determine the preference label C ignoring the artifact
A, which corresponds to H0 . To achieve that, we can utilize two d-separation relationships of the
DAG G.

         • R1: Under H0 , A and C are d-separated by (Y1 , Y2 ), thus A ⊥ C | (Y1 , Y2 ).
         • R2: Under H0 , A and C are d-separated by S, thus A ⊥ C | S.

3.2      DATA AUGMENTATION

To fix the issue mentioned in Proposition 3.1, we can effectively utilize R1&R2. In particular, we
propose to augment data with by adding the permuted pairs of generated responses.

                                                                                                       (i)   (i)
Possible Combinations Given the dataset of triplets Dhf = {t(i) }N             i=1 with t
                                                                                          (i)
                                                                                              = (x(i) , yw , yl ),
we can first expand the dataset as D̃hf = {t(i) , t(σ1 (i)) , t(σ2 (i)) }N
                                                                         i=1 , where σ1 : [N ] → [N ] and σ2 :
[N ] → [N ] are two different invertible permutation functions randomly sampled from permutation
group  SN . In practice, we can shuffle the dataset twice to achieve σ1 and σ2 . There are in total
3 × 62 = 45 possible (x, y1 , y2 ) unordered triplets from each element in D̃hf . This is because there
are 3 possible prompts with 2 choices among 6 responses and we treat (x, y1 , y2 ) and (x, y2 , y1 ) as
the same one.

Preference Labels For the unordered triplet, we can set the preference rule based on the DAG G.
                                                                                         (i) (i)
We say response y is contextual to x if they are from the same triplet in Dhf = {x(i) , yw , yl }N
                                                                                                 i=1 .
               (i)        (i)                  (i)   (j)     (j)                         (i)
For example, yw and yl are contextual to x , but yw and yl are not contextual to x for j 6= i.
Then for (x, y1 , y2 ), we have the following rules:

         • if both y1 and y2 are contextual to x, we set the winning one in Dhf as winner.
         • if only one of y1 and y2 is contextual to x, we set the contextual one as winner.
         • if neither y1 nor y2 is contextual to x, we set the preference label as “Tie”.
                          (i)
Here we assume that yl is still an acceptable response for x(i) because it is usually generated by a
language model conditional on x(i) .

Augmented Triplets From R1, we can fix (Y1 , Y2 ) and vary X to perturb C. From R2, we can
fix C by picking a contextual (prompt, response) pair (X, Y1 ) and another non-contextual response
Y2 . Then we set Y1 as winning response and vary losing response Y2 to perturb A. We can see the
augmented datasets derived from the above two rules cover all possible (x, y1 , y2 ) unordered triplets
generated from D̃hf . For simplicity, we select the ones with prompt x(i) , which provides us with the
following additional augmented triplets3 :


 (x(i) , yw
          (i) (σ1 (i))
             , yw                   (i) 
                       ) →chosen = yw   
                                        
                                                                                                  
   (i) (i) (σ2 (i))                 (i)                                             (σ (i))
 (x , yw , yw          ) →chosen = yw  
                                                                (x(i) , yw
                                                                          (σ1 (i))
                                                                                   , yl 1   ) → Tie
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                  
   (i) (i) (σ1 (i))
                                        
                                    (i) 
                                                                                                   
 (x , yw , yl          ) →chosen = yw                       (i) (σ2 (i)) (σ2 (i))                 
                                        
                                        
                                                         (x , yw             , yl          ) → Tie
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
   (i) (i) (σ2 (i))
                                        
                                    (i) 
                                                                                                   
                                                             (i) (σ1 (i)) (σ2 (i))
 (x , yw , yl          ) →chosen = yw                    (x , yw             , yw          ) → Tie
                                                                                                   
          (i) (σ1 (i))              (i)
                                          Non-contextuals                                            Neutrals
                                                                     (σ1 (i)) (σ2 (i))
 (x(i) , yl , yw       ) →chosen = yl  
                                                         (x(i) , yw          , yl          ) → Tie
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                  
          (i) (σ2 (i))              (i)                     (i) (σ2 (i)) (σ1 (i))
 (x(i) , yl , yw
                                                                                                  
                       ) →chosen = yl                    (x     , y          , y           ) → Tie
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                        
                                                                   w            l                 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                  
   (i) (i) (σ1 (i))                 (i)                     (i)     (σ  (i))     (σ   (i))
                                                                                                  
 (x , yl , yl          ) →chosen = yl  
                                                         (x     , yl
                                                                       1
                                                                              , yl
                                                                                     2
                                                                                            ) → Tie
                                                                                                   
                                        
          (i) (σ (i))               (i) 
 (x(i) , yl , yl 2 ) →chosen = yl
                                                                                                           (5)
   3
       We show a sample Python code in Appendix A.2.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


“Non-contextuals” set the contextual response as chosen and non-contextual one as rejected. “Neu-
trals” set both non-contextual responses as tie. With these, we have the following claim:
Proposition 3.2. If the reward model is trained with Dhf and augmented triplets in Equation 5, there
is no causal edge from A to C in DAG G.

Proof. We can prove this by contradiction. If there is a causal edge from A to C, then the conditional
independence relations A ⊥ C | (Y1 , Y2 ) and A ⊥ C | S do not hold, which contracts to the triplets
constructed on “Non-contextuals” and “Neutrals”.

3.3      C ONNECTION TO EXISTING WORKS

ODIN (Chen et al.) ODIN decomposes reward into additive format of a quality one and a length
one. During learning, it enforces the disentanglement between the quality reward and the response
length and encourages the correlation between the length reward and the response length. We claim
that this is a special case of our causal modelling with single observed artifact A as length, because
the disentangle learning is a necessary condition of the conditional independence between C and A
given the data. Our framework is more general and can go beyond single and observed artifact.

Length-controlled AlpacaEval-2 (Dubois et al., 2024a) This work improves the original ver-
sion of AlpacaEval-2 by conditioning on the length through Controlled Direct Effect (VanderWeele,
2011). It adds length as a variable in the logistic regression to predict the preference. Effectively,
it learns the residual part that cannot be explained by the length. In our framework, we directly
learn the residual part that is orthogonal to the artifacts, which is the length in length-controlled
AlpacaEval-2. Thus the two methods are equivalent, and our approach can go beyond single artifact
and be extended to unobserved artifacts.

Length-controlled DPO (Park et al., 2024) This work adds a length penalty in the RLHF objec-
tive (Equation 2). It serves as a post-hoc reward adjustment to mitigate the length bias during policy
optimization. The idea for removing the lengthy bias using a length reward is the same as ODIN, but
they don’t have the correlation penalty and the additional hyperparameter introduced can add more
complexity into policy optimization. In comparison, our work directly learns a artifact-free reward
model so we do not need an explicit length adjustment factor in the alignment algorithm designs.

Contrast Instructions (Shen et al., 2023a) This work shows the issues of reward models on the
instruction and response consistencies when switching instruction or response to another similar one.
It proposes a data augmentation training approach and retrieval-augmented inference technique to
improve the consistencies of reward models. On contrary, by considering all possible combinations
of (x, y1 , y2 ) across different examples, our approach uses the organic data from the dataset, which
can effectively eliminate the artifacts existing in the dataset.

4       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct reward modeling and apply the trained reward to downstream alignment
tasks to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method. For deeper understanding, we also conduct
analysis on reward model training data, aligned policies, and perturbed reward model training data.

4.1      S ETTINGS

Training Set We study RRM using the preference dataset curated by RLHFlow4 (Dong et al.,
2024), which has been used to train a series of strong open-source preference models as evaluated
by the Reward-Bench (Lambert et al., 2024). The dataset consists of 700K preference pairs, which
is a mixture of HH-RLHF (Bai et al., 2022a), SHP (Ethayarajh et al., 2022), HelpSteer (Wang et al.,
2023), PKU-SafeRLHF (Ji et al., 2024), UltraFeedback (Cui et al., 2023), UltraInteract (Yuan et al.,
2024), Distilabel-Capybara (Daniele & Suphavadeeprasit, 2023), and Distilabel-Orca (Lian et al.,
2023). We list the data sources and number of examples in Table 1. The authors of the original
    4
        https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/pair_preference_model_dataset


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


paper delete the samples with similar scores when the scores are available because when the model
is well calibrated, these samples are more likely to mislabelled. Thus the total number is smaller
than the sum of each individual datasets.
           Source                                                      Number of Examples
           HH-RLHF-Helpful5 (Bai et al., 2022a)                             115,396
           SHP6 (Ethayarajh et al., 2022)                                    93,301
           HelpSteer7 (Wang et al., 2023)                                    37,131
           PKU-SafeRLHF8 (Ji et al., 2024)                                   26,874
           UltraFeedback9 (Cui et al., 2023)                                340,025
           UltraInteract10 (Yuan et al., 2024)                              161,927
           Distilabel-Capybara11 (Daniele & Suphavadeeprasit, 2023)          14,811
           Distilabel-Orca12 (Lian et al., 2023)                             6,926

                       Table 1: Composition of reward model training dataset


Reward Model Training Details We first train a pairwise ranking reward model (RM) from
Gemma-2-9b-it. With the augmentation illustrated in Equation 5, we can get 14X additional ex-
amples, most of which can be too easy for RM to learn. To reduce the augmented data size, we
first conduct inference on random 50% of the augmented data using the trained RM, and leave the
examples with |P̂(A   B) − P∗ (A   B)| ≥ 0.2, where P̂(A   B) is winning probability calcu-
lated by RM and P∗ (A   B) is the ground truth probability13 . We get 2.4M training examples by
merging the filtered augmented data and original RM training data. Then we use the same train-
ing recipe to get the robust reward model (RRM). We train the reward models for 1 epoch using
AdamW (Loshchilov, 2017) optimizer with learning rate 1e-6 and batch size 12814 .

Policy Model Training Details We train DPO policies using the on-policy responses generated
by Gemma-2-9b-it and labeled by RM and RRM, respectively. We use the prompt set            from the
UltraFeedback dataset to generate 5 responses per prompt. Then, we compare all 52 pairs and
pick the best-worst response pairs to align the DPO policy following (Pace et al., 2024; Dong et al.,
2024). We train the policies for 2 epochs at most using AdamW (Loshchilov, 2017) optimizer with
learning rate 2e-7 and a global batch size of 128, where the batch size follows Dong et al. (2024)
and the learning rate is decided by grid search.

Evaluation Metrics We evaluate the quality of reward model from two perspectives: the accuracy
on Reward-Bench (Lambert et al., 2024) and the quality of policies induced by the reward model.
For policies induced by the reward model, we consider two variants: 1. Best-of-N (BoN) policy and
2. aligned DPO policy. Our main focus is for open-ended generation and we use MT-Bench (Zheng
et al., 2024) and AlpacaEval-2 (Dubois et al., 2024b) to evaluate.

4.2    M AIN R ESULTS

Reward Model Accuracy The test accuracies on Reward-Bench are reported in Table 2. RRM
improves “Chat Hard” and “Safety” by a clear margin but sacrifices the “Reasoning”. Regarding
“Reasoning”, we hypothesize that math and coding are less affected by the non-contextual artifacts
and we may use other rewards than an LLM because those are objectives like golden answers. On
average, RRM improves RM by an absolute 3.54% accuracy gain.
   5
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/HH-RLHF-Helpful-standard
   6
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/SHP-standard
   7
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/Helpsteer-preference-standard
   8
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/PKU-SafeRLHF-30K-standard
   9
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/UltraFeedback-preference-standard
  10
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/UltraInteract-filtered-standard
  11
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/Capybara-distibalel-Filter-standard
  12
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/RLHFlow/Orca-distibalel-standard
  13
     The ground truth probability is 1 if A is preferred over B, 0 if B is preferred over A, and 0.5 if they tie.
  14
     We found 1 epoch is best for reward model training and we pick the best hyperparameter by grid search.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Model     Chat      Chat Hard    Safety    Reasoning     Average
                       RM        97.77       51.54      78.54       94.58        80.61
                       RRM       96.51       65.57      83.90       90.62        84.15

Table 2: Comparison of test accuracy of Reward-Bench. RRM shows improvement upon RM on
Chat Hard and Safety with an average 3.54% improvement of accuracy.



Policies Induced by Reward Models We investigate the quality of reward models by evaluating
the aligned policies. To study the effect of adding “Neutrals” in Equation 5, we also train a reward
model without augmented neutrals (-Neutrals). The results are summarized in Table 3. As expected,
ODIN (Chen et al.)15 shows shorter responses than RM and RRM since it explicitly disentangles the
length from quality. RRM shows the best performance on MT-Bench first turn and AlpacaEval-2
over ODIN and RM, with shorter responses generated than RM, suggesting it effectively controls the
length as one of the artifact. The added “Neutrals” have slight improvements on first-turn MT-Bench
and AlpacaEval-2.

  Reward           Policy                  MT-Bench16                           AlpacaEval-2
                                  T1 (↑)   T2 (↑) Overall (↑)      LC (%) (↑)    WR (%) (↑)    Length (↓)
  RM               BoN (N=8)         -        -         -            36.87         50.14         3072
  RRM              BoN (N=8)         -        -         -            47.68         53.19         1770
  RM               BoN (N=64)        -        -         -            40.52         57.62         2992
  RRM              BoN (N=64)        -        -         -            62.82         63.03         1770
  RM               DPO             8.02     6.33      7.27           33.46         41.07         2416
  ODIN             DPO             8.66     8.13      8.39           48.29         37.13         1559
  RRM              DPO             8.70     7.87      8.31           52.49         43.31         1723
   -Neutrals       DPO             8.65     8.21      8.44           51.73         43.24         1722

Table 3: Comparison among different reward models on various aligned policies. T1 and T2 stand
for the first and second turn of the conversation, respectively. WR stands for win-rate against GPT-
4. LC stands for length-controlled win-rate. Length is the average number of characters in the
generated responses. RRM shows quality improvements over ODIN and RM with shorter responses
than RM. Dropping augmented neutral examples slightly hurt the quality.



4.3      L ENGTH A NALYSIS

To further understand the artifacts learned in reward model, we take length as an example to analyze
the reward model training data and aligned policy.

Length distribution of training data We study the length (number of tokens) distribution of
reward model training datasets. Length is one common artifact that shows bias on both policy
training and evaluation. We hypothesize that the bias can possibly come from the reward model
training data. The one used in training RM is not well calibrated and the chosen responses are
longer on average (Figure 3a) and by frequency (Figure 3c). On contrary, the RRM training data is
better calibrated with length more balanced between chosen and rejected responses in each length
bin (Figure 3b and 3c). We further provide length analysis for each data source in Appendix A.1.

Length distribution of policies To understand the lengthy bias learned in various policies, we
also study the length distribution of generated responses on AlpacaEval-2’s (Dubois et al., 2024a)
prompts (Figure 4). We observe that the policies induced by RRM generate shorter responses than
RM, which implies the correction of lengthy bias by RRM.

  15
       Training details in Appendix A.3.
  16
       we do not evaluate BoN policies on MT-Bench because it involves multi-turn.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Histogram of response lengths (b) Histogram of response lengths (c) Percentage of chosen responses
in RM training data.              in RRM training data.             being longer or shorter in RM and
                                                                    RRM traininng data.

Figure 3: Distribution of response lengths on reward model training datasets. (a) the RM training
data has longer chosen responses on average and not well calibrated (large percent deviation in left
two bins between chosen and rejected) (b) the RRM training data is well calibrated and the average
length of the chosen responses is even shorter than rejected. Additional neutral triplets can further
calibrated the model. (c) Around 60% of chosen responses are longer in RM training data. On
contrary, the lengths of chosen responses are more balanced in RRM training data.


      (a) Best of 8 responses          (b) Best of 64 responses               (c) DPO policy

Figure 4: Distribution of response lengths on AlpacaEval-2 prompts of various policies induced by
RM and RRM, average length is marked by the dashed line. All policies show a lengthy bias towards
longer responses for RM comparing with RRM.


4.4   D ELIBERATELY DESIGNED ARTIFACTS

Artifacts To verify that our proposed method is able to eliminate artifacts, we artificially added
an artifact to the chosen responses in reward model training data. More specifically, we add prefix
“Sure, here is the response: ” to the chosen responses with probability 0.1. We train an RM and
RRM on the modified reward model training data, respectively.
To test the effect of reward model on the policy model, we first sample N responses from Gemma-
2-9b-it model using the AlpacaEval-2 prompts. Then we add the same type of artifact to each
response with probability pa = p, where p ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}. Under this setting, RM trained
on the artifact-added data would prefer responses with the artifacts since the chosen responses come
with artifacts, even if the responses may contain low-quality answer. RRM is expected to be more
robust to the artifact. To verify this, we construct BoN policies using RM and RRM, respectively.
As expected, Figure 5 shows that after adding the artifacts, the BoN policies induced by RRM are
more robust than RM to artifacts injected in the responses.

5     R ELATED W ORKS
RLHF algorithms The first RLHF framework (Stiennon et al., 2020) is based on the proximal
policy optimization (PPO) algorithm, which was first popularized by Christiano et al. (2017) and
further developed by Bai et al. (2022a); Ouyang et al. (2022). However, getting PPO work is chal-
lenging especially in the era of LLMs (Choshen et al.; Engstrom et al., 2020). In recognition of this
issue, another line of works propose direct alignment algorithms, where notable examples include


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   (a) Best of 8 responses                   (b) Best of 64 responses

Figure 5: Proportion of BoN generated responses with artifact versus the rate of injected artifact.
For each policy, we first sample N (N = 8 or 64) responses on AlpacaEval-2 prompts, then prepend
“Sure, here is the response: ” before each response with probability (Rate) 5%, 10%, 20%, 50%,
respectively. Then we compute the proportion of BoN responses that have the above artifact (Ar-
tifact). The BoN policies induced by RRM are more robust to artifacts injected in the responses,
suggesting that the proposed approach enables the model to focus more on the contextual signals
instead of context-free artifacts in the reward model training data.


SLiC (Zhao et al., 2023), DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024), IPO (Azar et al., 2024), KTO (Ethayarajh
et al., 2024), ORPO (Hong et al., 2024), SimPO (Meng et al., 2024), and DRO (Richemond et al.,
2024). These algorithms directly optimize a supervised target to optimize the policy model with-
out constructing a reward model first, hence the name direct alignment algorithms. However, these
algorithms learning from a fixed dataset are offline and often off-policy without further exploration
of the environment. RSO (Liu et al., 2024b) emphasizes the importance of reward model and fixes
the distribution shift problem to improve the DPO training, followed by list-wise alignment (Liu
et al., 2024a) and the online (iterative) training frameworks (Xiong et al.; Guo et al., 2024; Calan-
driello et al.). Alternatively, there is also a line of work based on the best-of-n sampling, such as
RAFT (Dong et al.), BOND (Sessa et al., 2024), BoNBoN alignment (Gui et al., 2024). These algo-
rithms leverage a reward model to rank the generated responses and distill knowledge from the best
responses. Our approach can benefit RLHF algorithms relying on a reward model.

Reward Models & Reward Hackings Building a superhuman/unbiased reward model is vital
for training better chat assistants since it could affect the upper bound of the policies’ capabili-
ties in the online preference optimization (Wang et al., 2024a; Bai et al., 2022b). Multi-objective
rewards (Wang et al., 2024b), RLHF-workflow (Dong et al., 2024), and RMBoost (Shen et al.,
2024) are proposed to train more capable reward models. While revealed by Denison et al. (2024);
Zhang et al. (2024), reward models are easily hacked by different pattern in different scenario,
e.g., length (Singhal et al., 2023) and sycophancy. Recent works employ the model merging
(WARP (Ramé et al., 2024a) and WARM (Ramé et al., 2024b)), and hacking reward decomposition
(ODIN (Chen et al.)) to mitigate the hackings in online RLHF. Generative reward models can pro-
vide more detailed preference analysis (Yan et al., 2024). For the most accurate reward signal, one
can also use verifiable answers in certain domain like math (Xiong et al., 2024). Most model-based
methods failed to distinguish between preferences driven by the prompt and context-free artifacts.
Our RRM is more advanced in removing the artifacts.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we identified a key problem in the current reward training methodology: its inability to
differentiate between contextual signals and context-free artifacts. Using a causal framework, we ex-
plained this effect and improved reward model training by introducing a data augmentation approach
derived from the framework. Our theoretical analysis and extensive empirical results demonstrated
that the proposed techniques effectively enhance both the test accuracy of the reward model and the
quality of the policies it induces. Future work will explore filtering augmented pairs and matching
artifacts when constructing response pairs, further refining the training process.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland,
 Michal Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learn-
 ing from human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
 pp. 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai:
  Harmlessness from ai feedback, 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08073.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022c.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

Daniele Calandriello, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Yunhao Tang,
  Bernardo Avila Pires, Pierre Harvey Richemond, Charline Le Lan, Michal Valko, Tianqi Liu,
  et al. Human alignment of large language models through online preference optimisation. In
  Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.

Lichang Chen, Chen Zhu, Jiuhai Chen, Davit Soselia, Tianyi Zhou, Tom Goldstein, Heng Huang,
  Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. Odin: Disentangled reward mitigates hacking in rlhf.
  In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.

Leshem Choshen, Lior Fox, Zohar Aizenbud, and Omri Abend. On the weaknesses of reinforce-
  ment learning for neural machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.

Thomas Coste, Usman Anwar, Robert Kirk, and David Krueger. Reward model ensembles help
  mitigate overoptimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02743, 2023.

Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback, 2023.

Luigi Daniele and Suphavadeeprasit. Amplify-instruct: Synthetically generated diverse multi-turn
  conversations for effecient llm training. arXiv preprint arXiv:(coming soon), 2023. URL https:
  //huggingface.co/datasets/LDJnr/Capybara.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Carson Denison, Monte MacDiarmid, Fazl Barez, David Duvenaud, Shauna Kravec, Samuel Marks,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Ryan Soklaski, Alex Tamkin, Jared Kaplan, Buck Shlegeris, Samuel R. Bow-
  man, Ethan Perez, and Evan Hubinger. Sycophancy to subterfuge: Investigating reward-tampering
  in large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.10162.

Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Yihan Zhang, Winnie Chow, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao,
  Jipeng Zhang, SHUM KaShun, and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative
  foundation model alignment. Transactions on Machine Learning Research.

Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Bo Pang, Haoxiang Wang, Han Zhao, Yingbo Zhou, Nan Jiang, Doyen
  Sahoo, Caiming Xiong, and Tong Zhang. Rlhf workflow: From reward modeling to online rlhf.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07863, 2024.

Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Length-controlled al-
  pacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04475, 2024a.

Yann Dubois, Chen Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for
  methods that learn from human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024b.

Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Alex D’Amour, DJ Dvijotham,
  Adam Fisch, Katherine Heller, Stephen Pfohl, Deepak Ramachandran, et al. Helping or herd-
  ing? reward model ensembles mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.09244, 2023.

Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry
  Rudolph, and Aleksander Madry. Implementation matters in deep policy gradients: A case study
  on ppo and trpo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12729, 2020.

Kawin Ethayarajh, Yejin Choi, and Swabha Swayamdipta. Understanding dataset difficulty with
  v-usable information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5988–6008. PMLR,
  2022.

Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
  alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.

Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.

Lin Gui, Cristina Gârbacea, and Victor Veitch. Bonbon alignment for large language models and
  the sweetness of best-of-n sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00832, 2024.

Shangmin Guo, Biao Zhang, Tianlin Liu, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Felipe Llinares, Alexandre
  Rame, Thomas Mesnard, Yao Zhao, Bilal Piot, et al. Direct language model alignment from
  online ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04792, 2024.

Jiwoo Hong, Noah Lee, and James Thorne. Reference-free monolithic preference optimization with
  odds ratio. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07691, 2024.

Jiaming Ji, Mickel Liu, Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Chi Zhang, Ce Bian, Boyuan Chen, Ruiyang Sun,
   Yizhou Wang, and Yaodong Yang. Beavertails: Towards improved safety alignment of llm via a
   human-preference dataset. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models
  with pairwise ranking and generative fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02561, 2023.

Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
  Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, et al. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward
  models for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13787, 2024.

Steffen L Lauritzen. Graphical models, volume 17. Clarendon Press, 1996.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kuang-Yao Lee, Tianqi Liu, Bing Li, and Hongyu Zhao. Learning causal networks via additive
  faithfulness. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(51):1–38, 2020.

Erich L Lehmann and George Casella. Theory of point estimation. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2006.

Wing Lian, Bleys Goodson, Eugene Pentland, Austin Cook, Chanvichet Vong, and ”Teknium”.
 Openorca: An open dataset of gpt augmented flan reasoning traces. https://https://
 huggingface.co/Open-Orca/OpenOrca, 2023.

Yong Lin, Lu Tan, Hangyu Lin, Zeming Zheng, Renjie Pi, Jipeng Zhang, Shizhe Diao, Haoxiang
  Wang, Han Zhao, Yuan Yao, et al. Speciality vs generality: An empirical study on catastrophic
  forgetting in fine-tuning foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06256, 2023.

Tianqi Liu, Zhen Qin, Junru Wu, Jiaming Shen, Misha Khalman, Rishabh Joshi, Yao Zhao, Mo-
  hammad Saleh, Simon Baumgartner, Jialu Liu, Peter J. Liu, and Xuanhui Wang. Lipo: Listwise
  preference optimization through learning-to-rank, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2402.01878.

Tianqi Liu, Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, Peter J Liu, and Jialu
  Liu. Statistical rejection sampling improves preference optimization. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b.

I Loshchilov. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. Simpo: Simple preference optimization with a
  reference-free reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14734, 2024.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.

Alizée Pace, Jonathan Mallinson, Eric Malmi, Sebastian Krause, and Aliaksei Severyn. West-of-n:
  Synthetic preference generation for improved reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12086,
  2024.

Ryan Park, Rafael Rafailov, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Disentangling length from quality
  in direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19159, 2024.

Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Alexandre Ramé, Johan Ferret, Nino Vieillard, Robert Dadashi, Léonard Hussenot, Pierre-Louis
  Cedoz, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Sertan Girgin, Arthur Douillard, and Olivier Bachem. Warp: On
  the benefits of weight averaged rewarded policies, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2406.16768.

Alexandre Ramé, Nino Vieillard, Léonard Hussenot, Robert Dadashi, Geoffrey Cideron, Olivier
  Bachem, and Johan Ferret. Warm: On the benefits of weight averaged reward models, 2024b.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12187.

Pierre Harvey Richemond, Yunhao Tang, Daniel Guo, Daniele Calandriello, Mohammad Gheshlaghi
  Azar, Rafael Rafailov, Bernardo Avila Pires, Eugene Tarassov, Lucas Spangher, Will Ellsworth,
  et al. Offline regularised reinforcement learning for large language models alignment. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.19107, 2024.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Robert Dadashi, Léonard Hussenot, Johan Ferret, Nino Vieillard, Alexandre
  Ramé, Bobak Shariari, Sarah Perrin, Abe Friesen, Geoffrey Cideron, et al. Bond: Aligning llms
  with best-of-n distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14622, 2024.
Jiaming Shen, Ran Xu, Yennie Jun, Zhen Qin, Tianqi Liu, Carl Yang, Yi Liang, Simon Baumgart-
   ner, and Michael Bendersky. Boosting reward model with preference-conditional multi-aspect
   synthetic data generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16008, 2024.
Lingfeng Shen, Sihao Chen, Linfeng Song, Lifeng Jin, Baolin Peng, Haitao Mi, Daniel Khashabi,
  and Dong Yu. The trickle-down impact of reward (in-) consistency on rlhf. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.16155, 2023a.
Wei Shen, Rui Zheng, Wenyu Zhan, Jun Zhao, Shihan Dou, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing
 Huang. Loose lips sink ships: Mitigating length bias in reinforcement learning from human
 feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05199, 2023b.
Prasann Singhal, Tanya Goyal, Jiacheng Xu, and Greg Durrett. A long way to go: Investigating
  length correlations in rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03716, 2023.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Tyler J VanderWeele. Controlled direct and mediated effects: definition, identification and bounds.
  Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 38(3):551–563, 2011.
Binghai Wang, Rui Zheng, Lu Chen, Yan Liu, Shihan Dou, Caishuang Huang, Wei Shen, Senjie Jin,
  Enyu Zhou, Chenyu Shi, Songyang Gao, Nuo Xu, Yuhao Zhou, Xiaoran Fan, Zhiheng Xi, Jun
  Zhao, Xiao Wang, Tao Ji, Hang Yan, Lixing Shen, Zhan Chen, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu,
  Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Secrets of rlhf in large language models part
  ii: Reward modeling, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06080.
Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. Interpretable preferences
  via multi-objective reward modeling and mixture-of-experts, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2406.12845.
Zhilin Wang, Yi Dong, Jiaqi Zeng, Virginia Adams, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Daniel Egert,
  Olivier Delalleau, Jane Polak Scowcroft, Neel Kant, Aidan Swope, and Oleksii Kuchaiev. Help-
  steer: Multi-attribute helpfulness dataset for steerlm, 2023.
Wei Xiong, Hanze Dong, Chenlu Ye, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhong, Heng Ji, Nan Jiang, and Tong Zhang.
 Iterative preference learning from human feedback: Bridging theory and practice for rlhf under
 kl-constraint. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.
Wei Xiong, Chengshuai Shi, Jiaming Shen, Aviv Rosenberg, Zhen Qin, Daniele Calandriello, Misha
 Khalman, Rishabh Joshi, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Saleh, et al. Building math agents with multi-
 turn iterative preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02392, 2024.
Jing Nathan Yan, Tianqi Liu, Justin Chiu, Jiaming Shen, Zhen Qin, Yue Yu, Charumathi Laksh-
   manan, Yair Kurzion, Alexander Rush, Jialu Liu, and Michael Bendersky. Predicting text prefer-
   ence via structured comparative reasoning. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar
   (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
   tics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 10040–10060, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association
   for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.
   541.
Chenlu Ye, Wei Xiong, Yuheng Zhang, Nan Jiang, and Tong Zhang. A theoretical analysis of
  nash learning from human feedback under general kl-regularized preference. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.07314, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lifan Yuan, Ganqu Cui, Hanbin Wang, Ning Ding, Xingyao Wang, Jia Deng, Boji Shan, Huimin
  Chen, Ruobing Xie, Yankai Lin, Zhenghao Liu, Bowen Zhou, Hao Peng, Zhiyuan Liu, and
  Maosong Sun. Advancing llm reasoning generalists with preference trees, 2024.

Xuanchang Zhang, Wei Xiong, Lichang Chen, Tianyi Zhou, Heng Huang, and Tong Zhang. From
  lists to emojis: How format bias affects model alignment, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2409.11704.

Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu. Slic-hf:
  Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10425, 2023.

Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving
  few-shot performance of language models. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  12697–12706. PMLR, 2021.

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   A DDITIONAL LENGTH ANALYSIS OF REWARD MODEL TRAINING DATASETS

In this section, we show the length distribution of chosen and rejected responses from each individual
data source in Figure 6. HH-RLHF, SHP, HelpSteer, UltraFeedback show bias towards rejected
responses as the first length bin. SHP, HelpSteer, and UltraFeedback have longer chosen responses
than rejected ones on average.

A.2   DATA AUGMENTATION PYTHON CODE

In Algorithm 1, we show a sample code of data augmentation in Python. We expect each element in
data contains “context”, “response w”, “response l”. We use “neutral” to indicate if the label should
be “Tie”.

A.3   T RAINING DETAILS FOR ODIN

We use the same loss as described in Chen et al.. We train Gemma-2-9b-it for 1 epoch on the same
data we used for RM. AdamW is our optimizer and the learning rate is set to 2e-6 with cosine
scheduler. We use Flash-Attention to accelerate the training while applying the Deepspeed Zero-
Stage 3 to get batch size 16 on each GPU (the global batch size is 128) to make sure the calculation
of the Pearson correlation between the head value and the length of the responses is stable.

A.4   P RELIMINARIES IN CAUSAL INFERENCE

We list a few critical concepts in this section. For information, we refer the readers to Lauritzen
(1996) and Pearl (2009).

DAGs and d-separation A DAG is a set of vertices and a set of directed edges (arrows) that con-
nect pairs of these vertices. The causal modeling connects a DAG with Markov condition via a
graphical relation called d-separation (Pearl, 2009). D-separation is a relation among three disjoint
sets of vertices in a directed graph. D-separation and Markov condition connect DAGs and probabil-
ity distribution. By faithfulness assumption, the d-separation in a DAG is equivalent to conditional
independence in distribution.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  (a) HH-RLHF-Helpful                             (b) SHP


                      (c) HelpSteer                          (d) PKU-SafeRLHF


                     (e) UltraFeedback                        (f) UltraInteract


                  (g) Distilabel-Capybara                    (h) Distilabel-Orca

Figure 6: Distribution of response lengths on each individual source of reward model training data.
SHP, HelpSteer, and UltraFeedback show significant lengthy bias showing longer responses in cho-
sen. They also dominate the training dataset, accounting for more than a half.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Example Python Code for Data Augmentation
def get_augmented(data: List[Dict[str, Any]]) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
  data_i = data
  data_j = data_i.copy()
  random.shuffle(data_j)
  data_k = data_j.copy()
  random.shuffle(data_k)
  for ex_i, ex_j, ex_k in zip(data_i, data_j, data_k):
    xi = ex_i[’context’]
    xj = ex_j[’context’]
    xk = ex_k[’context’]
    ywi = ex_i[’response_w’]
    ywj = ex_j[’response_w’]
    ywk = ex_k[’response_w’]
    yli = ex_i[’response_l’]
    ylj = ex_j[’response_l’]
    ylk = ex_k[’response_l’]
    # xi_ywi_ywj
    yield {
        "context": xi,
        "response_w": ywi,
        "response_l": ywj,
        "neutral": False
    }
    # xi_ywi_ywk
    yield {
        "context": xi,
        "response_w": ywi,
        "response_l": ywk,
        "neutral": False
    }
    # fill in all other augmented triplets ...
    # xi_ywk_ylj
    yield {
        "context": xi,
        "response_w": ywk,
        "response_l": ylj,
        "neutral": True
    }
    # xi_ylj_ylk
    yield {
        "context": xi,
        "response_w": ylj,
        "response_l": ylk,
        "neutral": True
    }



The causal Markov condition The Causal Markov assumption assumes that a variable X is in-
dependent of every other variable (except X’s effects) conditional on all of its direct causes. With
this, a DAG defines a set of distributions of the form
                                                   Y
                                p(y1 , ..., yk ) =   p(yj |parents(yj ))

Counterfactuals Consider two variables X and Y . We will call X the “treatment”. We call Y the
“outcome”. For a given subject we see (Xi , Yi ). What we don’t see is what their value of Yi would
have been if we changed their value of Xi . This is called counterfactual. Suppose that X is a binary
variable that represents some treatment. So X = 1 means the subject was treated and X = 0 means
the subject was not treated. Let Y1 denote the outcome if the subject is treated. Let Y0 denote the
response if the subject is not treated. Then
                                      Y = XY1 + (1 − X)Y0


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


If we treat a subject, we observe Y1 but not Y0 . The unobserved variable is called a counterfactual.
The variables (Y0 , Y1 ) are also called potential outcomes. We define mean treatment effect as
                    θ = E(Y1 ) − E(Y0 ) = E(Y |set X = 1) − E(Y |set X = 0)

A.5   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS WITH G EMMA -2-2 B - IT

To further verify effectiveness of our approach, we train Gemma-2-2b-it reward model (RM) and
robust reward model (RRM), respectively. Table 4 shows the results on the reward bench. RRM
again shows improvement on the Chat Hard. It shows some regression on Safety and Reasoning,
where we hypothesis that some context-free nature of reasoning and safety makes the RRM perform
worse. Overall, RRM shows positive effect. We also test the reward models on AlpacaEval2 using
best-of-n policies. The results are shown in Table 5. We use the trained reward model to rank the
responses generated from the Gemma-2-9b-it model, and observe consistent gains on RRM over
RM.
                   Model     Chat     Chat Hard    Safety   Reasoning    Average
                   RM        96.49      42.54      72.70      72.30       71.01
                   RRM       97.21      49.01      72.71      70.08       72.25

Table 4: Comparison of test accuracy of Reward-Bench. RRM shows improvement upon RM on
Chat and Chat Hard with an average 1.75% improvement of accuracy.


                   Reward    Policy                      AlpacaEval-2
                                            LC (%) (↑)    WR (%) (↑)    Length (↓)
                   RM        BoN (N=8)        44.21         45.83         2264
                   RRM       BoN (N=8)        54.37         47.19         1749
                   RM        BoN (N=64)       47.32         52.23         2316
                   RRM       BoN (N=64)       60.42         56.50         1870

Table 5: Comparison among different reward models on various aligned policies. WR stands for
win-rate against GPT-4. LC stands for length-controlled win-rate. Length is the average number
of characters in the generated responses. RRM shows quality improvements with shorter responses
over RM.


A.6   A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS WITH M IXED A RTIFACTS

To investigate the effect of RRM on mixed artifacts, we conduct an additional experiment as follows:

      1. With p = 0.1, wrap the whole chosen response with “**” as bold-face.
      2. After the above step, with p = 0.1, append emoji .
      3. Train RM and RRM on the above dataset.

To test the effect of reward model on the policy model, we first sample N responses from Gemma-2-
9b-it model using the AlpacaEval-2 prompts. Then we add emoji to each response with probability
pa = p, where p ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}. Under this setting, RM trained on the artifact-added data
would prefer responses with the artifacts since the chosen responses come with artifacts, even if the
responses may contain low-quality answer. RRM is expected to be more robust to the artifact. To
verify this, we construct BoN policies using RM and RRM, respectively.
As expected, Figure 7 shows that after adding the artifacts, the BoN policies induced by RRM are
more robust than RM to artifacts injected in the responses.

A.7   D ISCUSSION ON DATA F ILTERING S TRATEGIES

In this work, we assume the preference labels should be purely controlled by the prompt dependent
signal. However, there can be cases such that prompt-independent signals can contribute to the


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   (a) Best of 8 responses                   (b) Best of 64 responses

Figure 7: Proportion of BoN generated responses with emoji versus the rate of injected emoji. For
each policy, we first sample N (N = 8 or 64) responses on AlpacaEval-2 prompts, then append
emoji after each response with probability (Rate) 5%, 10%, 20%, 50%, respectively. Then we
compute the proportion of BoN responses that have the above artifact (Artifact). The BoN policies
induced by RRM are more robust to artifacts injected in the responses, suggesting that the proposed
approach enables the model to focus more on the contextual signals instead of context-free artifacts
in the reward model training data.


preference label. For example, a responsible AI should be always safe and cares about the diversity.
In the data augmentation, we sometimes use rejected response as new chosen in “Non-contextuals”.
See the last four triplets in “Non-contextuals” of Equation 5. For “Neutrals”, we also assume 0.5
winning probability of a non-contextual response pair. These treatment may cause the unwanted
behavior of AI if we use unsafe response as the new chosen or assigning winning probability of 0.5
on a pair of (safe, unsafe) responses.
To address this, we have a few treatments that can be applied in future works:

      • Use a trained safety pointwise or Bradley-Terry model to filter out triplets that has low
        safety scores on the chosen responses.
      • Use AI feedback such as Constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022c) to ensure the augmented
        triplets have high quality chosen responses and consistent preference according to certain
        non-contextual rules. The rules can include safety, style, factuality.

B    E THICS S TATEMENT
Our research adheres to the ethical guidelines. Our work aims to mitigate reward hacking in RLHF,
contributing to the development of more reliable AI systems that better align with human prefer-
ences. Our data augmentation process explicitly addresses and mitigates common forms of bias,
thus reducing the potential for harm in practical applications of AI systems. Our model was de-
signed with fairness in mind, particularly in avoiding biases related to response length and format,
which can unfairly influence AI decision-making.

C    R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All code used for training the reward models (RM and RRM) and for running the experiments de-
scribed in this paper will be made publicly available upon publication. This includes the implemen-
tation of the data augmentation pipeline, the reward model training process, and policy alignment.
The datasets used in our experiments are publicly available. We provide the complete set of hyper-
parameters used for training the models, including learning rates, batch sizes, and other optimization
settings. The evaluation approaches are also public available and can be fully reproduced.


                                                 19
