Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S YNTHESIZING P ROGRAMMATIC R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING P OLICIES WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL
G UIDED S EARCH
 Max Liu1∗ Chan-Hung Yu1∗ Wei-Hsu Lee1                      Cheng-Wei Hung1
 Yen-Chun Chen2 Shao-Hua Sun1
 1
   National Taiwan University 2 Microsoft



                                                 A BSTRACT
             Programmatic reinforcement learning (PRL) has been explored for representing
             policies through programs as a means to achieve interpretability and generalization.
             Despite promising outcomes, current state-of-the-art PRL methods are hindered
             by sample inefficiency, necessitating tens of millions of program-environment
             interactions. To tackle this challenge, we introduce a novel LLM-guided search
             framework (LLM-GS). Our key insight is to leverage the programming expertise
             and common sense reasoning of LLMs to enhance the efficiency of assumption-free,
             random-guessing search methods. We address the challenge of LLMs’ inability
             to generate precise and grammatically correct programs in domain-specific lan-
             guages (DSLs) by proposing a Pythonic-DSL strategy – an LLM is instructed to
             initially generate Python codes and then convert them into DSL programs. To
             further optimize the LLM-generated programs, we develop a search algorithm
             named Scheduled Hill Climbing, designed to efficiently explore the programmatic
             search space to improve the programs consistently. Experimental results in the
             Karel domain demonstrate our LLM-GS framework’s superior effectiveness and
             efficiency. Extensive ablation studies further verify the critical role of our Pythonic-
             DSL strategy and Scheduled Hill Climbing algorithm. Moreover, we conduct
             experiments with two novel tasks, showing that LLM-GS enables users without
             programming skills and knowledge of the domain or DSL to describe the tasks in
             natural language to obtain performant programs.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved great success from beating the world champion in
Go (Silver et al., 2016) to powering the frontier natural language assistants (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022), and demonstrated great potential in robotics (Jain et al., 2024), autonomous vehi-
cles (Wang et al., 2023b), and recommendation systems (Chen et al., 2023). However, approximating
a policy using a deep neural network makes the decision-making process a black box and, there-
fore, less interpretable and trustable to human users (Heuillet et al., 2021). Subsequently, carefully
designed tools and costly human intervention are often required to deploy trustworthy DRL sys-
tems (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017). Moreover, DRL frequently encounters substantial performance
declines when applied to previously unseen scenarios (Kirk et al., 2023; Cobbe et al., 2018), revealing
another aspect of its challenges in generalization.
Recent programmatic reinforcement learning (PRL) methods have explored representing an RL policy
using a program (Andre and Russell, 2001; Verma et al., 2018; Bastani et al., 2018; Silver et al., 2020).
Instead of learning a state-to-action mapping as in DRL, PRL synthesizes programs written in Domain-
Specific Languages (DSLs) as human-readable policies that can be parsed and executed, making
human inspection possible as an extra safety guard. Moreover, such structured program policies
are shown to be able to capture high-level task-solving ideas, allowing for generalizing to a wide
range of task variants (Trivedi et al., 2021). Despite the encouraging results, the state-of-the-art
PRL algorithms are notoriously inefficient and require tens of millions of program execution in
    ∗
        Equal contribution.   Correspondence to: Shao-Hua Sun <shaohuas@ntu.edu.tw>


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


environments (Trivedi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Carvalho et al., 2024). Under the hood, they are
search or RL algorithms without any assumption to the targeting problems. On the one hand, this
allows generalization to all kinds of problems; on the other hand, the search time grows exponentially
with increasing DSL complexity, making it intolerable for any practical use case.
Our key insight is that there is likely only a limited set of problems corresponding to specific program
policies that are of human interest – hence, we can utilize reasonable assumptions to prune the
search space. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have been demonstrated to possess internet-
scale knowledge that can be retrieved by a natural language interface (Wang et al., 2024; Zheng
et al., 2024; Taylor et al., 2022). If we view the text on the internet as a “text projection” of human
civilization, an LLM as a knowledge base should be able to provide hints to “prune” the program
search paths that are out of the “human interest scope”. With this intuition, we conjecture LLMs can
be utilized to bootstrap the sample efficiency of search-based PRL algorithms, pushing PRL one step
closer to practical adoption.
To this end, we aim to develop a PRL framework that utilizes LLMs to produce task-solving program
policies while minimizing the number of program executions in environments. Directly instructing
LLMs to synthesize DSL programs for solving PRL tasks faces three fundamental challenges:
(1) LLMs may lack the domain knowledge of the PRL tasks, e.g., environment dynamics, what
an agent can obverse or how it can act, (2) the training data of modern LLMs are mostly natural
language texts and general-purpose programming languages, e.g., Python and C++, which can be
quite different from the DSLs used in PRL, and (3) there is no apparent mechanism for directly and
iteratively optimizing LLMs to produce programs that maximize rewards since the best-performing
LLMs are privately owned, e.g., GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023).
To combat these challenges, we present an LLM-guided search (LLM-GS) framework leveraging
the programming skills and common sense of LLMs and the effectiveness of search algorithms.
(1) To familiarize LLMs with PRL tasks, we devise domain and task-aware prompts that convey
PRL domain knowledge to LLMs while avoiding leaking task-solving information. (2) To mitigate
the gap between general-purpose programming languages and DSLs, we design a Pythonic-DSL
strategy that allows LLMs to generate more precise and grammatically correct DSL programs by first
producing Python programs. (3) To further optimize the LLM-generated programs, we propose a
search algorithm, Scheduled Hill Climbing (Scheduled HC), to efficiently improve programs.
We compare our proposed LLM-GS framework in the Karel domain to various existing PRL meth-
ods (Trivedi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Carvalho et al., 2024). The experimental results demonstrate
that LLM-GS is significantly more effective and efficient than the existing methods. Extensive
ablation studies show that (1) our proposed Pythonic-DSL strategy leads to a higher ratio of ex-
ecutable (i.e. grammatically correct) programs and a higher average return compared to directly
generating DSL programs, (2) our proposed search method, Scheduled HC, achieves the best effi-
ciency among existing search algorithms, (3) initializing the search population of Scheduled HC
using LLM-generated programs is significantly more efficient than randomly sampled programs. To
evaluate whether LLM-GS is useful to users without knowledge of the Karel domain and DSL, we
additionally design two novel tasks and only provide LLM-GS with task descriptions while fixing the
domain and DSL prompts. The experiment results show that LLM-GS still achieves significantly
improved sample efficiency, highlighting the extensibility of our proposed framework.


2    R ELATED WORK

Programmatic reinforcement learning (PRL). PRL represents RL policies using more structured
and potentially more interpretable and generalizable representations, such as decision tree (Bastani
et al., 2018), state machine (Inala et al., 2020; Koul et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2024), symbolic expres-
sion (Verma et al., 2018; 2019; Bhupatiraju et al., 2018; Landajuela et al., 2021), Logic programming
language (Jiang and Luo, 2019), and program written in domain-specific language (DSL) (Andre and
Russell, 2001; Silver et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2019; Qiu and Zhu, 2022; Moraes and
Lelis, 2024; Mariño et al., 2021; Trivedi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Carvalho et al., 2024). Trivedi
et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2023) devised PRL tasks in the Karel domain (Pattis, 1981) and proposed
learning embedding spaces of programs using variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling, 2014)
and then optimizing program embeddings using cross-entropy method or RL. Carvalho et al. (2024)
achieve the state-of-the-art results in the Karel domain (Pattis, 1981) by searching in a programmatic


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       Goal: Find the key   Goal: Put a marker
      Program ρ := DEF run m( s m)                                                                                 Task completed
                                                                        to open the door    at the goal location
    Repetition n := 0..19
    Perception h := frontIsClear | leftIsClear | rightIsClear |
                 markersPresent | noMarkersPresent
     Condition b := perception h | not perception h
        Action a := move | turnLeft | turnRight |
                 putMarker | pickMarker
     Statement s := WHILE c( b c) w( s w) | s1 s2 | a |
                                                                      Figure 2: An example Karel task – D OOR K EY.
                 REPEAT R=n r( s r) | IF c( b c) i( s i) |            The agent first needs to find the key (marker) in the
                 IFELSE c( b c) i( s1 i) ELSE e( s2 e)                left room, which will open the door (wall) to the right
                                                                      room. Navigating to the goal marker in the right room
                                                                      and placing the picked marker on it will grant the full
Figure 1: The Karel DSL grammar. It describes the                     reward for the task. This sparse-reward task has been
Karel domain-specific language’s actions, perceptions,                found to pose significant challenges to previous PRL
and control flows. The domain-specific language is                    methods, as it necessitates a greater capability in long-
obtained from Liu et al. (2023).                                      horizon strategy formulation.


space of AST structure. Despite the encouraging results and the generality of these methods, they
are notoriously inefficient, requiring tens of millions of program executions to obtain task-solving
programs. In this work, to devise an efficient PRL framework, we leverage the knowledge and the
reasoning ability of LLMs to generate a set of initial programs to bootstrap search algorithms.
Large language models for code generation. With a remarkable ability to understand and gen-
erate natural languages and codes, LLMs have been widely adopted for code generation (Brown
et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023; Nijkamp et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022; Roziere et al., 2023). These
works target general-purpose programming languages for software development, e.g. Python and
C++, with abundant data on the internet; in contrast, we aim to solve PRL tasks that require writing
programs in given domain-specific languages. Prior works exploring using LLMs to synthesize DSL
programs via providing LLMs with DSL grammars and few-shot examples, hindsight relabeling, and
prioritized experience replay (Wang et al., 2023a; Grand et al., 2024; Butt et al., 2024). While they
focus on string/array transformations and abstract reasoning (Chollet, 2019), we leverage LLMs to
synthesize DSL program policies to be executed in an RL environment and maximize the return.
Search-based program synthesis. Various search algorithms have been developed for program-
by-example (PBE) (Gulwani, 2011; Feser et al., 2015; Polozov and Gulwani, 2015; Gulwani
et al., 2017; Parisotto et al., 2017; Balog et al., 2017), whose goal is to find programs that sat-
isfy given examples, e.g. input/output string pairs. Recent works have explored utilizing search
algorithms in DSL to learn libraries (Ellis et al., 2021; Grand et al., 2024). In the regime of pro-
grammatic RL, Carvalho et al. (2024) recently applied the Hill Climbing algorithm to the Karel
benchmark, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Instead of randomly sampling programs via
search algorithms, we present a framework that integrates knowledge from an LLM with a search
algorithm to significantly improve the sample efficiency.
An extended discussion on related work can be found in Appendix A.


3    P RELIMINARY

The Karel domain. We first review the Karel domain, the de facto test bed for programmatic
reinforcement learning research (Bunel et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Shin et al., 2018; Gupta
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). The Karel domain-specific language illustrated in Figure 1 is a robot
programming language to control the Karel agent in a 2D grid world. The agent’s actions include
moving as well as interacting with the environment by picking up and putting down objects (markers).
The perceptions check for obstacles and markers, which allows observing the environment. Lastly,
control flows, e.g., REPEAT, WHILE, IF, and IFELSE, enable describing complex decision-making
logics. More details of the DSL can be found in Appendix B.
We illustrate a Karel task, D OOR K EY, in Figure 2. The agent needs to explore the left room using the
DSL actions such as move and turnLeft as well as the perceptions such as frontIsClear and
markersPresent to find the key (marker). After picking up the key via pickMarker, the wall


                                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Task-Aware Prompt                                    LLM                        Current Candidate Program          Neighbouring Programs            Environment    Scheduled Iteration
                                                                                                 DEF run m(                       DEF run m(                                        Iteration 1
    Task name: DOORKEY                                                                              IF c( frontIsClear c)            IF c( frontIsClear c)
                                                                                                       i( move i)                       i( move i)
    Task map: The map is a 8x8 grid surrounded                                                      pickMarker m)                    putMarker m)
    by walls that is vertically split into two …
    Task agent position: The agent starts on a
    random cell on the left chamber facing east.                   Python Program                                                 DEF run m(
                                                                                                                                     IF c( markersPresent c)
    Task goal: Pick up a marker on the left                          def run():                                                         i( move i)
    chamber, which open a door connecting both                          if frontIsClear():                                           pickMarker m)
                                                                           move()
    chamber …
                                                                                                                                                                                    Iteration 2
                                                                        pickMarker()


                                                                                                                  Search          DEF run m(
                                                                                                                                                                       Execution
    Pythonic-DSL Instruction Prompt
                                                                                                                                     IF c( frontIsClear c)

                                                                           Parser                                 Center                i( turnLeft i)
                                                                                                                                     pickMarker m)                      Results
    frontIsClear( ) is a perception that return True
    there is no wall in front of the agent …
    move( ) is an action that ask agent to move                                                        Search                                           Return
    forward one cell …
                                                                                                       Region
    Convert Pythonic code into Karel DSL by
                                                           DSL Program                                                                                                              Iteration n
    following constraints:                                                                                        Programmatic Space
    1. Do not de ne functions except run() …           DEF run m(
                                                          IF c(frontIsClear c)
                                                                                                                                                                        Hill
    2. Do not de ne variable                                 i( move i)
                                                                                                                                                                     Climbing
                                                          pickMarker m)
                                                                                                                Update Candidate Program

        fi
             (a) Generating DSL Program with LLM                                                                            (b) Search with Scheduled Hill Climbing

Figure 3: Large language model-guided search (LLM-GS). (a) With task description and the
Pythonic-DSL instruction, LLM generates Python programs that are subsequently converted to DSL
programs. (b) These initial programs serve as the initial population of our proposed Scheduled Hill
Climbing, which evaluates the episodic return of the neighboring programs to update the current
candidate program with increasing neighborhood size over search steps.


to the right room will unblock. The agent then needs to place a marker on the goal marker located in
the right room to receive a full task reward. Appendix C presents all the Karel tasks in detail.
The state-of-the-art performance in Karel is achieved by iteratively searching for improved programs
according to their episodic return using search algorithms (Carvalho et al., 2024). Next, we introduce
the concept of search space, which defines how search algorithms find neighbor programs from a set
of current candidates for improved performance, and then dive into the search algorithm details.
Programmatic space. In the programmatic space, a program P can be represented as an abstract
syntax tree (AST), where each leaf node in the AST represents a program token (Carvalho et al., 2024).
To obtain its neighborhood program, a node is sampled from its AST, and then replaced by a subtree
randomly generated using the DSL’s production rules and sampling strategies.
Hill climbing (HC). This search algorithm climbs whenever there is a higher place, i.e., moves
to a program having a higher episodic return. Given a program, HC generates its k neighborhood
programs from the search space. These programs are evaluated in the environment. If one of them
has a higher episodic return than the initial program, it is set as the search center program, and then
this process repeats. Otherwise, the algorithm halts and returns the best program evaluated. This
search algorithm has a major weakness – it searches surrounding programs in narrow proximity; thus,
the distance between initial programs and optimal programs could upper-bound its sample efficiency.

4            L ARGE LANGUAGE MODEL GUIDED SEARCH
The hill climbing algorithm (HC) is the state-of-the-art programmatic reinforcement learning (PRL)
approach in Karel, at the cost of tens of millions of program interactions (Carvalho et al., 2024).
This prevents its application to real-world decision-making problems, where program-environment
interaction at this scale is inapplicable. Hence, we aim to maintain the high episodic return while
reducing programs executed in the environments, i.e., improves the sample efficiency of PRL. To
this end, our key insight is to utilize a large language model (LLM), hypothesizing that its abundant
world knowledge, including programming skills and common sense, may bootstrap the inherently
assumption-less, random-guessing HC. However, to implement this idea, many challenges rooted in
the environment’s domain gap (Section 4.1), DSL’s language barrier (Section 4.2), and the inability
to optimize closed-source LLMs (Section 4.3) must be addressed. Figure 3 presents an overview of
our proposed framework, large language model-guided search (LLM-GS).

4.1          D OMAIN AND TASK - AWARE PROMPTING

An inexperienced LLM user might directly ask an LLM: “Write a program to solve the Karel task
D OOR K EY,” since this is how typical users interact with LLM-based software development assistants.
Obviously, repeating this until the LLM spits out a correct program is unlikely to be more efficient


                                                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Activate LLM’s domain and task awareness. To bridge the domain gap between the target
task and the LLM’s knowledge, we curate a scaffolding prompt to alleviate the knowledge gap and
activate the task-solving ability without explicitly dictating the specific programming approach or
implementation. Take the task D OOR K EY as an example, the user writes down the task name, goal,
and some detailed information like map and initial position. Users can easily follow the categories in
the prompt to write the task description. The LLM is encouraged to solve the specified task with its
programming skills and common sense. More details of the prompts can be found in Appendix D.
 Knowledge          Prompt Text
 Task Name          D OOR K EY
 Map                The map is a 8 × 8 grid surrounded by walls that is vertically split into two chambers.
 Description        The left chamber is 6 × 3 grid and the right chamber is 6 × 2 grid. There is a marker
                    placed randomly on the left chamber as a key, and another marker placed randomly on
                    the right chamber as a goal.
 Initial Position   The agent starts on a random cell on the left chamber facing east.
 Task Goal          The goal of the agent is to pick up a marker on the left chamber, which opens a door
                    connecting both chambers. Allow the agent to reach and put a marker on the goal marker.



than existing search algorithms. There are two major challenges that exist: (1) the LLM lacks the
dynamic environmental concepts inherent to the Karel domain, and (2) the LLM does not have
background knowledge of the specific PRL task D OOR K EY. Therefore, it is crucial to provide a
detailed description of the task and environment in natural language so the LLM can make informed
assumptions based on its learned common sense.
To address this, we devise a prompting strategy that converts the task description and the task-agnostic
environment knowledge into natural language sentences that LLMs can process and reason. The
task-agnostic environment knowledge prompt introduces the basic mechanics of interacting with this
environment to the model, setting the stage for more specific programming tasks within the Karel
framework, detailed in Appendix D.1. Table 1 provides an example of a user prompt for the Karel
task D OOR K EY. Now that the LLM has acquired basic knowledge of the Karel domain and the task,
we can further instruct it to leverage its programming skills, algorithmic knowledge, and long-term
planning abilities to generate programs that solve tasks. Note that given this domain-aware prompt,
given any novel task within the same domain, even a user without any programming skills can simply
describe the task in natural language to obtain a performant program, as shown in Section 5.4.

4.2   G ENERATING DSL PROGRAMS WITH P YTHONIC -DSL STRATEGY

Given LLMs’ widespread success in assisting software development, one might assume an LLM
can naively generate DSL programs. Yet, precisely generating DSL programs turns out to be quite
challenging for LLMs – their training data typically consists of natural language corpus and general-
purpose programming language codes, thus specific DSLs used in PRL tasks are actually quite exotic
for them. Note that this language barrier is beyond lexical syntax differences. For example, the
DSL may specify rules that limit the usage of temporary variables constrained by the actual robotic
hardware, which is rarely a concern for common Python / JavaScript code found on the internet.
Despite the issue, we still hope to leverage the best of LLM’s programming skills, algorithmic
knowledge, and long-term planning abilities to synthesize DSL programs. To this end, we derive a
solution from the following assumptions: (1) The LLM is proficient in a general-purpose programming
language, such as Python, (2) The DSL can be represented by a possibly restricted version of the
general-purpose programming language, and (3) The LLM understands the restriction in natural
language, if any. Our Pythonic-DSL strategy instructs the LLM to generate Python programs instead,
given the Karel rules and constraints we wrote in English, and then later convert it into the Karel
DSL. As shown in Table 2, DSL details are provided, including the action, perception, primitives and
language constraints. Thus, the LLM can generate programs based on its innate general programming
skills and its understanding of the DSL description. One caveat is that the LLM still occasionally
generates Python programs that cause Python-to-DSL parsing failures. An empirical useful mitigation
is instructing the LLM to generate the DSL program converted from its own output Python program


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: The Pythonic-DSL instruction. The Karel DSL is specified via a constrained version
of Python with pre-defined functions, including Pythonic-DSL perceptions that allow the agent to
observe, and Pythonic-DSL actions that enable the agent to interact. This Pythonic-DSL description
is fed into the LLM via the system prompt so that it can generate Python code that can later be
converted into Karel DSL. We will show that this approach outperforms the direct generation of DSL
or Python programs in Table 3. The full prompt is presented in Appendix D.1.
 Knowledge                  Prompt Text
 Pythonic-DSL               frontIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall in front of the agent.
 Perceptions                markersPresent(): Returns True if there exist markers on the current cell.
                            ... (more perceptions omitted)
 Pythonic-DSL               move(): Asks the agent to move forward one cell ... (truncated)
 Actions                    turnLeft(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees counter-clockwise.
                            pickMarker(): Asks the agent to pick up one marker from the current cell.
                            ... (more actions omitted)
 Language Constraints       - do not define other functions besides run()
                            - do not define variables
                            ... (more rules omitted)



as a backup. At this point, we have developed the mechanism to instruct an LLM to generate DSL
programs given the PRL task and the DSL grammar in natural language.

4.3   O PTIMIZING THE PROGRAM POLICY WITH SCHEDULED HILL CLIMBING

Although the aforementioned techniques can already instruct the LLM to produce DSL programs that
solve the target task to a certain degree, the episodic return can still be far from optimal. Since best-in-
class LLMs are typically proprietary APIs, directly and iteratively fine-tuning them via gradient-based
policy optimization methods is not possible. To further optimize the program generated by the LLM,
we explore initializing search populations of search algorithms using LLM-generated programs. Via
extensive experiments with the HC, CEM, and CEBS search algorithms on both program space and
latent space whenever applicable, we discover a key improvement that is crucial when initializing
search from LLM-generated programs – program-environment interaction scheduling for a more
efficient allocation of the interaction budget. The intuition is that LLMs can often provide good
initialization and therefore it makes sense to keep a small search budget, i.e. with a smaller population.
After a while, if an optimal program is not yet found, we can gradually increase the budget and
facilitate broader exploration. We design a scheduler based on this intuition:
                        log2 k(n) = (1 − r(n)) log2 Kstart + r(n) log2 Kend ,                           (1)
where n represents the number of evaluated programs, k(n) denotes a function indicating the current
number of neighborhood programs based on the number of evaluated programs n. This function’s
logarithm is a linear combination of the logarithms of two hyperparameters, Kstart and Kend , which
signify the initial and terminal numbers of neighbors to search, respectively. The variable r(n)
governs the linear ratio, which itself is a sinusoidal function that gradually increases from 0 to 1
throughout the evaluation of a total of N programs (see Appendix E). With this scheduler, the number
of neighbors k is a function of the execution budget used, growing from Kstart to Kend on an
exponential basis. We apply this scheduler to Hill Climbing and call this method Scheduled Hill
Climbing (Scheduled HC).
Overall, our best recipe consists of the following steps. First, we sample DSL programs for the
LLM using the aforementioned techniques. Next, these programs are evaluated in the environment
for the episodic return. In some easy tasks, some generated programs might have achieved perfect
returns and thus are optimal programs. If no optimal program is found, we sort the programs based
on the total reward decreasingly. Next, programs are selected from the sorted list, each serves as an
initial program for the HC search, which is the best-performing search algorithm from our extensive
experiments. HC searches k neighbors at each step following the scheduler in Eq. (1). This process is
repeated until either the optimal program is found or we meet the maximum program-environment
interaction budget allowed (N ).


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               LEAPS    HPRL      CEBS     HC    LLM-GS (Ours)


    (a) S TAIR C LIMBER           (b) M AZE              (c) F OUR C ORNERS          (d) T OP O FF


      (e) H ARVESTER          (f) C LEAN H OUSE            (g) D OOR K EY          (h) O NE S TROKE

                                                         Figure 4: Efficiency in the Karel tasks. We
                                                         compare our proposed LLM-guided search
                                                         (LLM-GS) framework against existing meth-
                                                         ods, LEAPS, HPRL, CEBS, and HC in the
                                                         Karel and Karel-Hard problem sets. The re-
                                                         sults show that our LLM-GS is significantly
        (i) S EEDER              (j) S NAKE              more efficient than these methods.



5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1    E VALUATION SETUP

PRL tasks. We evaluate our proposed framework LLM-guided search (LLM-GS) using the
Karel tasks from the two problem sets: Karel (Trivedi et al., 2021) (S TAIR C LIMBER, M AZE,
F OUR C ORNERS, T OP O FF, H ARVESTER, and C LEAN H OUSE) and Karel-Hard (Liu et al., 2023)
(D OOR K EY, O NE S TROKE, S EEDER, and S NAKE). More task details can be found in Appendix C.
Baselines. We compare our proposed framework with the following methods: LEAPS (Trivedi
et al., 2021), HPRL (Liu et al., 2023), CEBS (Carvalho et al., 2024), and Hill Climbing (Carvalho
et al., 2024) (the current state-of-the-art). Note that LEAPS and CEBS search programs in learned
latent program space, as introduced in Appendix F.
Metrics. For a fair comparison in sample efficiency, we use the number of programs evaluated to
represent the program-environment interaction budget, i.e. a method is more sample-efficient if it
achieves a higher average episodic return on a fixed budget. Specifically, for each task, the number of
task variances is C. Task variances arise from differences in the environment’s initial states. Each
program evaluation means executing the program on all C task variances to obtain an average return.
We set the number of task variances C = 32, the maximum number of program evaluation N = 106 ,
i.e., the interaction budget. Programs achieving an average return of 1.0 are considered optimal.
Setup. We use GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023) (gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09 with temperature=1.0,
top p=1.0) as our LLM module to generate the initial search population. The scheduler of our
proposed Scheduled HC starts from Kstart = 32 to Kend = 2048. We evaluate our LLM-GS and
HC with 32 random seeds and 5 seeds for LEAPS, HPRL, and CEBS.
Data Leakage. When using modern LLMs, a key concern is whether the model has already
memorized the content in the test bed, leading to biased or inflated results. We carefully rule out this
possibility in Appendix G by examining the LLM release dates and the availability of optimal Karel
programs, and by probing the LLM we use.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Update Stage 1
  DEF run m(                                                       ELSE e(                                    DEF run m(
    WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(                                  WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(            WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(
      IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(    ELSE e(                          move                                       IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
        move                            turnLeft               →       move                                         move
      I)                               e)                      +       turnRight                                  I)
      ELSE e(                                                        w)                                           ELSE e(
        ……                                                          e)                                              ……
      e)                                                                                                          e)
    w)                                                                                                          w)
    pickMarker                                                                                                  pickMarker
    turnLeft
    WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(   Update Stage 2                                                            turnLeft
                                                                                                                WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(
      ……                                                                                                          ……
                                      WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(
    w)                                                                                                          w)
                                        IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
    putMarker                                                               WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(     putMarker
                                          move
  m)                                                                          move                            m)
                                        i)                              →
                                                                        +     turnRight
                                        ELSE e(
                                                                              move
                                          turnLeft
                                                                            w)
                                        e)
                                      w)



Figure 5: Example on D OOR K EY. This example shows how our search method improves an
LLM-initialized program to an optimal one. The original program (left) has a two-stage structure but
lacks navigation ability. The improved program (right) solves this by enhancing its navigating ability
on both stages, allowing for solving the task.


5.2    LLM- GUIDED SEARCH SIGNIFICANTLY IMPROVES THE SAMPLE EFFICIENCY

Figure 4 presents the experimental result, indicating that our proposed LLM-GS surpasses all the
existing methods by a large margin on almost all the tasks.
On the Karel set, our framework completely solves these tasks and exhibits the best sample efficiency.
Also, LLM-GS performs extraordinarily well on S EEDER, O NE S TROKE, and D OOR K EY, which
are among the hardest of the Karel-Hard set. We highlight our D OOR K EY result, with an efficiency
improvement from not converging at even 1M (baselines) to converging within around 500K (ours).
Existing PRL algorithms struggle at D OOR K EY due to the fact that it is a two-stage task with a sparse
reward function. Therefore, most of the baselines cannot escape the local maxima and converge
around 0.5. Curiously, our method starts at an episodic return of ≈ 0.5 from the beginning and
converges quickly without being trapped by the local maxima. To analyze, we examine one output
program from LLM shown in Figure 5. The LLM clearly understands that D OOR K EY is a two-stage
task and thus generates a corresponding two-stage structured program, which is much easier for later
search to find the optimal program. The full dialogue is presented in Appendix D.
We include a plot aggregating the performance across all ten tasks in Appendix H, a wall-clock time
(real-time elapsed) evaluation in Appendix I, and a statistical significance test in Appendix J.


5.3    A BLATION STUDIES

Which language to generate, Python or DSL? Do both! To justify the effectiveness of our
proposed Pythonic-DSL strategy, we conduct experiments on generating either Python or DSL
programs with the same 8 seeds and present the results in Table 3. The acceptance rate calculates the
ratio of executable DSL programs, while the best return refers to the highest episodic return among
the legal programs. Our method achieves the highest acceptance rate on 9 / 10 tasks and the highest
best return on 7 / 10 tasks. The complete prompts are presented in Appendix K.
Our proposed Scheduled HC is the most efficient search method. We compare various search
methods in both programmatic and latent spaces in D OOR K EY and C LEAN H OUSE using LLM-
initialized programs. In the learned latent space, we run CEM, CEBS, HC-250 (HC with a fixed
population size of 250), and our proposed Scheduled HC; in the programmatic space, we run HC-
k ∈ {32, 256, 2048} and our proposed Scheduled HC. The results presented in Figure 6 show that HC
in the programmatic space achieves the best performance compared to latent space search. However,
HC-k with a fixed population size only specializes in specific tasks. To be specific, HC-32 for
C LEAN H OUSE and HC-2048 for D OOR K EY. In contrast, our proposed Scheduled HC achieves
comparatively the best performance in both tasks.
LLM provides a better initial search population. To verify the efficacy of using LLM-generated
programs as search initialization for Scheduled HC, we compare it to using randomly sampled
programs as initialization in D OOR K EY and C LEAN H OUSE. The results shown in Figure 7 suggest


                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Pythonic-DSL strategy ablation. We compare the programs generated using our proposed
Pythonic-DSL strategy to directly generated Python or DSL programs. Our method achieves the
highest acceptance rate and best return, justifying the effectiveness of our Pythonic-DSL strategy.
                                  Python                            DSL                      Pythonic-DSL (ours)
      Task
                        Acceptance Rate    Best Return   Acceptance Rate   Best Return   Acceptance Rate   Best Return
      S TAIR C LIMBER    88.02±3.57%       1.00±0.00     45.31±11.59%      0.75±0.65      88.54±4.54%      1.00±0.00
      M AZE              72.40±7.49%       0.94±0.08     57.81±8.12%       0.88±0.07      92.45±3.89%      0.98±0.05
      F OUR C ORNERS     83.07±5.04%       1.00±0.00      93.49±2.43%      1.00±0.00      94.01±2.43%      1.00±0.00
      T OP O FF          90.89±2.07%       0.97±0.07     94.53±4.29%       1.00±0.00      96.35±3.08%      1.00±0.00
      H ARVESTER         67.45±7.51%       0.98±0.03      79.69±7.64%      0.98±0.03      80.21±5.51%      0.95±0.09
      C LEAN H OUSE      62.50±3.45%       0.27±0.28     76.30±6.16%       0.36±0.14      84.64±4.29%      0.29±0.27
      D OOR K EY         90.10±3.86%       0.63±0.13     75.78±15.09%      0.55±0.05      94.53±3.60%      0.63±0.14
      O NE S TROKE       85.42±4.77%       0.77±0.06     85.68±7.54%       0.74±0.09      95.31±3.08%      0.83±0.08
      S EEDER            73.70±4.77%       0.93±0.14     88.28±4.88%       0.66±0.10      74.74±7.10%      0.90±0.14
      S NAKE             87.50±2.76%       0.09±0.00      30.47±9.02%      0.09±0.00      98.96±1.04%      0.09±0.00


       (a) D OOR K EY             (b) C LEAN H OUSE                   (a) D OOR K EY             (b) C LEAN H OUSE

Figure 6: Comparing search algorithms. We Figure 7: Comparing initializations. We com-
compare the proposed Scheduled HC with la- pare initializing the search population using
tent space CEM, CEBS, HC-250, and Sched- LLM-generated programs or randomly sampled
uled HC, and programmatic space HC-k ∈ programs, combined with our proposed SHC.
{32, 256, 2048} using LLM-initialized programs. The results demonstrate that starting from LLM-
Our method achieves comparatively good ef- generated programs significantly improves effi-
ficiency in D OOR K EY and performs best in ciency and performance, especially in D OOR K EY,
C LEAN H OUSE, justifying the efficacy of our pro- highlighting the effectiveness of our proposed
posed search method.                               framework.


that initializing the search with LLM-generated programs significantly improves the sample efficiency
compared to randomly initializing population-like search methods.
Scheduled HC variants. We ablate the components in the scheduled HC, i.e. logarithmic interpola-
tion, sinusoidal schedule, and logarithmic ratio, and present the results in Appendix E.3.

5.4    P ERFORMANCE ON NOVEL TASKS SHOWCASES THE EXTENSIBILITY OF LLM-GS

A key advantage of our proposed LLM-GS framework is its ability to adapt to new tasks using only
text descriptions without requiring users to have any domain knowledge or familiarity with the DSL.
To showcase this feature, we designed two novel Karel tasks, PATH F OLLOW and WALL AVOIDER, as
detailed in Appendix C.3. By simply replacing the task descriptions while keeping the Karel domain
prompt, Python-to-DSL prompt, and hyperparameters the same, we compare our method with the
best-performing baseline, HC. The results presented in Figure 8 show that by only changing task
descriptions, LLM-GS still achieves improved sample efficiency and finds better program policies.

5.5    P ERFORMANCE ON M INIGRID DOMAIN VERIFIES THE ADAPTABILITY OF LLM-GS

To verify if our proposed LLM-GS framework can be adapted to another domain, we adopt three
tasks in the Minigrid domain, L AVAG AP, P UT N EAR, and R ED B LUE D OOR. Unlike the case in Karel,
the perception functions in our Minigrid DSL are parameterized, i.e., require an input parameter such
as an object, as detailed in Appendix L. By adapting all aspects of the prompt from the Karel domain
to the Minigrid version, including the domain prompt, the task descriptions, and the Python-to-DSL


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) PATH F OLLOW      (b) WALL AVOIDER              (a) L AVAG AP            (b) P UT N EAR

Figure 8: Performance of PATH F OLLOW Figure 9: Performance of Minigrid LavaGap
& WALL AVOIDER. With only changing the and PutNear. We compare LLM-GS and the
task descriptions, LLM-GS surpasses the best- best-performing baseline in Karel, i.e. HC, in the
performing baseline HC on two novel tasks, high- Minigrid domain. LLM-GS demonstrates better
lighting the extensibility of LLM-GS.            sample efficiency in both of the two tasks.


prompt, we evaluate our method against the strongest baseline, HC. The results presented in Figure 9
show that our proposed LLM-GS is more sample-efficient in the Minigrid domain.

5.6     B EYOND INITIALIZATION – A PRELIMINARY ATTEMPT ON LLM REVISION

Given the encouraging results from LLM-initialized programs, one might be curious whether LLM
itself without the help of any search algorithms can progressively revise and improve its programs
once given feedback from the environment, e.g., reward. For completeness, we additionally conduct
studies with the following LLM-based revision:

 • Regeneration. Inspired by Chen et al. (2024) and Olausson et al. (2024), we instruct the LLM to
   re-generate non-duplicate programs given its previously generated programs.
 • Regeneration with reward. In addition to the historical program list, the episodic return of each
   program is appended to the LLM’s inputs.
 • Agent execution trace. Inspired by prior arts that leverage environment knowledge (Tang
   et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024) and code repair (Chen et al., 2024; Olausson et al., 2024), we feed
   the program with the best episodic return and its execution traces into the LLM.
 • Agent and program execution trace. Inspired by Hu et al. (2024), we additionally point out the
   line of the program currently being executed as extra hints to the LLM.

We conduct the LLM revision experiments on D OOR K EY
for five revision rounds, each round with 32 programs with
5 seeds. The results are presented in Figure 10. We can
see that the improvement quickly saturates within the first
two rounds, and no significant gain is observed with more
revision rounds. This indicates that only using LLM to revise
the program may not be sufficient to solve the task. On the
other hand, our proposed Scheduled HC can converge to
an optimal program – and is “free,” i.e. no expensive API
calls or “API usage has reached your notification threshold”
emails. The details can be found in Appendix K.
                                                                Figure 10: LLM revision. The perfor-
                                                                mance gain of LLM revision saturates
6     D ISCUSSION                                               within a few program revision rounds.

We propose the LLM-guided search (LLM-GS) that leverages the programming skills and common
sense of LLM to bootstrap the efficiency of assumption-free, random-guessing search methods. We
propose a Pythonic-DSL method to address LLMs’ inability to generate precise and grammatically
correct programs. To improve the programs generated by LLMs, we design a search algorithm,
Scheduled Hill Climbing, which can explore the programmatic search space to consistently improve
the programs. The experimental results show the improved sample efficiency of LLM-GS. Extensive
ablation studies verify the effectiveness of our proposed Pythonic-DSL method and Scheduled Hill
Climbing. The limitations and future directions of LLM-GS are presented in Appendix M.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES

Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
David Andre and Stuart J Russell. Programmable reinforcement learning agents. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2001.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay.
 In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Matej Balog, Alexander L Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Sebastian Nowozin, and Daniel Tarlow.
 Deepcoder: Learning to write programs. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2017.
Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy
  extraction. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Surya Bhupatiraju, Kumar Krishna Agrawal, and Rishabh Singh. Towards mixed optimization for
  reinforcement learning with program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.00403, 2018.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Rudy R Bunel, Matthew Hausknecht, Jacob Devlin, Rishabh Singh, and Pushmeet Kohli. Leveraging
  grammar and reinforcement learning for neural program synthesis. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.
Natasha Butt, Blazej Manczak, Auke Wiggers, Corrado Rainone, David Zhang, Michaël Defferrard,
  and Taco Cohen. Codeit: Self-improving language models with prioritized hindsight replay. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Tales Henrique Carvalho, Kenneth Tjhia, and Levi Lelis. Reclaiming the source of programmatic poli-
  cies: Programmatic versus latent spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Xiaocong Chen, Lina Yao, Julian McAuley, Guanglin Zhou, and Xianzhi Wang. Deep reinforcement
  learning in recommender systems: A survey and new perspectives. Knowledge-based systems, 264:
  110335, 3 2023.
Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Execution-guided neural program synthesis. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Xinyun Chen, Dawn Song, and Yuandong Tian. Latent execution for neural program synthesis
  beyond domain-specific languages. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, Lucas Willems, Salem
 Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld: Modular &
 customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. In Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2023.
François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Christopher Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying
  generalization in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Quentin Delfosse, Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Interpretable and
  explainable logical policies via neurally guided symbolic abstraction. In Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2024.
Aditya Desai, Sumit Gulwani, Vineet Hingorani, Nidhi Jain, Amey Karkare, Mark Marron, Subhajit
  Roy, et al. Program synthesis using natural language. In International Conference on Software
  Engineering, 2016.
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608, 2017.
Manuel Eberhardinger, Johannes Maucher, and Setareh Maghsudi. Learning of generalizable and
 interpretable knowledge in grid-based reinforcement learning environments. In Proceedings of the
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, 2023.
Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Lucas Morales, Luke Hewitt, Luc
  Cary, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Dreamcoder: Bootstrapping inductive
  program synthesis with wake-sleep library learning. In Proceedings of the 42nd acm sigplan
  international conference on programming language design and implementation, 2021.
John K Feser, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Isil Dillig. Synthesizing data structure transformations from
  input-output examples. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 50(6), 2015.
Daniel Furelos-Blanco, Mark Law, Anders Jonsson, Krysia Broda, and Alessandra Russo. Hierarchies
  of reward machines. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Gabriel Grand, Lionel Wong, Matthew Bowers, Theo X. Olausson, Muxin Liu, Joshua B. Tenenbaum,
  and Jacob Andreas. LILO: Learning interpretable libraries by compressing and documenting code.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Lin Guan, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Leveraging approximate symbolic models
  for reinforcement learning via skill diversity. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2022.
Sumit Gulwani. Automating string processing in spreadsheets using input-output examples. ACM
  Sigplan Notices, 46(1), 2011.
Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, et al. Program synthesis. Foundations and
  Trends® in Programming Languages, 4(1-2):1–119, 2017.
Kavi Gupta, Peter Ebert Christensen, Xinyun Chen, and Dawn Song. Synthesize, execute and debug:
  Learning to repair for neural program synthesis. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Alexandre Heuillet, Fabien Couthouis, and Natalia Dı́az-Rodrı́guez. Explainability in deep reinforce-
  ment learning. Knowledge-based systems, 214, 2021.
Xueyu Hu, Kun Kuang, Jiankai Sun, Hongxia Yang, and Fei Wu. Leveraging print debugging to
  improve code generation in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05319, 2024.
Jeevana Priya Inala, Osbert Bastani, Zenna Tavares, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Synthesizing
  programmatic policies that inductively generalize. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.
Vidhi Jain, Maria Attarian, Nikhil J Joshi, Ayzaan Wahid, Danny Driess, Quan Vuong, Pannag R
  Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Stefan Welker, Christine Chan, et al. Vid2robot: End-to-end video-
  conditioned policy learning with cross-attention transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12943,
  2024.
Adam Jelley, Amos Storkey, Antreas Antoniou, and Sam Devlin. Contrastive meta-learning for
  partially observable few-shot learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhengyao Jiang and Shan Luo. Neural logic reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2019.
Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Piotr Milos, Blazej Osinski, Roy H Campbell, Konrad
  Czechowski, Dumitru Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Piotr Kozakowski, Sergey Levine, et al. Model-based
  reinforcement learning for atari. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.00374, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2014.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of zero-shot
  generalisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:
  201–264, 2023.
Hector Kohler, Quentin Delfosse, Riad Akrour, Kristian Kersting, and Philippe Preux. Inter-
  pretable and editable programmatic tree policies for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.14956, 2024.
Anurag Koul, Alan Fern, and Sam Greydanus. Learning finite state representations of recurrent policy
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Mikel Landajuela, Brenden K Petersen, Sookyung Kim, Claudio P Santiago, Ruben Glatt, Nathan
 Mundhenk, Jacob F Pettit, and Daniel Faissol. Discovering symbolic policies with deep reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Chu Hong Hoi. Coderl:
  Mastering code generation through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Xi Victoria Lin, Chenglong Wang, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Michael D Ernst. Nl2bash: A corpus
  and semantic parser for natural language interface to the linux operating system. In International
  Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, 2018.
Yu-An Lin, Chen-Tao Lee, Chih-Han Yang, Guan-Ting Liu, and Shao-Hua Sun. Hierarchical
  programmatic option framework. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Guan-Ting Liu, En-Pei Hu, Pu-Jen Cheng, Hung-Yi Lee, and Shao-Hua Sun. Hierarchical program-
  matic reinforcement learning via learning to compose programs. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, 2023.
Julian R. H. Mariño, Rubens O. Moraes, Tassiana C. Oliveira, Claudio Toledo, and Levi H. S. Lelis.
  Programmatic strategies for real-time strategy games. In Association for the Advancement of
  Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra,
  Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 2015.
Rubens O Moraes and Levi HS Lelis. Searching for programmatic policies in semantic spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.05431, 2024.
Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
  and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program
  synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Theo X. Olausson, Jeevana Priya Inala, Chenglong Wang, Jianfeng Gao, and Armando Solar-Lezama.
  Is self-repair a silver bullet for code generation? In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Emilio Parisotto, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Rishabh Singh, Lihong Li, Dengyong Zhou, and Pushmeet
  Kohli. Neuro-symbolic program synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2017.
Richard E Pattis. Karel the robot: a gentle introduction to the art of programming. John Wiley &
  Sons, Inc., 1981.
Oleksandr Polozov and Sumit Gulwani. Flashmeta: A framework for inductive program synthe-
  sis. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented
  Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, 2015.
Wenjie Qiu and He Zhu. Programmatic reinforcement learning without oracles. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Mohammad Raza, Sumit Gulwani, and Natasa Milic-Frayling. Compositional program synthesis
 from natural language and examples. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 2015.
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Reuven Y Rubinstein and Dirk P Kroese. The cross-entropy method: a unified approach to com-
  binatorial optimization, Monte-Carlo simulation, and machine learning, volume 133. Springer,
  2004.
Eui Chul Shin, Illia Polosukhin, and Dawn Song. Improving neural program synthesis with inferred
  execution traces. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 2016.
Tom Silver, Kelsey R Allen, Alex K Lew, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Josh Tenenbaum. Few-shot
  bayesian imitation learning with logical program policies. In Association for the Advancement of
  Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
STUDENT. The probable error of a mean. Biometrika, 6(1):1–25, 03 1908. ISSN 0006-3444.
Shao-Hua Sun, Hyeonwoo Noh, Sriram Somasundaram, and Joseph Lim. Neural program synthesis
  from diverse demonstration videos. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Shao-Hua Sun, Te-Lin Wu, and Joseph J. Lim. Program guided agent. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Richard S Sutton. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. A Bradford Book, 2018.
Hao Tang, Darren Key, and Kevin Ellis. Worldcoder, a model-based llm agent: Building world
  models by writing code and interacting with the environment. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2024.
Ross Taylor, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom, Anthony Hartshorn, Elvis Saravia,
  Andrew Poulton, Viktor Kerkez, and Robert Stojnic. Galactica: A large language model for science.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09085, 2022.
Dweep Trivedi, Jesse Zhang, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joseph J Lim. Learning to synthesize programs as
 interpretable and generalizable policies. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Abhinav Verma, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri.
  Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, 2018.
Abhinav Verma, Hoang Le, Yisong Yue, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Imitation-projected programmatic
  reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bailin Wang, Zi Wang, Xuezhi Wang, Yuan Cao, Rif A. Saurous, and Yoon Kim. Grammar prompting
  for domain-specific language generation with large language models. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023a.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
 Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
Letian Wang, Jie Liu, Hao Shao, Wenshuo Wang, Ruobing Chen, Yu Liu, and Steven L Waslander.
  Efficient reinforcement learning for autonomous driving with parameterized skills and priors. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.04412, 2023b.
Sida I Wang, Samuel Ginn, Percy Liang, and Christoper D Manning. Naturalizing a programming
  language via interactive learning. In Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Marco A Wiering and Hado Van Hasselt. Ensemble algorithms in reinforcement learning. IEEE
 Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), 2008.
Antonia Wüst, Wolfgang Stammer, Quentin Delfosse, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting.
  Pix2code: Learning to compose neural visual concepts as programs. In The 40th Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
Frank F Xu, Uri Alon, Graham Neubig, and Vincent Josua Hellendoorn. A systematic evaluation of
  large language models of code. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium
  on Machine Programming, 2022.
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in large language models.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Linghan Zhong, Ryan Lindeborg, Jesse Zhang, Joseph J Lim, and Shao-Hua Sun. Hierarchical neural
  program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06018, 2023.
He Zhu, Zikang Xiong, Stephen Magill, and Suresh Jagannathan. An inductive synthesis framework
  for verifiable reinforcement learning. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language
  Design and Implementation, 2019.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

Table of Contents
     A Extended Related work                                                                       17

     B Karel DSL details                                                                           17

     C Karel tasks                                                                                 18
       C.1 Karel tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
       C.2 Karel-Hard tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22
       C.3 New Karel tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23

     D An example pipeline of our method                                                           24
       D.1 The system prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
       D.2 The user prompt of the task D OOR K EY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      26
       D.3 The sample response of LLM in the task D OOR K EY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         26
       D.4 Apply post-processing and retrieve the LLM-initialized programs . . . . . . . .         27

     E Scheduled Hill Climbing detail                                                              28
       E.1 Design intuition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29
       E.2 Variants of Scheduled Hill Climbing components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29
       E.3 Ablation study results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29

     F Baselines and their hyperparameters                                                         30
       F.1 Latent space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    30
       F.2 LEAPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
       F.3 Hierarchical programmatic reinforcement learning (HPRL) . . . . . . . . . . . .         31
       F.4 Cross-entropy beam search (CEBS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31
       F.5 Hill climbing (HC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      32

     G Data Leakage                                                                                32

     H Aggregated performance across all tasks                                                     33

     I   Wall-clock time evaluation on task D OOR K EY                                             35

     J   Statistical test between LLM-GS and HC                                                    35

     K LLM prompts for ablations and revision                                                      36
       K.1 Pythonic-DSL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      36
       K.2 Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
       K.3 DSL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     40
       K.4 Regenerate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    41
       K.5 Regenerate with reward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      42
       K.6 Agent execution trace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     44
       K.7 Agent and Program execution trace. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      46

     L Minigrid Environment                                                                        50
       L.1 MiniGrid DSL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      50
       L.2 Minigrid tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    50
       L.3 Minigrid domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     53
       L.4 Minigrid prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      53

     M Limitation                                                                                  56



                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    E XTENDED R ELATED WORK

Sample efficiency in programmatic reinforcement learning . While deep reinforcement learning
has achieved tremendous success in various domains (Silver et al., 2016; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023), it still suffers from sample inefficiency prob-
lems. Many methods make their effort to improve sample efficiency including modeling transition
model (Kaiser et al., 2019), replay buffer (Mnih et al., 2015), hindsight relabeling (Andrychowicz
et al., 2017), ensembling (Wiering and Van Hasselt, 2008), and importance sampling (Sutton, 2018).
Likewise, this is also the case for programmatic reinforcement learning (PRL) algorithms. The
SOTA algorithm, Hill Climbing (HC), still needs to generate thousands to millions of programs
to achieve optimal policies. In this work, we utilize the information on Karel’s tasks and LLM
programming skills to initiate the search population of our proposed Scheduled HC to improve the
sample efficiency. Incorporating other sample efficiency-improving methods into PRL algorithms is
a promising research direction, but is orthogonal to our contribution.
Large language models and search-based program synthesis. Various search algorithms have
been developed for program-by-example (PBE) (Gulwani, 2011; Feser et al., 2015; Polozov and
Gulwani, 2015; Gulwani et al., 2017; Parisotto et al., 2017; Balog et al., 2017), whose goal is to find
programs that satisfy given examples, e.g., input/output string pairs. Recent works have explored
utilizing search algorithms in DSL to learn libraries (Ellis et al., 2021; Grand et al., 2024; Eber-
hardinger et al., 2023; Wüst et al., 2024) for PBE, imitating policies (Bastani et al., 2018; Kohler
et al., 2024), and object representations (Wüst et al., 2024). Neural program synthesis methods (Lin
et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2018; Desai et al., 2016; Raza et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017; Zhong
et al., 2023; Le et al., 2022; Parisotto et al., 2017; Balog et al., 2017) learn neural networks from data
to synthesize programs intended by users. Grand et al. (2024); Eberhardinger et al. (2023) show that
LLMs can bootstrap program synthesis in the wake stage of library learning; it is an open question
whether the LLM can bootstrap the sleep stages. We utilize the description of the Karel tasks to
bootstrap our scheduled HC. Additional information may be crucial for LLM assist bootstrapping and
fine-tuning. This additional information may come from the execution (Chen et al., 2024), prompt
design (Wang et al., 2023a; Wei et al., 2022; Wüst et al., 2024; Grand et al., 2024), and the task
description in our work.
More on search methods and structured policy representations. There are several different search
methods developed for programming by example (PBE) (Gulwani, 2011; Feser et al., 2015; Polozov
and Gulwani, 2015; Gulwani et al., 2017; Parisotto et al., 2017; Balog et al., 2017) or DSLs with
learned libraries (Ellis et al., 2021; Grand et al., 2024; Eberhardinger et al., 2023; Wüst et al., 2024)
for PBE, imitating policies (Bastani et al., 2018; Kohler et al., 2024), and object representations (Wüst
et al., 2024). Recent studies explore different representations for Reinforcement Learning policies
toward interpretable and/or explainable. Together with various structured policy representations
such as DSL programs (Andre and Russell, 2001; Verma et al., 2018; Silver et al., 2020), decision
trees (Bastani et al., 2018; Kohler et al., 2024), state machines (Lin et al., 2024), and symbolic
programs (Jiang and Luo, 2019; Qiu and Zhu, 2022; Delfosse et al., 2024). Our method has the
greatest bootstrapping ability for DSL programs but is difficult to extend to all kinds of representations.
We designed our prompt by contrasting the policy representation (Karel DSL) with Python. As a
result, our prompt in Appendix D.1 limits some of the functionalities of Python. We believe our
framework is only suitable for tasks with task-solving procedures that could be described using
languages. That said, it could be difficult to apply this framework to low-level control tasks, such as
motor torque control (Qiu and Zhu, 2022).


B    K AREL DSL DETAILS

In our framework, we ask the LLM to write the program in Python and then translate it into DSL,
all in one response. We include a sample output from the LLM in Appendix D.3. To translate the
responded program to an abstract syntax tree (AST), we use an off-the-shelf Karel parser which can
convert a string in DSL into an AST. We implement a translator to convert a Python program into
Karel DSL. We list common mistakes LLM made in Table 6 and how we solve these problems.
There are 5 symbols in the Karel DSL: statement, condition, action, boolean, and number. The
production rules and Python converting rules are listed in Table 4. The statement counts are the total


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


statements connected to the root node of the abstract syntax tree (AST), and the statement counts are
limited to 6 in search of optimal programs. The program length is the total number of tokens used in
string representation and is set to 44. The depth in DSL is the recursive call of control flows, which is
limited to 4. These limitations are the same as the original settings in LEAPS (Trivedi et al., 2021).
The probabilities of the production rules are listed in Table 5. The mutation process selects one
random node in the AST. We use the production rules to sample a sub-tree to replace the original
node. The Karel syntax has many symbol-related parentheses, e.g., “i(” and “i)” which are related to
the “IF” and “IFELSE”, thus LLM sometimes makes mistakes translating Python to DSL.


                                Table 4: Python to DSL converting rules.

                      Python                   DSL
                      def run(): s             DEF run m( s m)
                      while b: s               WHILE c( b c) w( s w)
                      if b: s                  IF c( b c) i( s i)
                      if b: s else: s          IFELSE c( b c) i( s i) ELSE e( s e)
                      for i in range(n): s     REPEAT R=n r( s r)
                      not h                    not c( h c)
                      frontIsClear()           frontIsClear
                      leftIsClear()            leftIsClear
                      rightIsClear()           rightIsClear
                      markersPresent()         markersPresent
                      noMarkersPresent()       noMarkersPresent
                      move()                   move
                      turnLeft()               turnLeft
                      turnRight()              turnRight
                      putMarker()              putMarker
                      pickMarker()             pickMarker


C    K AREL TASKS


We give the large language model 5 pieces of information related to the tasks: task name, map
description, initial Position, task goal, and task return. By converting the original task description into
these 5 categories, this design allows the user to easily fill in all categories for new tasks. Here we list
all the information pieces for these tasks. Appendix K.1.2 shows how these 5 different components
are filled into the placeholders in the user prompt. Appendix D.2 show all filled results with the task
D OOR K EY. There are three sets of tasks: Karel (Trivedi et al., 2021), Karel-Hard (Liu et al., 2023),
and new Karel tasks. Appendix C.1 lists all 6 Karel tasks, Appendix C.2 lists all 4 Karel-Hard tasks,
and Appendix C.3 lists the 2 new tasks. Example figures of Karel tasks are in Figure 11, Karel-Hard
tasks are in Figure 12 and new Karel tasks are in Figure 13.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 5: Probabilities of the production rules.

                        Category         Rule                 Probability
                        Program P        Statement            1.0
                        Statement S      While                0.15
                                         Repeat               0.03
                                         Concatenate          0.5
                                         If                   0.08
                                         Ifelse               0.04
                                         Action               0.2
                        Condition c      Boolean              0.9
                                         not                  0.1
                        Action a         move                 0.5
                                         turnLeft             0.15
                                         turnRight            0.15
                                         putMarker            0.1
                                         pickMarker           0.1
                        Boolean b        frontIsClear         0.5
                                         leftIsClear          0.15
                                         rightIsClear         0.15
                                         markersPresent       0.1
                                         noMarkersPresent     0.1
                        Number n         i (0 ≤ i ≤ 19)       0.05


Table 6: These are the common mistakes LLM makes. We implement a simple program to correct
these mistakes.

 Type                              Before                            After
 Brackets removal                  DEF run m( move() m)              DEF run m( move m)
 Brackets separation               DEF run m(move m)                 DEF run m( move m)
 Brackets addition                 DEF run m( WHILE frontIs-         DEF run m( WHILE c( fron-
                                   Clear w( move w) )m               tIsClear c) w( move w) )m
 Brackets repairment               DEF run m( move )                 DEF run m( move m)
 If to IFELSE                      DEF run m( IF c( frontIsClear     DEF run m( IFELSE c( fron-
                                   c) i( move i) ELSE e( turnLeft    tIsClear c) i( move i) ELSE e(
                                   e) )m                             turnLeft e) )m
 Redundant symbols removal         DEF run m( move() m m)            DEF run m( move m)
 Illegal symbols transformation    DEF run m( WHILE c( True          DEF run m( REPEAT r=19 r(
                                   c) w( move w) )                   move r) m)


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) S TAIR C LIMBER                                (b) FOUR C ORNER
                                                                         maze


                    (c) T OP O FF            harvester                 (d) M AZE


                                      cleanHouse
                                          (e) H ARVESTER


                                        (f) C LEAN H OUSE

Figure 11: Illustrations of the initial and desired final state of each task in the K AREL Problem set
introduced in by Trivedi et al. (2021). Note that these illustrations are from Trivedi et al. (2021)
except for S TAIR C LIMBER, T OP O FF, and F OUR C ORNERS. We align our setting with Carvalho
et al. (2024) to evaluate these tasks in a map of 12x12. The position of markers, walls, and agent’s
position are randomly set according to the configurations of each task.

C.1     K AREL TASKS

C.1.1    T HE TASK PROMPT OF S TAIR C LIMBER

 Purpose              Prompt Text
 Task Name            STAIRCLIMBERSPARSE
 Map Description      The map is a 12x12 grid surrounded by walls with stairs formed by walls
                      and a marker is randomly initialized on the stairs as a goal.
 Initial Position     The agent starts on a random position on the stairs facing east.
 Task Goal            The goal of the agent is to reach a marker that is also randomly initialized
                      on the stairs.
 Task Reward          If the agent reaches the marker, the agent receives 1 as an episodic return
                      and 0 otherwise. If the agent moves to an invalid position, i.e. outside the
                      contour of the stairs, the episode terminates with a -1 return.
                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1.2   T HE TASK PROMPT OF M AZE

 Purpose            Prompt Text
 Task Name          MAZESPARSE
 Map Description    The map is a complex 8x8 grid surrounded by walls and a random marker is
                    placed on an empty cell as a goal.
 Initial Position   The agent starts on a random empty cell of the map facing east.
 Task Goal          The goal of the agent is to reach the goal marker.
 Task Reward        If the agent reaches the marker, the agent receives 1 as an episodic return
                    and 0 otherwise.



C.1.3   T HE TASK PROMPT OF F OUR C ORNERS

 Purpose            Prompt Text
 Task Name          FOURCORNERS
 Map Description    The map is an empty 12x12 grid surrounded by walls.
 Initial Position   The agent starts on a random cell on the bottom row of the map facing east.
 Task Goal          The goal of the agent is to place one marker in each corner of the map.
 Task Reward        Return is given by the number of corners with one marker divided by 4.



C.1.4   T HE TASK PROMPT OF T OP O FF

 Purpose            Prompt Text
 Task Name          TOPOFF
 Map Description    The map is a 12x12 grid surrounded by walls with markers randomly placed
                    on the bottom row of the map.
 Initial Position   The agent starts on the bottom left cell of the map facing east.
 Task Goal          The goal of the agent is to place one extra marker on top of every marker on
                    the map.
 Task Reward        Return is given by the number of markers that have been topped off divided
                    by the total number of markers. Picking up the marker will terminate the
                    episode with a -1 return.



C.1.5   T HE TASK PROMPT OF H ARVESTER

 Purpose            Prompt Text
 Task Name          HARVESTER
 Map Description    The map is a 8x8 grid surrounded by walls that starts with a marker on each
                    cell.
 Initial Position   The agent starts on a random cell on the bottom row of the map facing east.
 Task Goal          The goal of the agent is to pick up every marker on the map.
 Task Reward        Return is given by the number of picked-up markers divided by the total
                    number of markers.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1.6    T HE TASK PROMPT OF C LEAN H OUSE

 Purpose                Prompt Text
 Task Name              CLEANHOUSE
 Map Description       The map is a complex 14x22 grid made of many connected rooms and is
                       surrounded by walls. There are ten markers randomly placed adjacent to the
                       walls.
 Initial Position       The agent starts on a fixed cell facing south.
 Task Goal              The goal of the agent is to pick up every marker on the map.
 Task Reward            Return is given by the number of picked-up markers divided by the total
                        number of markers.


C.2     K AREL -H ARD TASKS


                (a) D OOR K EY                                       (b) O NE S TROKE


                    (c) S EEDER                                          (d) S NAKE

Figure 12: Illustrations of the initial and final state of each task in the Karel-Hard problem set
introduced in by Liu et al. (2023). The position of markers, walls, and agent’s position are randomly
set according to the configurations of each task.



C.2.1    T HE TASK PROMPT OF D OOR K EY

 Purpose                Prompt Text
 Task Name              DOORKEY
 Map Description       The map is a 8x8 grid surrounded by walls that is vertically split into two
                       chambers. The left chamber is 6x3 grid and the right chamber is 6x2 grid.
                       There is a marker placed randomly on the left chamber as a key, and another
                       marker placed randomly on the right chamber as a goal.
 Initial Position       The agent starts on a random cell on the left chamber facing east.
 Task Goal              The goal of the agent is to pick up a marker on the left chamber, which
                        opens a door connecting both chambers. Allow the agent to reach and put a
                        marker on the goal marker.
 Task Reward            Picking up the first marker yields a 0.5 reward, and putting a marker on the
                        goal marker yields an additional 0.5.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2.2    T HE TASK PROMPT OF O NE S TROKE


 Purpose            Prompt Text
 Task Name          ONESTROKE
 Map Description    The map is given by an empty 8x8 grid surrounded by walls.
 Initial Position   The agent starts on a random cell of the map facing east.
 Task Goal          The goal of the agent is to visit every grid cell without repeating. Visited
                    cells become a wall that terminates the episode upon touching.
 Task Reward        Return is given by the number of visited cells divided by the total number
                    of empty cells in the initial state.


C.2.3    T HE TASK PROMPT OF S EEDER


 Purpose            Prompt Text
 Task Name          SEEDER
 Map Description    The map is given by an empty 8x8 grid surrounded by walls..
 Initial Position   The agent starts on a random cell of the map facing east.
 Task Goal          The goal of the agent is to place one marker in every empty cell of the map.
 Task Reward        Return is given by the number of cells with one marker divided by the total
                    number of empty cells in the initial state.


C.2.4    T HE TASK PROMPT OF S NAKE


 Purpose            Prompt Text
 Task Name          SNAKE
 Map Description    The map is given by an empty 8x8 grid surrounded by walls with a marker
                    randomly placed on the map.
 Initial Position   The agent starts on a random cell of the map facing east.
 Task Goal          The agent acts like the head of a snake, whose body grows each time a
                    marker is reached. (No need to pick it up.) Every time a marker is reached,
                    the body of the agent grows one marker. The goal of the agent is to touch the
                    marker on the map without colliding with the snake’s body, which terminates
                    the episode. Each time the marker is reached, it is placed on a random cell,
                    until 20 markers are reached.
 Task Reward        Return is given by the number of reached markers divided by 20.


C.3     N EW K AREL TASKS


To showcase the extensibility of our proposed LLM-GS framework, we additionally propose two
novel new tasks, PATH F OLLOW and WALL AVOIDER. Here we list the task prompts.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               (a) PATH F OLLOW                                    (b) WALL AVOIDER

         Figure 13: Illustrations of the initial and final state of the two new proposed tasks.


C.3.1    T HE TASK PROMPT OF PATH F OLLOW

 Purpose              Prompt Text
 Task Name            PATHFOLLOW
 Map Description      The map is given by a 8x8 grid surrounded by walls. There is a rugged
                      ascending markers line that starts from the bottom left cell and randomly
                      grows either north or to the east until it reaches the top right cell. Resulting
                      in a rugged markers line connecting the bottom left cell and the top right
                      cell.
 Initial Position     The agent starts on the bottom left cell of the map facing north.
 Task Goal            The goal of the agent is to collect every marker on that rugged markers line
                      without leaving the rugged markers line two cells away.
 Task Reward          Return is given by the number of picked-up markers divided by the total
                      number of markers. Placing any marker or leaving the rugged markers line
                      two cells away will have a negative return as -1.0 and terminate the episode.

C.3.2    T HE TASK PROMPT OF WALL AVOIDER

 Purpose              Prompt Text
 Task Name            WALLAVOIDER
 Map Description      The map is given by an empty 8x5 grid surrounded by walls.
 Initial Position     The agent starts on a random cell of the map facing random directions.
 Task Goal            The goal of the agent is to place exactly one marker in every interior cell of
                      the map, which refers to the cells that are not adjacent to any wall.
 Task Reward          Return is given by the number of interior cells with exactly one marker
                      divided by the total number of interior cells. Picking up the marker, putting
                      more than one marker on one cell, or putting any marker on the cell adjacent
                      to any wall will terminate the episode with a -1 return.


D     A N EXAMPLE PIPELINE OF OUR METHOD

This is our pipeline of getting programs from LLM with the task D OOR K EY. Appendix D.1 details
the system prompt, Appendix D.2 provides all the information in the task D OOR K EY. Appendix D.3
lists the LLM response, and Appendix D.4 gives an example of how we get the Karel DSL program.

D.1     T HE SYSTEM PROMPT

You're currently navigating within a Karel environment, which is
   essentially a grid world. In this context, a "world" is
   referred to as a "map." Within this map, there's an entity


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    known as the "agent," capable of movement, changing direction,
     as well as picking up and placing markers on the map.
    Additionally, there are obstacles called "walls" that impede
    the agent's progress; whenever the agent encounters a wall, it
     turns around. Furthermore, there are pre-existing "markers"
    scattered throughout the map at the beginning, though the
    agent has the ability to both pickup and place these markers
    as needed.

Your objective is to generate the appropriate Python program based
    on a given task name and description. This Python program
   will encompass actions enabling the agent to engage with the
   environment, alongside perceptions facilitating the agent's
   recognition of the environment's dynamics.

Here are the available actions for the agent:
move(): Asks the agent to move forward one cell. The agent will
   instead turn left twice if a wall is blocking its way.
turnLeft(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees counterclockwise.
turnRight(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees clockwise.
pickMarker(): Asks the agent to pick up one marker from the
   current cell.
putMarker(): Asks the agent to put down one marker on the current
   cell.

Here are the available perceptions of the agent:
frontIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall in front of the
   agent.
leftIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall on the agent's
   left.rightIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall on the
   agent's right.
markersPresent(): Returns True if there exist markers on the
   current cell.
noMarkersPresent(): Returns True if there is no marker on the
   current cell.

There are some limitations for the Python program:
- do not define other functions besides run()
- do not call other functions
- do not define variables
- do not use True, False, break, continue, return, ==, !=, elif,
   or, and

Python to Karel dsl conversion
1. "def run(): s" to "DEF run m( s m)"
2. "while b: s" to "WHILE c( b c) w( s w)"
3. "if b: s" to "IF c( b c) i( s I)"
4. "if b: s else: s" to "IFELSE c( b c) i( s i) ELSE e( s e)"
5. "for i in range(n): s" to "REPEAT R=n r( s r)"
6. "not h" to "not c( h c)"
7. "frontIsClear()" to "frontIsClear"
8. "leftIsClear()" to "leftIsClear"
9. "rightIsClear()" to "rightIsClear"
10. "markersPresent()" to "markersPresent"
11. "noMarkersPresent()" to "noMarkersPresent"
12. "move()" to "move"
13. "turnLeft()" to "turnLeft"
14. "turnRight()" to "turnRight"
15. "putMarker()" to "putMarker"


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


16. "pickMarker()" to "pickMarker"


D.2   T HE USER PROMPT OF THE TASK D OOR K EY

I'll provide you with the task name and description.

Task name: DOORKEY
Task map: The map is a 8x8 grid surrounded by walls that is
   vertically split into two chambers. The left chamber is 6x3
   grid and the right chamber is 6x2 grid. There is a marker
   placed randomly on the left chamber as a key, and another
   marker placed randomly on the right chamber as a goal.
Task agent position: The agent starts on a random cell on the left
    chamber facing east.
Task goal: The goal of the agent is to pick up a marker on the
   left chamber, which opens a door connecting both chambers.
   Allow the agent to reach and put a marker on the goal marker.
Task return: Picking up the first marker yields a 0.5 reward, and
   putting a marker on the goal marker yields an additional 0.5.

1. Generate 1 simple and short Python program to tackle the task,
   avoid using comments.
2. Convert the Python program to the Karel dsl program.


D.3   T HE SAMPLE RESPONSE OF LLM IN THE TASK D OOR K EY

### Python Program for Task DOORKEY

```python
def run():
    while not markersPresent():
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        else:
            turnLeft()

      pickMarker()

      turnLeft()

      while not markersPresent():
          if frontIsClear():
              move()
          else:
              turnLeft()

      putMarker()
```

### Karel DSL Conversion

```
DEF run m(
    WHILE not c( markersPresent c) w(
        IF frontIsClear i(
            move i)
        ELSE e(
            turnLeft e) w)


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      pickMarker m
      turnLeft m
      WHILE not c( markersPresent c) w(
          IF frontIsClear i(
              move i)
          ELSE e(
              turnLeft e) w)
      putMarker m)
```


D.4     A PPLY POST- PROCESSING AND RETRIEVE THE LLM- INITIALIZED PROGRAMS

For the Python program part in LLM response, we convert the Python program to a DSL program
through the rule-based method and apply post-processing to correct minor mistakes. For the DSL part,
we directly apply post-processing to correct minor mistakes. Appendix D.4.1 presents the original
Python program, the converted DSL, and the post-processed DSL. Appendix D.4.2 shows the original
DSL and the post-processed DSL. All of the post-processing rules are listed in Table 6.

D.4.1    P YTHON PROGRAM PART

                     Listing 1: Original Python program
def run():
    while not markersPresent():
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        else:
            turnLeft()

      pickMarker()

      turnLeft()

      while not markersPresent():
          if frontIsClear():
              move()
          else:
              turnLeft()

      putMarker()

                Listing 2: DSL program converted through the rule-based method
DEF run m(
    WHILE c( not c( markersPresent c) c) w(
        IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
             move i)
        ELSE e(
             turnLeft e) w)
    pickMarker
    turnLeft
    WHILE c( not c( markersPresent c) c) w(
        IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
             move i)
        ELSE e(
             turnLeft e) w)
    putMarker m)

                          Listing 3: DSL program after post-processing


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DEF run m(
    WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(
        IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
             move i)
        ELSE e(
             turnLeft e) w)
    pickMarker
    turnLeft
    WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(
        IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
             move i)
        ELSE e(
             turnLeft e) w)
    putMarker m)


D.4.2    DSL PROGRAM PART

                                  Listing 4: Original DSL program
DEF run m(
    WHILE not c( markersPresent c) w(
        IF frontIsClear i(
            move i)
        ELSE e(
            turnLeft e) w)
    pickMarker m
    turnLeft m
    WHILE not c( markersPresent c) w(
        IF frontIsClear i(
            move i)
        ELSE e(
            turnLeft e) w)
    putMarker m)

                            Listing 5: DSL program after post-processing
DEF run m(
    WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(
        IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
             move i)
        ELSE e(
             turnLeft e) w)
    pickMarker
    turnLeft
    WHILE c( noMarkersPresent c) w(
        IFELSE c( frontIsClear c) i(
             move i)
        ELSE e(
             turnLeft e) w)
    putMarker m)


E    S CHEDULED H ILL C LIMBING DETAIL
This Scheduler is designed for improving sample efficiency. n is the number of programs evaluated,
and Kstart and Kend are hyper-parameters representing the initial and terminal number of neighbors
to search, respectively. r(n) is a sinusoidal function that smoothly increase from 0 to 1 over the course
of N total programs evaluated in the environment. We provide detailed equation in Equation (2) and
Equation (3)


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       log2 k(n) = (1 − r(n)) log2 Kstart + r(n) log2 Kend ,                          (2)


                                             2 log n        π
                               2r(n) = sin (         − 1) ×     + 1.                                  (3)
                                             log N          2


E.1     D ESIGN INTUITION

Scheduled HC comprises logarithmic interpolation, sinusoidal schedule, and logarithmic ratio. Our
intuition to logarithmic interpolation and logarithmic ratio aims to allocate the most appropriate
neighborhood size, k, to tasks of varying difficulties. The logarithm of the number of executed
programs provides an indication of task difficulty, with the intuition that the optimal k should increase
exponentially according to the structure of AST. For the sinusoidal schedule, we prioritize maintaining
a stable neighborhood size k during both the early and final stages of the training process.

E.2     VARIANTS OF S CHEDULED H ILL C LIMBING COMPONENTS

We add their linear counterpart, resulting in 2 variants for each component and 8 variants (2x2x2=8)
on the whole.

E.2.1    I NTERPOLATION VARIANTS
 • Logarithmic interpolation
                          log2 k(n) = (1 − r(n)) log2 Kstart + r(n) log2 Kend                         (4)
 • Linear interpolation
                                 k(n) = (1 − r(n))Kstart + r(n)Kend                                   (5)


E.2.2    S CHEDULE VARIANTS
 • Sinusoidal schedule
                                           h                  πi
                                2r(n) = sin (2 × ratio − 1) ×    +1                                   (6)
                                                              2
 • Linear schedule
                                               r(n) = ratio                                           (7)


E.2.3    R ATIO VARIANTS
 • Logarithmic ratio
                                                    log n
                                                                                                      (8)
                                                   log N
 • Linear ratio
                                                     n
                                                                                                      (9)
                                                     N

E.3     A BLATION STUDY RESULTS

We conduct experiments for all 8 variants on D OOR K EY and C LEAN H OUSE for 8 seeds. The results
shown in Figure 14 present no significant differences between all 8 variants.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (a) D OOR K EY                   (b) C LEAN H OUSE

Figure 14: Comparing Scheduled HC variants. We compare our proposed Scheduled HC with
its variants. The label stands for interpolation-schedule-ratio. For example, when using logarithmic
interpolation, sinusoidal schedule, and logarithmic ratios, our label is Log-Sin-Log. The results
indicate no significant differences between all Scheduled HC variants.


F     BASELINES AND THEIR HYPERPARAMETERS


We compare our framework to four baselines, LEAPS (Trivedi et al., 2021), HPRL (Liu et al., 2023),
CEBS (Carvalho et al., 2024), and HC (Carvalho et al., 2024). LEAPS, HPRL, and CEBS search
programs in the latent spaces, while HC searches programs in the programmatic space. We first
introduce the concept of latent space in Appendix F.1, then dive into the details of each baseline in
the following sections. The pseudo-code of CEBS is described in Algorithm 1, and the pseudo-code
of HC is described in Algorithm 2.



F.1   L ATENT SPACE

In addition to the programmatic space, another choice is to search in a learned latent space (Trivedi
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023), constructed by training a variational autoencoder on randomly generated
DSL programs. To sample a neighbor program, a small noise is added to the latent embedding of
the current program candidate, and the decoder can generate a program from the noise-corrupted
embedding.



F.2   LEAPS

LEAPS utilizes the Cross-entropy method (CEM) (Rubinstein and Kroese, 2004) as its search strategy.
It first generates k neighborhood programs from its latent space and evaluates their episodic return on
the Karel environment (Trivedi et al., 2021). Next, if the average return over the top-E neighborhood
programs is higher than the best-seen average return, it continues the process on the mean latent
embedding of the top-E neighborhood programs. When the average return no longer increases, the
program with the highest episodic return is returned.
The hyperparameters of the LEAPS baseline are from LEAPS (Trivedi et al., 2021) and HPRL (Liu
et al., 2023). We downloaded the pre-trained weights of LEAPS and used the parameters for searching
programs. We use the re-implementation of LEAPS from Carvalho et al. (2024), thus we do not have
hyperparameters of exponential decay. Also, the re-implementation samples candidate from a fixed
normal distribution which is hyperparameter in LEAPS (Trivedi et al., 2021). In Table 7, k is the
neighborhood size and E is the candidate, σ is the noise scale. In LEAPS and HPRL, they use an
elite ratio to represent the candidate programs. For better understanding, we round E to be an integer.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Table 7: LEAPS hyperparameter settings on all K AREL tasks.

                                    TASK NAME         k       σ        E
                                  S TAIR C LIMBER     32     0.25       2
                                  F OUR C ORNERS      64      0.5      13
                                      T OP O FF       64     0.25       3
                                       M AZE          16      0.1       2
                                  C LEAN H OUSE       32     0.25       2
                                    H ARVESTER        32      0.5       3
                                     D OOR K EY       32     0.25       3
                                    O NE S TROKE      64      0.5       3
                                      S EEDER         32     0.25       3
                                       S NAKE         32     0.25       6


F.3   H IERARCHICAL PROGRAMMATIC REINFORCEMENT LEARNING (HPRL)

HPRL (Liu et al., 2023) aims to improve LEAPS by composing several programs to represent
more complex behaviors. Given a learned latent space, meta-policy learns to predict a sequence
of actions, i.e. programs, by optimizing the return obtained by executing the composed programs
using reinforcement learning. HPRL considers the discount factor γ in the meta-MDP; as a result,
the evaluation method is not the same as our problem formulation. To ensure a fair comparison, we
record one million programs explored by meta-policy in the training stage. In HRPL, the authors
use the training step as a hyperparameter. One training step is one step of meta-policy, and the
maximum episode length is set to 5 as the original setting in the HPRL paper. In Table 8, we list the
hyperparameters we modified in the HPRL training script. All other hyperparameters remain the
same as described in HPRL.

                   Table 8: HRPL hyperparameter settings on all K AREL tasks.

                            TASK NAME       training steps     height       weight
                          S TAIR C LIMBER        50K              12         12
                          F OUR C ORNERS        500K              12         12
                              T OP O FF          5M               12         12
                               M AZE             50K               8          8
                          C LEAN H OUSE         500K              12         22
                            H ARVESTER           5M                8          8
                             D OOR K EY          5M                8          8
                            O NE S TROKE         5M                8          8
                              S EEDER            5M                8          8
                               S NAKE            5M                8          8


F.4   C ROSS - ENTROPY BEAM SEARCH (CEBS)

CEBS (Carvalho et al., 2024) extends CEM to maintain a set of E candidate programs to perform
beam search. Unlike CEM which only maintains one candidate program. CEBS maintains a set of E
candidate programs, to perform beam search. In other words, CEBS searches all the neighborhoods
of the top-E programs.
It also utilizes the pre-trained VAE weight from LEAPS (Trivedi et al., 2021) to search the program
in the latent space. All the hyperparameter follows the original CEBS with neighborhood K equal to
64, candidate E equal to 16, and noise ratio σ equal to 0.25 for all ten Karel tasks. The pseudo-code
is described in Algorithm 1.


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.5   H ILL CLIMBING (HC)

HC (Carvalho et al., 2024) is a state-of-the-art algorithm solving Programmatic Reinforcement
Learning tasks. All the hyperparameter follows the original HC with neighborhood K equal to 250
for all ten Karel tasks. The pseudo-code is described in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 1 Cross-entropy beam search algorithm (Carvalho et al., 2024)
Require: k, number of neighborhood; E number of top candidate; T ,
    the task; VAE, the program encoder and decoder.
Ensure: ρ∗ the highest averaged return over 32 task variants.
1: z ∼ N (0, I)
2: ρ ← VAE.decode(z)
3: steps ← 0
4: Return ← evaluate(ρ, T )
5: ρ∗ ← ρ
6: M ean ← −∞
7: P ← get-neighbor(ρ, k)
8: while steps < 1000000 do
9:    Candidates ← []
10:    for each ρnew in P do
11:      r ← evaluate(ρnew , T )
12:      Candidates.append(r, ρnew )
13:      if r > Return then
14:        ρ∗ ← ρnew
15:        Return ← r
16:      end if
17:    end for
18:    Elites ← Top-E(Candidates)
19:    if M ean > get-mean(Elites) then
20:      break
21:    end if
22:    if Return = 1 then
23:      break
24:    end if
25:    M ean ← get-mean(Elites)
26:    P ← []
27:    for each ρnew in Elites do
28:      P.extend(get-neighbor(ρnew , k/E))
29:    end for
30:    steps ← steps + k
31: end while



G     DATA L EAKAGE

While our proposed framework shows significant improvement over the baselines, some may ques-
tion if this improvement only comes from the LLM “memorizing” all the answers. Indeed, some
ground truth solutions have been documented in the previous literature (Trivedi et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2023; Carvalho et al., 2024), thus making data leakage a potential concern. Still, we would like
to rule out this possibility from three aspects: the timeline of previous works, the LLMs’ understand-
ing of the Karel tasks, and the innovation of two novel tasks. Thus proving our framework utilizes
the LLMs’ understanding and reasoning ability not just its internal knowledge.
Timeline. For the Karel-Hard problem set introduced by Liu et al. (2023) in July 2023, the optimal
programs were not included in Liu et al. (2023) since their proposed method could only partially
solve the tasks. Carvalho et al. (2024), made public in 2024, are the first to provide optimal programs
for the Karel-Hard tasks. Hence, our LLM (gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09 with knowledge up to December
2023) could not access the optimal Karel-Hard tasks programs.


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Hill climbing algorithm (Carvalho et al., 2024)
Require: T , the task; k, number of neighborhood.
Ensure: ρ∗ , the highest averaged return over 32 task variants.
1: Initialize ρ with a random solution
2: Return ← evaluate(ρ, T )
3: ρ∗ ← ρ
4: improved ← True
5: steps ← 0
6: while improved and steps < n do
7:   improved ← False
8:   N eighbors ← get-neighbor(ρ,k)
9:   for each ρnew in N eighbors do
10:      rnew ← evaluate(ρnew , T )
11:      if rnew > Return then
12:        ρ∗ ← ρnew
13:        Return ← rnew
14:        improved ← True
15:        break
16:      end if
17:      steps ← steps + 1
18:   end for
19:   ρ ← ρ∗
20: end while



    The Karel environment is used to test Programmatic Reinforcement Learning (PRL) algorithms
    and includes a variety of tasks. There are six tasks in the Karel test set and four more challenging
    tasks in the Karel-hard test set. These tasks are utilized in the research papers ”Learning to Syn-
    thesize Programs as Interpretable and Generalizable Policies” and ”Hierarchical Programmatic
    Reinforcement Learning via Learning to Compose Programs.”
    Can you list all ten tasks and their task descriptions based on what you have learned?

                  Figure 15: The prompt that asks GPT-4 about the Karel PRL tasks



Does the LLM know the Karel tasks?. To verify if the LLM knows the Karel tasks used in our work,
we prompt GPT-4 by providing the paper names of LEAPS (Trivedi et al., 2021) and HPRL (Liu
et al., 2023) and ask GPT-4 to list all the names and descriptions of the Karel tasks used in these
works. Among all the responses generated by GPT-4, the only task closely resembling the Karel
tasks used in our work is ”Maze Solving.” However, all other tasks described in the GPT-4’s response
are drastically distinct from the ones we used in our work. The full prompt and response are listed
in Figure 15 and Figure 16.
Two novel tasks. We additionally design two novel tasks that have not been used in any existing
work, PATH F OLLOW, and WALL AVOIDER, as illustrated in Figure 13. The details of these two novel
tasks are in Appendix C.3. The results in Figure 8 show that our framework can extend to new tasks
that are impossible to leak to LLMs.



H     AGGREGATED PERFORMANCE ACROSS ALL TASKS

To clearly examine the performance across all the tasks, we include a plot that aggregates the perfor-
mance of all main results (Figure 4) in Figure 17. Our proposed LLM-GS framework significantly
outperforms the existing methods.


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Sure! The Karel environment, based on the educational programming language designed to
  introduce students to the basics of programming, provides programmatic challenges that both
  regular and hierarchical reinforcement learning algorithms can address. Here is a summary of
  the tasks typically included in both the Karel test set and the Karel-hard set based on common
  challenges noted in similar environments and research contexts:

  K AREL T EST S ET TASKS
        1. Move to Wall: The task is for the agent (Karel) to move forward until it encounters a
           wall.
        2. Turn Right: Teach Karel to turn right using a sequence of commands (since Karel
           inherently only has a command to turn left).
        3. Collect Marker: Karel needs to navigate towards and collect a marker from the grid.
        4. Avoid Hurdles: Karel must move from one point to another while avoiding hurdles
           placed in its path.
        5. Put Marker and Move: This task combines placing a marker in a specified location
           and then moving to a different location.
        6. Maze Solving: Karel needs to find a path from one point to another in a maze-like
           structure.

  K AREL -H ARD T EST S ET TASKS
        1. Multiple Markers: Karel might need to collect or place multiple markers in various
           locations, requiring more complex navigation and memory usage.
        2. Dynamic Obstacles: The environments where obstacles may change location or appear
           suddenly, requiring Karel to adapt its path dynamically.
        3. Conditional Logic Usage: Tasks where Karel must use sensors to make decisions
           based on the conditions of its environment (e.g., If front is clear, move forward;
           otherwise, turn left).
        4. Complex Maze: More intricate and challenging mazes that require advanced pathfind-
           ing algorithms and possibly backtracking strategies.
  While these are typical tasks deduced from the context of using Karel for testing PRL algorithms,
  please note that specific details or task names might vary based on the particular implemen-
  tation or the focuses of different research papers or setups within the ”Karel” environment.
  Always refer back to the specific research documents or source materials for the most accurate
  descriptions and objectives of these tasks.

                      Figure 16: The GPT-4 response about Karel PRL tasks


Figure 17: Aggregated performance across all the tasks. The aggregate performance across all ten
tasks. Our proposed LLM-GS framework surpasses all existing methods by a large margin.


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: Wall-clock time evaluation on the D OOR K EY task. We evaluate the wall-clock time
performance on the D OOR K EY task, with the x-axis representing the number of seconds on a
logarithmic scale. The plot also includes the time LLM takes to generate the programs. The results
demonstrate the superiority of our proposed LLM-GS framework.


I    WALL - CLOCK TIME EVALUATION ON TASK D OOR K EY
We provide a wall-clock time evaluation (real-time elapsed) for the D OOR K EY task in Figure 18,
with the x-axis showing the number of seconds on a log scale. It also accounts for the time LLM takes
to generate the programs. The result highlights the superiority of our proposed LLM-GS framework.


    (a) S TAIR C LIMBER          (b) M AZE            (c) F OUR C ORNERS            (d) T OP O FF


     (e) H ARVESTER          (f) C LEAN H OUSE           (g) D OOR K EY           (h) O NE S TROKE

                                                      Figure 19: Statistical test on the Karel and
                                                      Karel-Hard tasks. We use the Student’s t-test
                                                      to measure the mean of LLM-GS and HC. The
                                                      p-value of the t-test (red line) follows the left
                                                      axis, while LLM-GS and HC use the right axis.
                                                      The brown dotted line presents the significant
                                                      level of the null hypothesis. LLM-GS outper-
       (i) S EEDER              (j) S NAKE            forms HC on 8 / 10 tasks when the search ends.


J    S TATISTICAL TEST BETWEEN LLM-GS AND HC
Since the confidence interval of LLM-GS overlaps with that of HC in some tasks, we conduct
hypothesis testing between these two methods for better comparison. The null hypothesis H0 is
that the mean of LLM-GS is greater than HC. We use Student’s t-test (STUDENT, 1908) to test the


                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distribution of LLM-GS and HC at the same number of evaluated programs. Figure 19 shows the
p-value from the t-test across the evaluated program on the Karel and Karel-hard tasks. We adjust the
primary y-axis (left) and the secondary y-axis (right) to have the same scale. The brown dotted line is
0.05. If the red lines (p-value) are under the brown dotted line, LLM-GS statistically outperforms HC.
If the red lines are above the brown dotted line, LLM-GS fails to surpass HC.
The result shows that our method significantly outperforms HC on S TAIR C LIMBER, M AZE, F OUR -
C ORNERS, D OOR K EY, and S EEDER. On task T OP O FF, LLM initialization can not outperform HC
in the first few attempts but has superior efficiency when the search ends. On the task H ARVESTER,
LLM-GS can surpass HC in less than a thousand programs, but cannot find a difference at the end
of the search. On the task C LEAN H OUSE, LLM-GS cannot outperform HC except for the LLM
initialization. On the task O NE S TROKE and S NAKE, LLM-GS eventually surpasses HC when the
search process ends. The LLM initialization (32 is at the middle point of 10 and 100) surpasses HC
on all tasks. On the other hand, LLM-GS outperforms HC on 8 / 10 tasks (except for H ARVESTER
and C LEAN H OUSE) when the search ends.


K     LLM PROMPTS FOR ABLATIONS AND REVISION

Ablation prompts for program generation methods. We conduct an ablation study in Section 5.3
to justify that our LLM-generating program method performs best in acceptance rate and best re-
turn. Here we list the complete prompts. There are three approaches to generating DSL programs:
Pythonic-DSL, Python, and DSL. There are two types of prompt, system prompt and user prompt,
in all approaches. In the system prompt, both the Python and the Pythonic-DSL approaches con-
tain limitations of Python usage. The DSL approach contains the grammar of the Karel, and the
Pythonic-DSL contains the paired Python-like and Karel production rules. All of the system prompts
contain the environment physics, action, and perception. On the other hand, the user prompt contains
five placeholders for task name, map description, initial position, task goal, and task reward. In Ap-
pendix C, all of the task-dependent information can be filled in the placeholders. Appendix D.2 shows
the full Pythonic-DSL prompt with the task D OOR K EY filled in the placeholders. The Pythonic-DSL
prompts are in Appendix K.1, and the Python prompts are in Appendix K.2, and the DSL prompts
are in Appendix K.3.
Prompts for LLM revision. We list all of the user prompts in the experiment of LLM revision, the
system prompt is the same as the one in Appendix K.1. We implement four approaches to revising
the program: Regenerate, Regenerate with reward, Agent execution trace, and Agent and program
execution trace. We ask the LLM to regenerate with all generated programs in the last round without
repetition, and the Regenerate prompt is in Appendix K.4. We ask the LLM to regenerate with the
program relating to reward, and the revision prompt of the Regenerate with reward is in Appendix K.5.
We utilize the execution trace of the Karel agent in the grid world, and the revision prompt of the Agent
execution trace is in Appendix K.6. We provided the action/perception call and executing line, and the
revision prompt of the Agent and program execution trace is in Appendix K.7. The program Listing 1
is the revision target of our method revision method in Appendix K.6 and Appendix K.7. Figure 20 is
the trajectories of the program we used in method Appendix K.6 and Appendix K.7. In the example,
the origin program has an average return of 0.5. LLM revision with agent trace can reach 0.640625,
while LLM revision with both agent and program traces can reach a result of 0.8125.

K.1     P YTHONIC -DSL

K.1.1    S YSTEM PROMPT

You're currently navigating within a Karel environment, which is
   essentially a grid world. In this context, a "world" is
   referred to as a "map." Within this map, there's an entity
   known as the "agent," capable of movement, changing direction,
    as well as picking up and placing markers on the map.
   Additionally, there are obstacles called "walls" that impede
   the agent's progress; whenever the agent encounters a wall, it
    turns around. Furthermore, there are pre-existing "markers"
   scattered throughout the map at the beginning, though the


                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) This is the initial state of one of (b) This is the last step of the trajec- (c) The program ends at step 47 and
D OOR K EY the task variants.           tories in the prompts.                   no reward is granted.

Figure 20: This is the demonstration of the task D OOR K EY. The Karel agent can only reach the
surrounding grids at the left chamber in the trajectory.

Listing 1 This is the program for LLM revision.
def run():
      while noMarkersPresent():
           if frontIsClear():
                   move()
           else:
                   turnLeft()
                   if frontIsClear():
                         move()
                         turnRight()
      pickMarker()
      while noMarkersPresent():
           if frontIsClear():
                   move()
           else:
                   turnLeft()
      putMarker()

Listing 2 The revision results of Appendix K.6.
      while noMarkersPresent():
           if frontIsClear():
                  move()
           else:
                  turnLeft()
      pickMarker()
      while frontIsClear():
           move()
      turnRight()
      while noMarkersPresent():
           if frontIsClear():
                  move()
           else:
                  turnLeft()
                  if frontIsClear():
                        move()
                        turnRight()
      putMarker()


                                                          37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Listing 3 The revision results of Appendix K.7.
      while noMarkersPresent():
           if frontIsClear():
                  move()
           else:
                  turnLeft()
      pickMarker()
      while noMarkersPresent():
           if rightIsClear():
                  turnRight()
                  move()
           else:
                  if frontIsClear():
                        move()
                  else:
                        turnLeft()
      putMarker()



    agent has the ability to both pickup and place these markers
    as needed.

Your objective is to generate the appropriate Python program based
    on a given task name and description. This Python program
   will encompass actions enabling the agent to engage with the
   environment, alongside perceptions facilitating the agent's
   recognition of the environment's dynamics.

Here are the available actions for the agent:
move(): Asks the agent to move forward one cell. The agent will
   instead turn left twice if a wall is blocking its way.
turnLeft(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees counterclockwise.
turnRight(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees clockwise.
pickMarker(): Asks the agent to pick up one marker from the
   current cell.
putMarker(): Asks the agent to put down one marker on the current
   cell.>

Here are the available perceptions of the agent:
frontIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall in front of the
   agent.
leftIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall on the agent's
   left.
rightIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall on the agent's
   right.
markersPresent(): Returns True if there exist markers on the
   current cell.
noMarkersPresent(): Returns True if there is no marker on the
   current cell.

There are some limitations for the Python program:
- do not define other functions besides run()
- do not call other functions
- do not define variables
- do not use True, False, break, continue, return, ==, !=, elif,
   or, and

Python to Karel dsl conversion


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1. "def run(): s" to "DEF run m( s m)"
2. "while b: s" to "WHILE c( b c) w( s w)"
3. "if b: s" to "IF c( b c) i( s i)"
4. "if b: s else: s" to "IFELSE c( b c) i( s i) ELSE e( s e)"
5. "for i in range(n): s" to "REPEAT R=n r( s r)"
6. "not h" to "not c( h c)"
7. "frontIsClear()" to "frontIsClear"
8. "leftIsClear()" to "leftIsClear"
9. "rightIsClear()" to "rightIsClear"
10. "markersPresent()" to "markersPresent"
11. "noMarkersPresent()" to "noMarkersPresent"
12. "move()" to "move"
13. "turnLeft()" to "turnLeft"
14. "turnRight()" to "turnRight"
15. "putMarker()" to "putMarker"
16. "pickMarker()" to "pickMarker"


K.1.2    U SER PROMPT
I'll provide you with the task name and description.

Task name: <<Task Name>>
Task map: <<Map Description>>
Task agent position: <<Initial Position>>
Task goal: <<Task Goal>>
Task return: <<Task Reward>>

1. Generate 1 simple and short Python program to tackle the task,
   avoid using comments.
2. Convert the Python program to the Karel dsl program.


K.2     P YTHON

K.2.1    S YSTEM PROMPT
You're currently navigating within a Karel environment, which is
   essentially a grid world. In this context, a "world" is
   referred to as a "map." Within this map, there's an entity
   known as the "agent," capable of movement, changing direction,
    as well as picking up and placing markers on the map.
   Additionally, there are obstacles called "walls" that impede
   the agent's progress; whenever the agent encounters a wall, it
    turns around. Furthermore, there are pre-existing "markers"
   scattered throughout the map at the beginning, though the
   agent has the ability to both pickup and place these markers
   as needed.

Your objective is to generate the appropriate Python program based
    on a given task name and description. This Python program
   will encompass actions enabling the agent to engage with the
   environment, alongside perceptions facilitating the agent's
   recognition of the environment's dynamics.

Here are the available actions for the agent:
move(): Asks the agent to move forward one cell. The agent will
   instead turn left twice if a wall is blocking its way.
turnLeft(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees counterclockwise.
turnRight(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees clockwise.


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


pickMarker(): Asks the agent to pick up one marker from the
   current cell.
putMarker(): Asks the agent to put down one marker on the current
   cell.

Here are the available perceptions of the agent:
frontIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall in front of the
   agent.
leftIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall on the agent's
   left.
rightIsClear(): Returns True if there is no wall on the agent's
   right.
markersPresent(): Returns True if there exist markers on the
   current cell.
noMarkersPresent(): Returns True if there is no marker on the
   current cell.

There are some limitations for the Python program:
- do not define other functions besides run()
- do not call other functions
- do not define variables
- do not use True, False, break, continue, return, ==, !=, elif,
   or, and


K.2.2    U SER PROMPT
I'll provide you with the task name and description.

Task name: <<Task Name>>
Task map: <<Map Description>>
Task agent position: <<Initial Position>>
Task goal: <<Task Goal>>
Task return: <<Task Reward>>

1. Generate 1 simple and short Python program to tackle the task,
   avoid using comments.


K.3     DSL

K.3.1    S YSTEM PROMPT
You're currently navigating within a Karel environment, which is
   essentially a grid world. In this context, a "world" is
   referred to as a "map." Within this map, there's an entity
   known as the "agent," capable of movement, changing direction,
    as well as picking up and placing markers on the map.
   Additionally, there are obstacles called "walls" that impede
   the agent's progress; whenever the agent encounters a wall, it
    turns around. Furthermore, there are pre-existing "markers"
   scattered throughout the map at the beginning, though the
   agent has the ability to both pickup and place these markers
   as needed.

Your objective is to generate the appropriate Karel dsl program
   based on a given task name and description. This Karel dsl
   program will encompass actions enabling the agent to engage
   with the environment, alongside perceptions facilitating the
   agent's recognition of the environment's dynamics.


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here are the available actions for the agent:
move: Asks the agent to move forward one cell. The agent will
   instead turn left twice if a wall is blocking its way.
turnLeft: Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees counterclockwise.
turnRight: Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees clockwise.
pickMarker: Asks the agent to pick up one marker from the current
   cell.
putMarker: Asks the agent to put down one marker on the current
   cell.

Here are the available perceptions of the agent:
frontIsClear: Returns True if there is no wall in front of the
   agent.
leftIsClear: Returns True if there is no wall on the agent's left.
rightIsClear: Returns True if there is no wall on the agent's
   right.
markersPresent: Returns True if there exist markers on the current
    cell.
noMarkersPresent: Returns True if there is no marker on the
   current cell.

This is the production role of the domain-specific language of the
    Karel environment.
Program p := DEF run m( s m)
Statement s := WHILE c( b c) w( s w) | IF c( b c) i( s i) | IFELSE
    c( b c) i( s i) ELSE e( s e) | REPEAT R=n r( s r) | s s | a
Condition b := h | not c( h c)
Number n := 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
   16, 17, 18, 19
Perception h := frontIsClear | leftIsClear | rightIsClear |
   markersPresent | noMarkersPresent
Action a := move | turnLeft | turnRight | putMarker | pickMarker

K.3.2    U SER PROMPT
I'll provide you with the task name and description.

Task name: <<Task Name>>
Task map: <<Map Description>>
Task agent position: <<Initial Position>>
Task goal: <<Task Goal>>
Task return: <<Task Reward>>

1. Generate 1 simple and short Karel dsl program to tackle the
   task, avoid using comments.


K.4     R EGENERATE

I'll provide you with the task name, task description, and the
   programs you generated last time.

Task name: DOORKEY
Task map: The map is a 8x8 grid surrounded by walls that is
   vertically split into two chambers. The left chamber is 6x3
   grid and the right chamber is 6x2 grid. There is a marker
   placed randomly on the left chamber as a key, and another
   marker placed randomly on the right chamber as a goal.


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Task agent position: The agent starts on a random cell on the left
    chamber facing east.
Task goal: The goal of the agent is to pick up a marker on the
   left chamber, which opens a door connecting both chambers.
   Allow the agent to reach and put a marker on the goal marker.
Task return: Picking up the first marker yields a 0.5 reward, and
   putting a marker on the goal marker yields an additional 0.5.

These are the programs you generated last time, all of these
   programs cannot yield perfect performance.

Program 1:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent():
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        else:
            turnLeft()
    pickMarker()
    while noMarkersPresent():
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        else:
            turnLeft()
    if markersPresent():
        putMarker()

###23 programs are truncated.###

Program 25:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent():
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        else:
            turnLeft()
    pickMarker()
    for i in range(19):
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        else:
            turnRight()


1. Generate a Python program that is not identical to any of the
   previous programs to tackle the task, and avoid using comments
   .
2. Convert the Python program to the Karel dsl program.


K.5   R EGENERATE WITH REWARD

I'll provide you with the task name, task description, and the
   programs rewards pairs sorted by their evaluation rewards from
    32 task variants.

Task name: DOORKEY
Task map: The map is a 8x8 grid surrounded by walls that is
   vertically split into two chambers. The left chamber is 6x3


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   grid and the right chamber is 6x2 grid. There is a marker
   placed randomly on the left chamber as a key, and another
   marker placed randomly on the right chamber as a goal.
Task agent position: The agent starts on a random cell on the left
    chamber facing east.
Task goal: The goal of the agent is to pick up a marker on the
   left chamber, which opens a door connecting both chambers.
   Allow the agent to reach and put a marker on the goal marker.
Task return: Picking up the first marker yields a 0.5 reward, and
   putting a marker on the goal marker yields an additional 0.5.

Program reward pairs sorted by their evaluation rewards:

Program 1:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent():
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        else:
            turnLeft()
            if frontIsClear():
                 move()
                 turnRight()
    pickMarker()
    while noMarkersPresent():
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        else:
            turnLeft()
    putMarker()

reward:
0.5

###23 programs are truncated.###

Program 25:
def run():
    for i in range(19):
        if markersPresent():
            pickMarker()
        while not frontIsClear():
            turnLeft()
        move()
        if frontIsClear():
            move()
        if markersPresent():
            putMarker()

reward:
-0.5

1. Depending on this information, examine the program pattern that
    the highest score programs process, but the lowest score
   programs do not.
2. Generate 1 simple and short Python program according to the
   pattern to tackle the task, avoid using comment.
3. Convert the Python program to the Karel dsl program.



                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K.6   AGENT EXECUTION TRACE

I'll provide you with the code you developed previously, with the
   goal of refining it. To guide your revision, you'll receive
   the specific task name and a description. Since there are 32
   different versions of the task that share the same objective
   but differ by random seeds, I will identify the specific
   variant where the performance of the program is most lacking.
   Additionally, you'll get the initial state of the task, the
   code, and a detailed trajectory demonstrating how the code
   operates within this particular scenario. This trajectory will
    detail each action step-by-step and show a localized snapshot
    of the environment (a 3x3 area centered on the agent) during
   execution. Rewards received by the agent will also be shown
   during these steps.

Task name: DOORKEY
Task map: The map is a 8x8 grid surrounded by walls that is
   vertically split into two chambers. The left chamber is 6x3
   grid and the right chamber is 6x2 grid. There is a marker
   placed randomly on the left chamber as a key, and another
   marker placed randomly on the right chamber as a goal.
Task agent position: The agent starts on a random cell on the left
    chamber facing east.
Task goal: The goal of the agent is to pick up a marker on the
   left chamber, which opens a door connecting both chambers.
   Allow the agent to reach and put a marker on the goal marker.
Task return: Picking up the first marker yields a 0.5 reward, and
   putting a marker on the goal marker yields an additional 0.5.

Initial state:
Wall(0, 0) ;    Wall(0, 1) ;    Wall(0, 2) ;    Wall(0, 3) ;
   Wall(0, 4) ;    Wall(0, 5) ;    Wall(0, 6) ;    Wall(0, 7) ;
Wall(1, 0) ;    Empty(1, 1) ;   Empty(1, 2) ;   Empty(1, 3) ;
   Wall(1, 4) ;    Empty(1, 5) ;   Marker(1, 6, quantity=1) ;
         Wall(1, 7) ;
Wall(2, 0) ;    Empty(2, 1) ;   Empty(2, 2) ;   Empty(2, 3) ;
   Wall(2, 4) ;    Empty(2, 5) ;   Empty(2, 6) ;   Wall(2, 7) ;
Wall(3, 0) ;    Empty(3, 1) ;   Empty(3, 2) ;   Empty(3, 3) ;
   Wall(3, 4) ;    Empty(3, 5) ;   Empty(3, 6) ;   Wall(3, 7) ;
Wall(4, 0) ;    Empty(4, 1) ;   Agent(4, 2, direction=(0, 1)) ;
   Empty(4, 3) ;   Wall(4, 4) ;    Empty(4, 5) ;   Empty(4, 6) ;
      Wall(4, 7) ;
Wall(5, 0) ;    Empty(5, 1) ;   Marker(5, 2, quantity=1) ;
   Empty(5, 3) ;   Wall(5, 4) ;    Empty(5, 5) ;   Empty(5, 6) ;
      Wall(5, 7) ;
Wall(6, 0) ;    Empty(6, 1) ;   Empty(6, 2) ;   Empty(6, 3) ;
   Wall(6, 4) ;    Empty(6, 5) ;   Empty(6, 6) ;   Wall(6, 7) ;
Wall(7, 0) ;    Wall(7, 1) ;    Wall(7, 2) ;    Wall(7, 3) ;
   Wall(7, 4) ;    Wall(7, 5) ;    Wall(7, 6) ;    Wall(7, 7) ;

Program:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear():
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
             if frontIsClear():


                                               44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      move()
                      turnRight()
     pickMarker()
     while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear():
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
     putMarker()


The average reward on 32 task variants is:
0.5

Trajectory:

Step 1:
Agent performs a perception: noMarkersPresent. The result is True.
Partial state:
Empty(3, 1) ;   Empty(3, 2) ;   Empty(3, 3) ;
Empty(4, 1) ;   Agent(4, 2, direction=(0, 1)) ; Empty(4, 3) ;
Empty(5, 1) ;   Marker(5, 2, quantity=1) ;      Empty(5, 3) ;


Step 2:
Agent performs a perception: frontIsClear. The result is True.
Partial state:
Empty(3, 1) ;   Empty(3, 2) ;   Empty(3, 3) ;
Empty(4, 1) ;   Agent(4, 2, direction=(0, 1)) ; Empty(4, 3) ;
Empty(5, 1) ;   Marker(5, 2, quantity=1) ;      Empty(5, 3) ;


Step 3:
Agent performs an action: move.
Partial state:
Empty(3, 2) ;   Empty(3, 3) ;   Wall(3, 4) ;
Empty(4, 2) ;   Agent(4, 3, direction=(0, 1)) ; Wall(4, 4) ;
Marker(5, 2, quantity=1) ;      Empty(5, 3) ;   Wall(5, 4) ;

###45 steps are truncated.###

Step 49:
Agent performs a perception: frontIsClear. The result is False.
Partial state:
Wall(1, 0) ;    Empty(1, 1) ;   Empty(1, 2) ;
Wall(2, 0) ;    Agent(2, 1, direction=(0, -1)) ;        Empty(2,
   2) ;
Wall(3, 0) ;    Empty(3, 1) ;   Empty(3, 2) ;


The total step number is 105, the latter ones are truncated.

The total reward is 0.0

1. Depending on this information, please analyze the reason why
   the program failed to achieve 1.0 on this task variant and
   generate a new strategy to solve this task.
2. Generate 1 simple and short Python program according to the new
    strategy to tackle the task, avoid using comment.


                                               45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3. Convert the Python program to the Karel dsl program.


K.7   AGENT AND P ROGRAM EXECUTION TRACE .

I'll provide you with the code you developed previously, with the
   goal of refining it. To guide your revision, you'll receive
   the specific task name and a description. Since there are 32
   different versions of the task that share the same objective
   but differ by random seeds, I will identify the specific
   variant where the performance of the program is most lacking.
   Additionally, you'll get the initial state of the task, the
   code, and a detailed trajectory demonstrating how the code
   operates within this particular scenario. This trajectory will
    detail each action step-by-step, indicate which section of
   your code is active, and show a localized snapshot of the
   environment (a 3x3 area centered on the agent) during
   execution. Rewards received by the agent will also be shown
   during these steps.

Task name: DOORKEY
Task map: The map is a 8x8 grid surrounded by walls that is
   vertically split into two chambers. The left chamber is 6x3
   grid and the right chamber is 6x2 grid. There is a marker
   placed randomly on the left chamber as a key, and another
   marker placed randomly on the right chamber as a goal.
Task agent position: The agent starts on a random cell on the left
    chamber facing east.
Task goal: The goal of the agent is to pick up a marker on the
   left chamber, which opens a door connecting both chambers.
   Allow the agent to reach and put a marker on the goal marker.
Task return: Picking up the first marker yields a 0.5 reward, and
   putting a marker on the goal marker yields an additional 0.5.

Initial state:
Wall(0, 0) ;    Wall(0, 1) ;    Wall(0, 2) ;    Wall(0, 3) ;
   Wall(0, 4) ;    Wall(0, 5) ;    Wall(0, 6) ;    Wall(0, 7) ;
Wall(1, 0) ;    Empty(1, 1) ;   Empty(1, 2) ;   Empty(1, 3) ;
   Wall(1, 4) ;    Empty(1, 5) ;   Marker(1, 6, quantity=1) ;
         Wall(1, 7) ;
Wall(2, 0) ;    Empty(2, 1) ;   Empty(2, 2) ;   Empty(2, 3) ;
   Wall(2, 4) ;    Empty(2, 5) ;   Empty(2, 6) ;   Wall(2, 7) ;
Wall(3, 0) ;    Empty(3, 1) ;   Empty(3, 2) ;   Empty(3, 3) ;
   Wall(3, 4) ;    Empty(3, 5) ;   Empty(3, 6) ;   Wall(3, 7) ;
Wall(4, 0) ;    Empty(4, 1) ;   Agent(4, 2, direction=(0, 1)) ;
   Empty(4, 3) ;   Wall(4, 4) ;    Empty(4, 5) ;   Empty(4, 6) ;
      Wall(4, 7) ;
Wall(5, 0) ;    Empty(5, 1) ;   Marker(5, 2, quantity=1) ;
   Empty(5, 3) ;   Wall(5, 4) ;    Empty(5, 5) ;   Empty(5, 6) ;
      Wall(5, 7) ;
Wall(6, 0) ;    Empty(6, 1) ;   Empty(6, 2) ;   Empty(6, 3) ;
   Wall(6, 4) ;    Empty(6, 5) ;   Empty(6, 6) ;   Wall(6, 7) ;
Wall(7, 0) ;    Wall(7, 1) ;    Wall(7, 2) ;    Wall(7, 3) ;
   Wall(7, 4) ;    Wall(7, 5) ;    Wall(7, 6) ;    Wall(7, 7) ;

Program:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear():


                                               46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
             if frontIsClear():
                  move()
                  turnRight()
     pickMarker()
     while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear():
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
     putMarker()


The average reward on 32 task variants is:
0.5

Trajectory:

Step 1:
Program:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent(): # Currently executing this line
         if frontIsClear():
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
             if frontIsClear():
                 move()
                 turnRight()
    pickMarker()
    while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear():
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
    putMarker()

Agent performs a perception: noMarkersPresent. The result is True.
Partial state:
Empty(3, 1) ;   Empty(3, 2) ;   Empty(3, 3) ;
Empty(4, 1) ;   Agent(4, 2, direction=(0, 1)) ; Empty(4, 3) ;
Empty(5, 1) ;   Marker(5, 2, quantity=1) ;      Empty(5, 3) ;


Step 2:
Program:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear(): # Currently executing this line
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
             if frontIsClear():
                 move()
                 turnRight()
    pickMarker()
    while noMarkersPresent():


                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         if frontIsClear():
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
     putMarker()

Agent performs a perception: frontIsClear. The result is True.
Partial state:
Empty(3, 1) ;   Empty(3, 2) ;   Empty(3, 3) ;
Empty(4, 1) ;   Agent(4, 2, direction=(0, 1)) ; Empty(4, 3) ;
Empty(5, 1) ;   Marker(5, 2, quantity=1) ;      Empty(5, 3) ;


Step 3:
Program:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear():
             move() # Currently executing this line
         else:
             turnLeft()
             if frontIsClear():
                 move()
                 turnRight()
    pickMarker()
    while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear():
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
    putMarker()

Agent performs an action: move.
Partial state:
Empty(3, 2) ;   Empty(3, 3) ;   Wall(3, 4) ;
Empty(4, 2) ;   Agent(4, 3, direction=(0, 1)) ; Wall(4, 4) ;
Marker(5, 2, quantity=1) ;      Empty(5, 3) ;   Wall(5, 4) ;

###45 steps are truncated.###

Step 49:
Program:
def run():
    while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear(): # Currently executing this line
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
             if frontIsClear():
                 move()
                 turnRight()
    pickMarker()
    while noMarkersPresent():
         if frontIsClear():
             move()
         else:
             turnLeft()
    putMarker()



                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Agent performs a perception: frontIsClear. The result is False.
Partial state:
Wall(1, 0) ;    Empty(1, 1) ;   Empty(1, 2) ;
Wall(2, 0) ;    Agent(2, 1, direction=(0, -1)) ;        Empty(2,
   2) ;
Wall(3, 0) ;    Empty(3, 1) ;   Empty(3, 2) ;


The total step number is 105, the latter ones are truncated.

The total reward is 0.0

1. Depending on this information, please analyze the reason why
   the program failed to achieve 1.0 on this task variant and
   generate a new strategy to solve this task.
2. Generate 1 simple and short Python program according to the new
    strategy to tackle the task, avoid using comment.
3. Convert the Python program to the Karel dsl program.


                                               49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L     M INIGRID E NVIRONMENT
Minigrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023) is a grid-world environment designed for conducting
research on reinforcement learning (Guan et al., 2022; Jelley et al., 2023; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2023).
Unlike the Karel environment (Pattis, 1981), Minigrid has a richer set of objects, and each object
comes with a color. Besides Karel’s actions, the Minigrid agent also can ”toggle” objects, like
unlocking a door or opening a box. The environment has built-in tasks that range from simple
navigation to complex multi-step reasoning.
To evaluate our proposed LLM-GS framework on the Minigrid environment, we designed and
implemented a domain-specific language (DSL), which contains more actions and object types than
the Karel one. We will introduce the DSL in Appendix L.1, the tasks in Appendix L.2, the result
in Appendix L.3, and the prompts in Appendix L.4.

L.1   M INI G RID DSL

Here, we present the DSL we designed for the Minigrid environment. The actions are similar to
the ones from Karel. The perceptions, on the other hand, are distinct from Karel. Specifically, the
perception functions in our Minigrid DSL are parameterized, i.e., require an input parameter such
as an object, since there are multiple object types in the domain, unlike the case in Karel. Thus, we
implemented two novel perceptions: front object type( type ) and front object color( color ), which
are completely different from the ones in Karel DSL. They check if the cell right in front of the agent
has a certain type or a certain color object. We list the Python to DSL converting rules in Table 9 and
the probabilities of the production rules in Table 10. The setting for the program mutation is the same
as the one in Karel DSL.
                        Table 9: Python to DSL converting rules in Minigrid.

                   Python                       DSL
                   def run(): s                 DEF run m( s m)
                   while b: s                   WHILE c( b c) w( s w)
                   if b: s                      IF c( b c) i( s i)
                   if b: s else: s              IFELSE c( b c) i( s i) ELSE e( s e)
                   for i in range(n): s         REPEAT R=n r( s r)
                   not h                        not c( h c)
                   front is clear()             front is clear
                   front object type(type)      front object type h( type h)
                   front object color(color)    front object color h( color h)
                   is carrying object()         is carrying object
                   forward()                    forward
                   left()                       left
                   right()                      right
                   pickup()                     pickup
                   drop()                       drop
                   toggle()                     toggle


L.2   M INIGRID TASKS

We evaluate three tasks from the Minigrid environment: Lava Gap (Appendix L.2.1), Put Near (Ap-
pendix L.2.2), and Red Blue Door (Appendix L.2.3). We include an example illustration of the three
tasks in Figure 21 and introduce the details of each task in the following sections.


                                                  50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Table 10: Probabilities of the production rules in Minigrid.

                          Category         Rule                  Probability
                          Program P        Statement             1.0
                          Statement S      While                 0.15
                                           Repeat                0.03
                                           Concatenate           0.5
                                           If                    0.08
                                           Ifelse                0.04
                                           Action                0.2
                          Condition c      Boolean               0.5
                                           not                   0.5
                          Action a         forward               0.5
                                           left                  0.15
                                           right                 0.15
                                           pickup                0.08
                                           drop                  0.08
                                           toggle                0.04
                          Boolean b        front is clear        0.125
                                           front object type     0.5
                                           front object color    0.25
                                           is carrying object    0.125
                          Type t           lava                  0.25
                                           door                  0.25
                                           ball                  0.25
                                           box                   0.25
                          Color o          blue                  0.5
                                           red                   0.5
                          Number n         i (0 ≤ i ≤ 19)        0.05


                (a) L AVAG AP                                             (b) P UT N EAR


                                          (c) R ED B LUE D OOR

Figure 21: Illustrations of the initial and final state of the task we chose for the Minigrid (Chevalier-
Boisvert et al., 2023) evaluation. The position of obstacles, objects, and the agent’s position are
randomly set according to the configurations of each task.


L.2.1   L AVAG AP

In the task LavaGap, the agent must pass through a gap in a vertical strip of lava and reach the goal.
Stepping on the lava will terminate the episode. We set the reward function of LavaGap to give a
reward of -1.0 when stepping on lava and a reward of 1.0 when reaching the goal.


                                                  51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Purpose             Prompt Text
 Task Name           LAVAGAP
 Map Description     The map is a 6x6 grid surrounded by walls. There is a vertical strip of lava
                     with a randomly selected gap in the middle of the map and a goal square at
                     the bottom right corner.
 Initial Position    The agent starts at the top left corner of the map facing east.
 Task Goal           The agent has to reach the goal square at the bottom right corner of the map
                     without step on lava. Touching the lava terminates the episode.
 Task Reward         If the agent reaches the goal, it will receive a reward of 1. If the agent steps
                     on lava, it will receive a reward of -1.


L.2.2   P UT N EAR

In the task PutNear, the agent needs to pick up the move object and drop it next to the target object.
We modified the task to fix the move object as a ball and the target object as a box. Picking up
the move object will get a reward of 0.5 and dropping it next to the target object will receive the
remaining 0.5. Picking up the wrong object will get a reward of -1.0.

 Purpose             Prompt Text
 Task Name           PUTNEAR
 Map Description     The map is a 6x6 grid surrounded by walls. There are two objects, one is a
                     ball and the other is a box. The two objects are randomly placed on the map.
 Initial Position    The agent starts at the top left corner of the map facing east.
 Task Goal           The agent has to first locate and pick up the ball. Next, it needs to find the
                     box and drop the ball either to the right or left of it. Picking up the wrong
                     object will terminate the episode.
 Task Reward         If the agent picks up the ball, it will receive a reward of 0.5. If the agent
                     drops the ball to the right or the left of the box, it will receive a reward of 1.
                     If the agent picks up the wrong object, it will receive a reward of -1.


L.2.3   R ED B LUE D OOR

In the task RedBlueDoor, the agent must first open the red door and then the blue one. Opening
the red door first will get a reward of 0.5, followed by an additional 0.5 for opening the blue door
afterward. Opening the blue door before the red one will get a reward of -1.0.

 Purpose             Prompt Text
 Task Name           REDBLUEDOOR
 Map Description     The map is a 6x12 grid surrounded by walls that are vertically split into
                     three chambers. The left chamber is a 4x2 grid, the middle chamber is a 4x4
                     grid and the right chamber is a 4x2 grid. On the wall between the left and
                     middle chamber, there is a randomly placed red door. On the wall between
                     the middle and right chamber, there is a randomly placed blue door.
 Initial Position    The agent starts at a random position with a random direction in the middle
                     chamber.
 Task Goal           The agent has to first find and open the red door, then find and open the blue
                     door. Opening the blue door first will terminate the episode.
 Task Reward         If the agent opens the red door first, it will receive a reward of 0.5. If the
                     agent opens the blue door after opening the red door, it will receive a reward
                     of 0.5. If the agent opens the blue door first, it will receive a reward of -1.


                                                  52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L.3     M INIGRID DOMAIN

L.3.1    E VALUATION SETUP
We evaluate our proposed LLM-GS framework using the Minigrid tasks L AVAG AP, P UT N EAR,
and R ED B LUE D OOR. More task details can be found in Appendix L.2. LLM-GS is compared
with the best-performing baseline HC. The evaluation metric is the same as the one mentioned in
Section 5.1 except for C = 16 and N = 104 . For the setup, we use GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-08-06
with temperature=1.0, top p=1.0) as our LLM module to generate the initial search population. The
scheduler of our proposed Scheduled HC starts from Kstart = 32 to Kend = 2048. We evaluate our
LLM-GS and HC with 8 random seeds.

L.3.2    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Figure 22 presents the experimental result, indicating that our proposed LLM-GS is more sample-
efficient compared to HC on all the tasks.


           (a) L AVAG AP                  (b) P UT N EAR              (c) R ED B LUE D OOR

Figure 22: Efficiency in Minigrid tasks. We compare our proposed LLM-GS framework against
best-performing baseline HC in three Minigrid tasks L AVAG AP, P UT N EAR, and R ED B LUE D OOR.
The results show that our LLM-GS is more sample-efficient than HC.


L.4     M INIGRID PROMPTS

L.4.1    T HE SYSTEM PROMPT
In the Minigrid environment, you navigate a grid-based world
   referred to as a "map." Within this map, an entity called the
   "agent" can move, change direction, and interact with objects.
    The map also includes obstacles like "walls," which block the
    agent's movement; if the agent encounters a wall, it remains
   stationary. Another obstacle is "lava," which ends the episode
    if the agent steps on it. Additionally, there are "doors"
   that block the agent until opened using the "toggle" action.

At the start of each episode, various objects are scattered across
    the map, and the agent can interact with them as needed.
   These objects fall into four categories: "lava," "door," "ball
   ," and "box." Except for lava, objects can appear in two
   colors: "red" and "blue."

Lava: Ends the episode when stepped on.
Door: Blocks the agent's path until opened using the "toggle"
   action.
Ball: Can be picked up and dropped.
Box: Can be picked up and dropped.

Your objective is to generate the appropriate Python program based
    on a given task name and description. This Python program


                                               53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    will encompass actions enabling the agent to engage with the
    environment, alongside perceptions facilitating the agent's
    recognition of the environment's dynamics.

Here are the available actions for the agent:
forward(): Asks the agent to move forward one cell. The agent will
    stay still if a wall or an unopened door is blocking its way.
    The episode will be terminated if the agent steps on lava.
left(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees counterclockwise.
right(): Asks the agent to rotate 90 degrees clockwise.
pickup(): Asks the agent to pick up an object right in front of
   the current cell. The agent can only carry one object at a
   time.
drop(): Asks the agent to drop the object it is carrying right in
   front of the current cell. The agent can only drop the object
   if it is carrying one and there is no object in the cell.
toggle(): Asks the agent to change the state of a door directly in
    front of its current position. The agent can use this action
   to open or close the door immediately ahead.

Here are the available perceptions of the agent:
front_is_clear(): Returns True if there is no wall and an unopened
    door right in front of the agent. It can only check wall and
   unopened door, so if there is lava right in front of the agent
   , it will return True.
front_object_type(type: Literal["lava", "door", "ball", "box"]):
   Returns True if there is an object of the specified type right
    in front of the agent. The type can be and only can be "lava
   ", "door", "ball", or "box".
front_object_color(color: Literal["red", "blue"]): Returns True if
    there is an object of the specified color right in front of
   the agent. The color can be and only can be "red" or "blue".
is_carrying_object(): Returns True if the agent is carrying an
   object.

There are some limitations to the Python program:
- do not define other functions besides run()
- do not call other functions
- do not define variables
- do not use True, False, break, continue, return, ==, !=, elif,
   or, and

Python to Minigrid dsl conversion
1. "def run(): s" to "DEF run m( s m)"
2. "while b: s" to "WHILE c( b c) w( s w)"
3. "if b: s" to "IF c( b c) i( s i)"
4. "if b: s else: s" to "IFELSE c( b c) i( s i) ELSE e( s e)"
5. "for i in range(n): s" to "REPEAT R=n r( s r)"
6. "not h" to "not c( h c)"
7. "front_is_clear()" to "front_is_clear"
8. "front_object_type(type)" to "front_object_type h( type h)"
9. "front_object_color(color)" to "front_object_color h( color h)"
10. "is_carrying_object()" to "is_carrying_object"
11. "forward()" to "forward"
12. "left()" to "left"
13. "right()" to "right"
14. "pickup()" to "pickup"
15. "drop()" to "drop"
16. "toggle()" to "toggle"


                                               54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L.4.2   T HE USER PROMPT OF THE TASK L AVAG AP
I'll provide you with the task name and description.

Task name: LAVAGAP
Task map: The map is a 6x6 grid surrounded by walls. There is a
   vertical strip of lava with a randomly selected gap in the
   middle of the map and a goal square at the bottom right corner
   .
Task agent position: The agent starts at the top left corner of
   the map facing east.
Task goal: The agent has to reach the goal square at the bottom
   right corner of the map without step on lava. Touching the
   lava terminates the episode.
Task return: If the agent reaches the goal, it will receive a
   reward of 1. If the agent steps on lava, it will receive a
   reward of -1.

1. Generate 1 simple and short Python program to tackle the task,
   avoid using comments.
2. Convert the Python program to the Minigrid dsl program.

L.4.3   T HE SAMPLE RESPONSE OF LLM IN THE TASK L AVAG AP
```python
def run():
    while not front_object_type("lava"):
        forward()
    left()
    forward()
    right()
    while front_is_clear():
        forward()
    right()
    forward()
    left()
    while front_is_clear():
        forward()
```

Minigrid DSL program:
```
DEF run m(
    WHILE c( not c( front_object_type h( "lava" h) c) c) w(
        forward
    w)
    left
    forward
    right
    WHILE c( front_is_clear c) w(
        forward
    w)
    right
    forward
    left
    WHILE c( front_is_clear c) w(
        forward
    w)
m)


                                               55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


```


M     L IMITATION
Adapting to more complex environments beyond Karel. We believe developing more realistic
and complex programmatic RL environments is a promising future direction. However, to make
a new environment suitable for programmatic reinforcement learning (PRL), we must carefully
craft a domain-specific language (DSL) that defines action and perception primitives tailored to the
environment’s constraints. For example, in the SpaceInvaders Atari environment, actions
might be defined as Left, Right, and Fire, while perceptions could include AlienInFront,
BulletInFront, and ObstacleInFront. Only once such a DSL is in place can our framework
be effectively implemented.
Availability of Capable LLMs. Our work assumes the availability of capable LLMs with common
sense and programming skills. Training large language models (LLMs) from scratch is resource-
intensive, posing significant financial and computational costs. The process requires vast amounts of
high-quality data and cutting-edge hardware like GPUs or TPUs.
Necessity of domain experts. We need a domain expert who understands both the basic grammar of
the domain-specific language (DSL) and the domain of interest, including its low-level action and
perception primitives and simple control flows. This expert will provide a system prompt that explains
the environmental and domain concepts to the LLM when introducing it to a new environment. That
said, adopting our framework to a new domain requires such an expert to provide domain prompts.
Note that the task prompt, describing the goal of tasks, is easy to write and accessible to general users,
as it simply converts task documentation into a natural language description.


                                                   56
