Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ON ’ T FLATTEN , TOKENIZE ! U NLOCKING THE KEY TO
S OFT M O E’ S EFFICACY IN DEEP RL
 Ghada Sokar                    Johan Obando-Ceron                  Aaron Courville
 Google DeepMind                Mila, Université de Montréal      Mila, Université de Montréal
 gsokar@google.com              jobando0730@gmail.com               courvila@mila.quebec

 Hugo Larochelle                                        Pablo Samuel Castro
 Google DeepMind                                        Google DeepMind
 hugolarochelle@google.com                              Mila, Université de Montréal
                                                        psc@google.com



                                           A BSTRACT
         The use of deep neural networks in reinforcement learning (RL) often suffers from
         performance degradation as model size increases. While soft mixtures of experts
         (SoftMoEs) have recently shown promise in mitigating this issue for online RL,
         the reasons behind their effectiveness remain largely unknown. In this work we
         provide an in-depth analysis identifying the key factors driving this performance
         gain. We discover the surprising result that tokenizing the encoder output, rather
         than the use of multiple experts, is what is behind the efficacy of SoftMoEs. In-
         deed, we demonstrate that even with an appropriately scaled single expert, we are
         able to maintain the performance gains, largely thanks to tokenization.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep networks have been central to many of the successes of reinforcement learning (RL) since
their initial use in DQN (Mnih et al., 2015a), which has served as the blueprint (in particular with
regards to network architecture) for most of the followup works. However, recent works have high-
lighted the need to better understand the network architectures used, and question whether alternate


                             Baseline                SoftMoE            SoftMoE-1
               8.0

               6.0
           IQM


               4.0

               2.0

                            1               2                  4             8
                                   Num experts / layer multiplier
Figure 1: Comparison of IQM (Agarwal et al., 2021) for Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018), using the
Impala architecture (Espeholt et al., 2018), with penultimate layer scaled, and with SoftMoE with
varying numbers of experts, and a single, scaled, expert. IQM scores computed over 200M envi-
ronment steps across 20 games, with 5 independent runs each, higher is better. Error bars represent
95% stratified bootstrap confidence intervals. A single scaled expert matches the performance of
multiple experts.


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


choices can be more effective (Graesser et al., 2022; Sokar et al., 2022; 2023; Obando Ceron et al.,
2024; Lee et al., 2025). Indeed, Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) and Willi* et al. (2024) demon-
strated that the use of Mixtures-of-Experts (MoEs) (Shazeer et al., 2017), and in particular soft
mixtures-of-experts (SoftMoEs) (Puigcerver et al., 2024), yields models that are more parameter
efficient. Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) hypothesized that the underlying cause of the effectiveness
of SoftMoEs was in the induced structured sparsity in the network architecture. While some of their
analyses did seem to support this, the fact that performance gains were observed even with a single
expert seems to run counter to this hypothesis.
In this work we seek to better understand the true underlying causes for the effectiveness of Soft-
MoEs in RL settings. Specifically, we perform a careful and thorough investigation into the many
parts that make up SoftMoEs aiming to isolate the impact of each. Our investigation led to the sur-
prising finding that the core strength of SoftMoEs lies in the tokenization of the outputs of the
convolutional encoder.
The main implications of this finding are two-fold. On the one hand, it suggests that we are still
under-utilizing experts when incorporating MoEs in deep RL, given that we are able to obtain com-
parable performance with a single expert (see Figure 1). On the other hand, this finding has broader
implications for deep RL agents trained on pixel-based environments, suggesting that the common
practice of flattening the multi-dimensional outputs of the convolutional encoders is ineffective.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • We conduct a series of analyses to identify the key factors that allow soft Mixture of Experts
         (SoftMoEs) to effectively scale RL agents.
       • We demonstrate that tokenization plays a crucial role in the performance improvements.
       • We demonstrate that experts within the SoftMoEs are not specialized to handle specific
         subsets of tokens and exhibit redundancy. We explore the use of recent techniques for
         improving network utilization and plasticity to mitigate this redundancy.

The paper is organized as follows. We introduce the necessary background for RL in Section 2 and
MoEs in Section 3; we present our experimental setup in Section 4.1, and present our findings from
Section 4.2 to Section 6; finally, we discuss related works in Section 7 and provide a concluding
discussion in Section 8.

2    O NLINE D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
In online reinforcement learning, an agent interacts with an environment and adjusts its behaviour
based on the reinforcement (in the form of rewards or costs) it receives from the environment.
At timestep t, the agent inhabits a state xt ∈ X (where X is the set of all possible states)
and selects an action at ∈ A (where A is the set of all possible actions) according to its be-
haviour policy π : X → P(A); the environment’s dynamics yield a new state xt+1 ∈ X
                                                                                                  ∗
and a numerical reward   P∞ rt t ∈ R. The goal of an RL agent is to find a policy π that max-
imizes V π (x) :=          t=0 [γ  r |x
                                    t 0  = x,   a t ∼ π(xt )], where  γ  ∈   [0, 1) is a  discount  factor. In
                                                               π                                    π
value-based
P∞              RL,   an agent  maintains  an   estimate  of  Q   : X  ×  A   →   R,  defined  as Q   (x, a) =
          t
   t=0 [γ   rt |x 0 = x, a0 =  a, at ∼  π(x t )]; from any  state x ∈  X , a policy  π can  then  be improved
via π(x) = arg maxa∈A Qπ (x, a) (Sutton & Barto, 1998).
In its most basic form, value-based deep reinforcement learning (DRL) extends this approach by
using neural networks, parameterized by θ, to estimate Q. While the network architectures used
may vary across environments, the one originally introduced by Mnih et al. (2015a) for DQN has
served as the basis for most. Given that its inputs consist of frames of pixels from Atari games
(Bellemare et al., 2013), this network consisted of a series of convolutional layers followed by a
series of fully-connected layers; for the remainder of this work we will refer to the convolutional
layers as the encoder. The top panel of Figure 2 displays a simplified version of this network, where
the encoder produces a 3-dimensional tensor with dimensions (h, w, d); this tensor is flattened to a
vector of length h ∗ w ∗ d, which is fed through fully-connected layers to produce the estimates for
Q. One notable variant to the original DQN encoder is Impala’s use of a ResNet encoder (Espeholt
et al., 2018), which has been shown to outperform the former. In this work, we mainly focus on the
more recent ResNet encoder, but also include some results using the original DQN encoder.


                                                      2
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                          Dense layer
                             Flatten


                                                                                                                        h*w*d
                                                                                                                                                        Q-values

Encoder output
                                                    Weighted average


                                                                                   Expert 1 Expert 2 Expert n
                                                   of tokens in each slot
                                              d


                             Tokenize                                                                                           Flatten
                                                                                                                                                        Q-values


                                        h*w
                                                  Assign one token per slot


                                                                                   Expert 1 Expert 2 Expert n
                                              d
                 h
                             Tokenize   h*w         Router

                                                                                                                                Flatten
                                                                                                                Scale                                   Q-values
                     d
                         w                                       Each expert
                                                               processes p slots



  Figure 2: The various architectures considered in this work. Top: baseline architecture; Middle:
  SoftMoE architecture; Bottom: Top-k architecture.


  3          M IXTURES OF E XPERTS

  While there have been a number of architectural variations proposed, in this work we focus on
  Mixtures of Experts as used by Obando Ceron* et al. (2024). Mixtures of experts (MoEs) were
  originally proposed as a network architecture for supervised learning tasks using conditional com-
  putation, which enabled training very large networks (Shazeer et al., 2017; Fedus et al., 2022). This
  was achieved by including MoE modules which route a set of input tokens to a set of n sub-networks,
  or experts; the output of these experts are then combined and fed through the rest of the outer net-
  work. The routing/gating mechanism and the expert sub-networks are all trainable. In top-k routing,
  we consider two methods for pairing tokens and experts. In token choice routing, each token gets an
  assignation to k experts, each of which has p slots (the number of processed inputs by each expert);
  this may result in certain tokens being dropped entirely by the MoE module and, more critically,
  certain experts may receive no tokens (Gale et al., 2023). To overcome having load-imbalanced
  experts, Zhou et al. (2022) proposed expert choice routing, where each expert chooses p tokens
  for its p slots, which results in better expert load-balancing. See the bottom row of Figure 2 for an
                                                                                   #tokens
  illustration of this. Unless otherwise specified, we use a value of p equals to #experts . In most of
  our analyses, we focus on expert choice routing as it demonstrates higher performance than token
  choice routing (see Appendix B.1 for full empirical comparison between the two across varying
  number of experts).
  Puigcerver et al. (2024) introduced SoftMoEs, which replace the hard token-expert pairing with a
  “soft” assignation. Specifically, rather than having each expert slot assigned to a specific token, each
  slot is assigned a (learned) weighted combination of all the tokens. Thus, each expert receives p
  weighted averages of all the input tokens. See the middle row of Figure 2 for an illustration of this.
  Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) proposed replacing the penultimate dense layer of a standard RL net-
  work with an MoE module; the authors demonstrated that, when using SoftMoEs, value-based on-
  line RL agents exhibit signs of a “scaling law”, whereby adding more parameters (in the form of
  more experts) monotonically improves performance. This is in stark contrast with what is observed
  with the original architectures, where extra parameters result in performance degradation (see Fig-
  ure 1). The authors argued that the structured sparsity induced by the MoE architecture is what was
  primarily responsible for their strong performance.
  In order to maintain the shape of the input tokens (as originally done with MoE architectures),
  Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) add a projection layer after the “combine” step (ΦC in Figure 2).
  Another important detail is the proposed tokenization scheme. MoEs are most commonly used in
  NLP transformer architectures where tokens are clearly defined (typically as encodings of words),


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                w                              w                                               w                          w
                                                                                          w/ρ

               h                                     h                                                 h                h


                                                                                                 h/ρ
                                                                                                                   Shuffle
                    d                                    d                                                 d                 d


                                                                   h/ρ * w/ρ tokens


                                                                                                                             h*w tokens
                   h*w tokens
h*w*d tokens


                                          d tokens
                                    d                    h*w                                d                                                 d

    Flatten                     PerConv              PerFeat                          PerPatch                                            Shuffled


        Figure 3: Tokenization schemes considered in this work, specified in the bottom row.


but this tokenization is not something readily available for online RL agents. Thus, Obando Ceron*
et al. (2024) proposed a number of mechanisms for tokenizing the output of the encoder.

Tokenization As mentioned in section 2, the output of a standard RL encoder is a 3-dimensional
tensor with dimensions (h, w, d); Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) proposed a few possible ways of
creating tokens from this output. PerConv tokenization creates h∗w tokens of dimension d; PerFeat
tokenization creates d tokens of dimension h∗w; see Figure 3 for an illustration. Although necessary
for compatibility with transformer MoEs, this tokenization is a departure from the standard practice
of flattening the encoder output, as discussed in Section 2.

4      U NDERSTANDING THE IMPACT OF THE S OFT M O E COMPONENTS
While Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) demonstrated the appeal of SoftMoEs for online RL agents, it
was not clear whether all of the components of SoftMoEs were important for the performance gains,
or whether some were more critical. Further, it was observed that SoftMoEs failed to provide similar
gains in actor-critic algorithms such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
This section aims to isolate the impact of each of these components.

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

The genesis of our work is to provide a deeper understanding of SoftMoEs in online RL. For this
reason, we will mostly focus on SoftMoEs applied to the Rainbow agent (Hessel et al., 2018) with
4 experts and the Impala achitecture (Espeholt et al., 2018), as this was the most performant setting
observed by Obando Ceron* et al. (2024). We explore variations of this setting where useful in
clarifying the point being argued. We evaluate performance on the same 20 games of the Arcade
Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013) benchmark used by Obando Ceron* et al.
(2024) for direct comparison, with 5 independent seeds for each experiment. However, we include
the results of our main findings on the full suite of 60 games. We will use the notation “SoftMoE-n”
to denote a SoftMoE architecture with n experts. All experiments were run on Tesla P100 GPUs
using the same Dopamine library (Castro et al., 2018) used by Obando Ceron* et al. (2024); each
run with 200 million environment steps took between six and eight days. Following the guidelines
suggested by Agarwal et al. (2021), we report human-normalized aggregated interquartile mean
(IQM), regular mean, median, and optimality gap, with error bars indicating 95% stratified bootstrap
confidence intervals. Performance gains are indicated by increased IQM, median, and mean scores,
and reduced optimality gaps. See Appendix A for further details.

4.2     A NALYSIS OF S OFT M O E C OMPONENTS

At a high level, SoftMoE modules for online RL agents consist of (i) the use of a learnable tensor Φ
used to obtain the dispatch (ΦD ) and combine (ΦC ) weights; (ii) processing p input slots per expert;
(iii) the architectural dimensions (network depth and width); (iv) the use of n experts; and (v) the
tokenization of the encoder output. The middle row of Figure 2 provides an illustration of these. In


                                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    SoftMoE-4
                          Baseline (scaled x4)
                [i] Combined tokenization
                               ExpertChoice-4
                  [ii] Expert specialization
      SoftMoE-4 (Expert's #slots = #tokens)
  ExpertChoice-4 (Expert's #slots = #tokens)
                                  [iii] Width
                         SoftMoE-4 (scaled x4)
                                  [iii] Depth
         Baseline (scaled x4) with extra layer
                                             2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5
                                                         Interquartile Mean (IQM)
Figure 4: Understanding the impact of SoftMoE components. Using Rainbow with the Impala
architecture as our base, we investigate key aspects of SoftMoE-4: (i) combining tokens, (ii) ex-
pert specialization, and (iii) adjusting architectural dimensions. Reporting IQM (Agarwal et al.,
2021), where higher is better. SoftMoE does not appear to suffer from the performance degradation
observed in the baseline, even when increasing its width.

this section we discuss the first four with empirical evaluation demonstrated in Figures 1 and 4, and
devote a separate section for tokenization, which turns out to be crucial for performance. The same
analysis was performed on DER, yielding the same results, and can be found in Appendix B.3.

Processing combined tokens To assess the impact of SoftMoE’s weighted combination of tokens
via the learnable weights Φ, we compare it with expert choice routing, where experts select sets of
(non-combined) tokens. While combined tokens yield improved performance, expert choice rout-
ing itself demonstrates substantial gains over the baseline and effectively scales the network (see
group [i] in Figure 4). Thus, combined tokens alone do not explain SoftMoE’s efficacy.

Expert specialization Each expert in a MoE architecture has a limited set of slots: with to-
ken/expert selection each slot corresponds to one token, while in SoftMoE each slot corresponds
to a particular weighted combination of all tokens. This constraint could encourage each expert to
specialize in certain types of tokens in a way that is beneficial for performance and/or scaling. To
investigate, we increase the number of slots to be equal to the number of tokens (effectively granting
unlimited capacity). Group [ii] in Figure 4 demonstrates that for both SoftMoE and expert choice
routing, the performance sees little change when increasing the number of slots, suggesting that
expert specialization is not a major factor in SoftMoE’s performance.

Expert width Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) scaled up the penultimate layer of the baseline model
with the intent of matching the parameters of the SoftMoE networks, thereby demonstrating that
naı̈vely scaling width degrades performance. While they demonstrated that a performance drop is
not observed when scaling down the dimensionality of each expert, they did not investigate what
occurs when scaling up the experts dimensionality. This experiment makes sense if comparing the
baseline’s penultimate layer dimensionality with that of each expert, rather than with the combined
experts dimensionality. Scaling up the width of experts in SoftMoE does not lead to the same
performance degradation observed in the scaled baseline model as shown in the first group [iii] of
Figure 4.

Network depth As mentioned in Section 3, SoftMoE models have an additional projection layer
within each expert to maintain input token size, resulting in a different number of layers compared
to the baseline model. To determine whether this extra layer contributes to SoftMoE’s performance
gains, we add a layer of the same size to the baseline model after the penultimate layer. The second
group [iii] in Figure 4 demonstrates that this added layer does not improve the baseline model’s per-
formance nor its ability to scale, suggesting that SoftMoE’s performance gains are not attributable
to the presence of the extra projection layer.

Multiple experts Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) demonstrated that multiple experts improves per-
formance. However, the performance gains plateau beyond a certain point, with minimal improve-
ment observed after utilizing four experts (see Figure 1). Consequently, the presence of multiple
experts cannot fully account for the observed performance advantages over the baseline model, sug-
gesting that other factors are also contributing to the improved results.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Impala           Median                IQM                      Mean              Optimality Gap
                           Baseline
           TokenizedSum (PerConv)
            TokenizedAvg (PerConv)
            TokenizedSum (PerFeat)
             TokenizedAvg (PerFeat)
                              CNN
                           Baseline
           TokenizedSum (PerConv)
            TokenizedAvg (PerConv)
            TokenizedSum (PerFeat)
             TokenizedAvg (PerFeat)
                                      3.0    4.5      6.0   3    4     5     6 4       6    8       10     0.04 0.06 0.08
                                                                Human Normalized Score
                           Impala           Median                IQM                  Mean                Optimality Gap
                           Baseline
           TokenizedSum (PerConv)
            TokenizedAvg (PerConv)
            TokenizedSum (PerFeat)
             TokenizedAvg (PerFeat)
                              CNN
                           Baseline
           TokenizedSum (PerConv)
            TokenizedAvg (PerConv)
            TokenizedSum (PerFeat)
             TokenizedAvg (PerFeat)
                                      3.0    4.5     6.0    3.0 4.5 6.0              5.0    7.5   10.0 0.025 0.050 0.075 0.100
                                                               Human Normalized Score


Figure 5: Evaluating impact of tokenizing Rainbow-lite with unscaled (top) and scaled (bottom)
architectures, using sum/mean over convolutional features, and exploring both PerConv and PerFeat
tokenization schemes. Reporting Median, IQM, Mean, and Optimaly Gap scores (Agarwal et al.,
2021). Higher is better for all except Optimality Gap. Tokenization with a scaled representation can
yield significant significant performance gains. Per-game results available in Appendix C.1.


5    D ON ’ T FLATTEN , TOKENIZE !

A crucial structural difference remains in how SoftMoE and the baseline model process the encoder’s
output: while the baseline model flattens the output of the final convolutional layer, SoftMoE divides
it into distinct tokens (see Section 3). We conduct a series of experiments to properly assess the
impact of this choice, going from the standard baseline architecture to a single-expert SoftMoE.

Tokenized baseline Our first experiment simply adds tokenization to the baseline architecture.
Specifically, given the 3-dimensional encoder output with shape [h, w, d], we replace the standard
flattening (to a vector of dimension h∗w∗d) with a reshape to a matrix of shape [h∗w, d] for PerConv
tokenization or [d, h ∗ w] for PerFeat; then, prior to the final linear layer, we either sum over the first
dimension or take their average. Since this operation is not immediately applicable to Rainbow
(due to Noisy networks), we explored this experiment with Rainbow-lite, a version of Rainbow
in Dopamine which only includes C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017), multi-step returns, and prioritized
experience replay. Figure 5 demonstrates that this simple change can yield statistically significant
improvements for Rainbow-lite, providing strong evidence that tokenization plays a major role in
the successful scaling of DRL networks.

Single expert processing all tokens sparsely To assess the influence of tokenization within the
MoE framework, while ablating all other four components studied in Section 4.2, we explore using
a single expert to process all input tokens. Each token is sparsely processed in one of the single
expert slots. This corresponds to expert choice-1. In line with the “expert width” investigation from
the last section, we study expert choice-1 with the scaled expert dimensionality to match the scaled
baseline one. As Figure 6 shows, even with a single expert the performance is comparable to that
of SoftMoE with multiple experts. This suggests that tokenization is one of the major factors in the
performance gains achieved by SoftMoE.

Combined tokenization is a key driver We further investigate the impact of combined tokeniza-
tion in the single expert setting. To this end, we study SoftMoE-1, with scaled expert dimensionality
as before. As Figure 6 shows, using combined tokens with a single expert brings the performance
even closer to the multiple expert setting. Similar results were observed in SoftMoE with 2 and 8


                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


experts (See Appendix B.2 for more details). This further confirms that (combined) tokenization is
the key driver of SoftMoE’s efficacy.

5.1   A DDITIONAL ANALYSES

The main takeaway from the previous section is that SoftMoE with a single (scaled) expert is as
performant as the variant with multiple unscaled experts. To better understand this finding, in this
section we perform an extra set of experiments with this variant of SoftMoE.

Are all types of tokenization equally effective? We compare the different tokenization types pre-
sented in section 3, in addition to two new types of tokenization, which serve as useful references:
PerPatch tokenization splits the 3-dimensional [h, w, d] tensor into ρ patches, over which average
pooling is performed resulting in a new tensor of dimensions [h/ρ, w/ρ, d]; Shuffled is similar to
PerConv, except it first applies a fixed permutation on the encoder output. See Figure 3 for an il-
lustration of these. The comparison of the different tokenization types is summarized in Figure 7.
Consistent with the findings of Obando Ceron* et al. (2024), PerConv performs best, and in par-
ticular outperforms PerFeat. It is interesting to observe that PerPatch is close in performance to
PerConv, while Shuffled is the worst performing. The degradation from PerPatch is likely due to
the average pooling and reduced dimensionality; the degradation from shuffling is clearly indicating
that it is important to maintain the spatial structure of the encoding output. Combining these results
with our previous findings suggests that using tokenization maintains the spatial structure learned
by the convolutional encoder, and is crucial to maximizing performance.

Computational efficiency by combined tokens Puigcerver et al. (2024) highlighted that the time
complexity of SoftMoE depends directly on the number of slots. As can be seen in Figure 8, using
SoftMoE-1 with only 10% of the default number of slots (kept fixed throughout training), and even
with a single slot, achieves a comparable performance to using the regular number of slots. On
the other hand, the reduced performance of ExpertChoice-1 further confirms the gains added by
combining tokens in SoftMoE.

More games and different encoders Our results so far were run on the 20 games used by
Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) and with the Impala ResNet encoder (Espeholt et al., 2018). To en-
sure our findings are not specific to these choices, we extend our evaluation to all 60 games in the
ALE suite, and with the standard CNN encoder of Mnih et al. (2015b). Our findings, as illustrated
in Figure 9, demonstrate consistent results across all games and various encoder architectures. We
further conducted extra experiments on Procgen (Cobbe et al., 2019), which are consistent with our
findings (Figure 21 in Appendix C).

More agents We focused on Rainbow for the majority of our investigation due to the positive
results demonstrated by Obando Ceron* et al. (2024), but it is important to also consider other
agents. To this point, we evaluate the impact of a single scaled expert on DQN (Mnih et al., 2015b)

                              SoftMoE
                              4 experts
                     1 expert scaled x4
                               1 expert
                         ExpertChoice
                     1 expert scaled x4
                              Baseline
             Penultimate layer scaled x4
                                       3.0   3.5   4.0   4.5   5.0   5.5   6.0   6.5   7.0   7.5
                                                         Interquartile Mean (IQM)

Figure 6: Combined tokenization is a key driver of SoftMoE’s efficacy. Reporting IQM (Agarwal
et al., 2021), where higher is better. SoftMoE with a single scaled expert has comparable perfor-
mance with using multiple experts. Even non-combined tokenization (e.g. ExpertChoice) with a
single expert achieves similar performance.


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Shuffled               PerFeat           PerPatch        PerConv
                        8.0

                        6.0


                     IQM
                        4.0

                        2.0

                                             1                             4
                                                 Num experts / layer multiplier

Figure 7: Comparison of different tokenization schemes for SoftMoE-1 with the standard and
scaled penultimate layer. Reporting IQM (Agarwal et al., 2021), where higher is better. PerConv
achieves the highest performance, suggesting that maintaining the spatial structure of the features
plays a role on the observed benefits.


and DER (Van Hasselt et al., 2019). Note that we replace the original Huber loss used in DQN
with mean-squared error loss, as it has been shown to be more performant (Ceron & Castro, 2021),
and coincides with what was used by Obando Ceron* et al. (2024). Following the training regime
used by Obando Ceron* et al. (2024), we train DER for 50M environment frames. In the DQN
setting, SoftMoE-1 does not appear to offer significant improvements over the baseline, potentially
due to the limited gains observed with SoftMoE-4 (Figure 10, top). Further investigation is needed to
understand how the inherent instability of DQN might limit the potential benefits of SoftMoE. On the
other hand, consistent with our finding in Rainbow, in DER, where SoftMoE-4 achieves a superior
performance over the baseline, SoftMoE-1 is able to offer the same gains (Figure 10, bottom). To
further evaluate the generality of our claims, we conducted initial experiments with SAC (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) on the CALE (Farebrother & Castro, 2024), which is a continuous action version of the
original ALE. In Figure 22 in Appendix C it can be seen that tokenization provides an improvement
over flattening.


6    C ALLING ALL EXPERTS !

Our findings in Sections 4 and 5 reveal that the main benefit of using SoftMoE architectures is in
the tokenization and their weighted combination, rather than in the use of multiple experts. The
fact that we see no evidence of expert specialization suggests that most experts are redundant (see
Figure 4). Rather than viewing this as a negative result, it’s an opportunity to develop new techniques
to improve expert utilization and maximize the use of MoE architectures in RL.
As a first step in this direction, we adopt existing techniques designed to improve network utilization:
(1) periodic reset of parameters (Nikishin et al., 2022) and (2) Shrink and Perturb (S&P) (Ash &
Adams, 2020), as used by D’Oro et al. (2022) and Schwarzer* et al. (2023). We perform these
experiments on Rainbow and DER with SoftMoE-4. We explore applying resets and S&P to either
all experts or a subset of experts, where the experts to reset are those that have the highest fraction of


                                  SoftMoE
                     Using 10% of slots
                                  SoftMoE
                              ExpertChoice
                              Single slot
                                  SoftMoE
                              ExpertChoice
                                         2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5
                                                            Interquartile Mean (IQM)

Figure 8: Evaluating the impact of fewer slots with a single scaled (by 4x) expert for both
SoftMoE and ExpertChoice. Reporting IQM (Agarwal et al., 2021), where higher is better. Even
with drastically fewer slots, SoftMoE-1 remains competitive.


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              7
              6
              5                                                                                        Baseline (scaled x4)
                                                                                                       SoftMoE-4


            IQM
              4
              3                                                                                        SoftMoE-1 (scaled x4)
              2
              1
              0         Evaluation over 60 games              Evaluation with CNN architecture


Figure 9: (Left) Evaluating the performance on all of the 60 games of Atari 2600. Reporting IQM
(Agarwal et al., 2021), where higher is better. Consistent with our results SoftMoE-1 matches the
performance of multiple experts over the full suite. (Right) CNN Encoder. The performance gain
of SoftMoE-1 is present when training with the standard CNN encoder, revealing the importance of
tokenization across architectures.

dormant neurons (Sokar et al., 2023). We reset every 20M and 200K environment steps for Rainbow
and DER, respectively. More experimental details can be found in Appendix B.5.
Interestingly, the effectiveness of these techniques varied across different RL agents. While weight
reset and S&P did not improve expert utilization in the Rainbow agent, they led to enhanced perfor-
mance in the sample-efficient DER agent (Figure 11). Within the DER agent, resetting a subset of
experts proved more beneficial than resetting all, while applying S&P to all experts yielded the most
significant performance gains. These findings highlight the need for further research into methods
that can optimize expert utilization and improve performance in RL with SoftMoE.

7     R ELATED W ORKS
Mixture of Experts Mixture of Experts (MoEs) have demonstrated remarkable success in scaling
language and computer vision models to trillions of parameters (Lepikhin et al., 2020; Fedus et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019; Abbas & Andreopoulos, 2020; Pavlitskaya et al., 2020).
Chung et al. (2024) examined the implicit biases arising from token combinations in SoftMoE and
defined the notion of expert specialization in computer vision. Besides the success of MoEs in
single task training, similar gains have been observed in transfer and multitask learning (Puigcerver
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023; Ye & Xu, 2023; Hazimeh et al., 2021). In addition to the works of
Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) and Willi* et al. (2024) already discussed, Farebrother et al. (2024)
proposed replacing regression loss with classification loss and showed its benefits on MoEs.

Network scalability in RL Scaling reinforcement learning (RL) networks presents significant
challenges, largely due to issues with training instabilities (Hessel et al., 2018). To address these
difficulties, several techniques have been proposed, with a focus on algorithmic improvements or
hyperparameter optimization (Farebrother et al., 2022; 2024; Taiga et al., 2022; Schwarzer* et al.,
2023). Recently, a few studies have begun to focus on architectural innovations as a means of
addressing these challenges. Kumar et al. (2023a) showed that incorporating a learned spatial em-
bedding with the output of a ResNet encoder, prior to flattening it, improves the scalability in offline
RL. Obando Ceron et al. (2024) demonstrated that gradual magnitude pruning enables the scaling
of value-based agents, resulting in substantial performance gains.

                                    Median              IQM                               Mean                 Optimality Gap
     Baseline (scaled x4)
    SoftMoE-1 (scaled x4)
               SoftMoE-4
                            2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4         3.00 3.25 3.50       5.4 6.0 6.6                    0.060 0.075 0.090 0.105
                                                      Human Normalized Score
                                    Median              IQM                  Mean                             Optimality Gap
     Baseline (scaled x4)
    SoftMoE-1 (scaled x4)
               SoftMoE-4
                              1.2    1.6      2.0   1.2 1.6 2.0 1.2 1.6                          2.0        0.20 0.24 0.28 0.32
                                                      Human Normalized Score

Figure 10: Evaluating on DQN (top) and DER (bottom). Reporting Median, IQM, Mean, and
Optimaly Gap scores (Agarwal et al., 2021). Higher is better for all except Optimality Gap. When
combined with DQN, SoftMoE with a single scaled expert does not provide gains over the baseline.
In contrast, when combined with DER, it achieves performance comparable to SoftMoE-4.

                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Rainbow                      DER
               Reset 4 experts
               Reset 2 experts
                     No resets
                S&P 4 experts
                S&P 2 experts
                      No S&P
                                 6.0   6.4       6.8   7.2      2.0       2.4   2.8
                                             IQM Human Normalized Score
Figure 11: Evaluating the use of resets (top) and S&P (bottom) for improving expert utilization
on Rainbow (left column) and DER (right column). Reporting IQM (Agarwal et al., 2021), where
higher is better. All experiments run with SoftMoE-4. Resets and S&P seem to benefit DER, but
degrade performance for Rainbow.


Network plasticity in RL It has been observed that networks trained on non-stationary distribu-
tions tend to lose their expressivity over time, a phenomenon referred to as the loss of plasticity
(Kumar et al., 2021; Lyle et al., 2021). While several studies have attempted to explain this phe-
nomenon (Lyle et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Lyle et al., 2024), the underlying causes remain un-
certain. In a parallel line of research, numerous methods have been proposed to improve network
trainability. These approaches involve using small batch size for gradient updates (Ceron et al.,
2023), periodically resetting some of the network’s parameters to random values (Sokar et al., 2023;
Nikishin et al., 2022; Igl et al., 2020; Dohare et al., 2024), slightly modifying the existing weights
by shrinking and perturbing them (D’Oro et al., 2022; Schwarzer* et al., 2023), and restricting the
large deviation from initial weights (Kumar et al., 2023b; Lewandowski et al., 2024). Recently, Lee
et al. (2024) have also demonstrated that combining reinitialization with a teacher-student frame-
work can enhance plasticity. Another technique involves preserving useful neurons by perturbing
gradients to ensure smaller updates for important neurons (Elsayed & Mahmood, 2024). Liu et al.
(2025) proposed dynamic network growth through neuron generation and dormant neuron pruning.
In this work, we explore some of these methods to improve plasticity and utilization of experts.

8   C ONCLUSIONS
We began our investigation by evaluating the components that make up a SoftMoE architecture, so
as to better understand the strong performance gains reported by Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) when
applied to value-based deep RL agents. One of the principal, and rather striking, findings is that
tokenizing the encoder outputs is one of the primary drivers of the performance improvements. Since
tokenization is mostly necessary for pixel-based environments (where encoders typically consist of
convolutional layers), it can explain the absence of performance gains observed by Obando Ceron*
et al. (2024) and Willi* et al. (2024) when using MoE architectures in actor-critic algorithms, since
these were evaluated in non-pixel-based environments. Initial experiments illustrated in Figure 22
suggest that our findings carry over to actor-critic agents on continuous control environments.
More generally, our findings suggests that the common practice of flattening the outputs of deep
RL encoders is sub-optimal, as it is likely not maintaining the spatial structure output by the con-
volutional encoders. Indeed, the results with PerConv versus Shuffled tokenization in Figure 7
demonstrate that maintaining this spatial structure is important for performance. This is further
confirmed by our results in Figure 5, where we can observe that not flattening the convolutional
outputs can lead to significant improvements. This idea merits further investigation, as the results
vary depending on the architecture used and whether features are summed or averaged over.
It is somewhat surprising that our results do not seem to carry over to DQN. However, the fact that
we do see similar results with Rainbow-lite and DER (which is based on Rainbow) suggests that
the use of categorical losses may have a complementary role to play. This is a point argued by
Farebrother et al. (2024) and merits further inquiry.
Although the use of mixtures-of-experts architectures for RL show great promise, our results suggest
that most of the experts are not being used to their full potential. The findings in Figure 11 present
one viable mechanism for increasing their use, but further research is needed to continue increasing
their efficacy for maximally performant RL agents.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Gheorghe Comanici, Jesse Farebrother, Joan Puigcerver, Doina Pre-
cup, and the rest of the Google DeepMind team for valuable feedback on this work. We would also
like to thank the Python community (Van Rossum & Drake Jr, 1995; Oliphant, 2007) for developing
tools that enabled this work, including NumPy (Harris et al., 2020), Matplotlib (Hunter, 2007) and
JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018).

R EFERENCES
Alhabib Abbas and Yiannis Andreopoulos. Biased mixtures of experts: Enabling computer vision
  inference under data transfer limitations. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 29:7656–7667,
  2020.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelz-
  imer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 29304–29320. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Jordan Ash and Ryan P Adams. On warm-starting neural network training. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:3884–3894, 2020.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
 253–279, 2013.
Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforce-
 ment learning. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
 pp. 449–458. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
 bellemare17a.html.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, et al. Jax:
  composable transformations of python+ numpy programs. 2018.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G. Bellemare.
  Dopamine: A Research Framework for Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2018. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1812.06110.
Johan Samir Obando Ceron and Pablo Samuel Castro. Revisiting rainbow: Promoting more insight-
  ful and inclusive deep reinforcement learning research. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1373–1383. PMLR, 2021.
Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Marc G Bellemare, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Small batch deep re-
  inforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=wPqEvmwFEh.
Zitian Chen, Yikang Shen, Mingyu Ding, Zhenfang Chen, Hengshuang Zhao, Erik G Learned-
  Miller, and Chuang Gan. Mod-squad: Designing mixtures of experts as modular multi-task learn-
  ers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 11828–11837, 2023.
Youngseog Chung, Dhruv Malik, Jeff Schneider, Yuanzhi Li, and Aarti Singh. Beyond parameter
  count: Implicit bias in soft mixture of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00879, 2024.
Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural genera-
  tion to benchmark reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01588, 2019.
Shibhansh Dohare, J Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, Qingfeng Lan, Parash Rahman, A Rupam Mah-
  mood, and Richard S Sutton. Loss of plasticity in deep continual learning. Nature, 632(8026):
  768–774, 2024.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pierluca D’Oro, Max Schwarzer, Evgenii Nikishin, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Marc G Bellemare, and
  Aaron Courville. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning by breaking the replay ratio barrier. In
  Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop NeurIPS 2022, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=4GBGwVIEYJ.

Mohamed Elsayed and A Rupam Mahmood. Addressing loss of plasticity and catastrophic forget-
 ting in continual learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2024.

Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymir Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with
  importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.

Jesse Farebrother and Pablo Samuel Castro. CALE: Continuous arcade learning environment. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Jesse Farebrother, Joshua Greaves, Rishabh Agarwal, Charline Le Lan, Ross Goroshin,
  Pablo Samuel Castro, and Marc G Bellemare. Proto-value networks: Scaling representation learn-
  ing with auxiliary tasks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.

Jesse Farebrother, Jordi Orbay, Quan Vuong, Adrien Ali Taı̈ga, Yevgen Chebotar, Ted Xiao, Alex
  Irpan, Sergey Levine, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aleksandra Faust, Aviral Kumar, and Rishabh Agar-
  wal. Stop regressing: Training value functions via classification for scalable deep rl. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024.

William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter
 models with simple and efficient sparsity. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):
 5232–5270, 2022.

Trevor Gale, Deepak Narayanan, Cliff Young, and Matei Zaharia. MegaBlocks: Efficient Sparse
  Training with Mixture-of-Experts. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 5, 2023.

Laura Graesser, Utku Evci, Erich Elsen, and Pablo Samuel Castro. The state of sparse training in
  deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7766–7792.
  PMLR, 2022.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Charles R Harris, K Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J Van Der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J Smith, et al. Array program-
  ming with numpy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, 2020.

Hussein Hazimeh, Zhe Zhao, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Maheswaran Sathiamoorthy, Yihua Chen,
  Rahul Mazumder, Lichan Hong, and Ed Chi. Dselect-k: Differentiable selection in the mixture
  of experts with applications to multi-task learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:29335–29347, 2021.

Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, H. V. Hasselt, T. Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan Hor-
 gan, Bilal Piot, M. G. Azar, and D. Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforce-
 ment learning. In AAAI, 2018.

John D Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing in science & engineering, 9
  (03):90–95, 2007.

Maximilian Igl, Gregory Farquhar, Jelena Luketina, Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson.
 Transient non-stationarity and generalisation in deep reinforcement learning. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aviral Kumar, Rishabh Agarwal, Dibya Ghosh, and Sergey Levine. Implicit under-parameterization
  inhibits data-efficient deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2021.
Aviral Kumar, Rishabh Agarwal, Xinyang Geng, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Offline
  q-learning on diverse multi-task data both scales and generalizes. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=4-k7kUavAj.
Saurabh Kumar, Henrik Marklund, and Benjamin Van Roy. Maintaining plasticity via regenerative
  regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11958, 2023b.
Hojoon Lee, Hyeonseo Cho, Hyunseung Kim, Donghu Kim, Dugki Min, Jaegul Choo, and Clare
  Lyle. Slow and steady wins the race: Maintaining plasticity with hare and tortoise networks. In
  Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Hojoon Lee, Dongyoon Hwang, Donghu Kim, Hyunseung Kim, Jun Jet Tai, Kaushik Subrama-
  nian, Peter R. Wurman, Jaegul Choo, Peter Stone, and Takuma Seno. Simba: Simplicity bias for
  scaling up parameters in deep reinforcement learning. In The Thirteenth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  jXLiDKsuDo.
Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen, Orhan Firat, Yanping Huang,
 Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and Zhifeng Chen. Gshard: Scaling giant models with conditional
 computation and automatic sharding. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2020.
Alex Lewandowski, Haruto Tanaka, Dale Schuurmans, and Marlos C. Machado. Directions of
  curvature as an explanation for loss of plasticity, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2312.00246.
Jiashun Liu, Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, and Ling Pan. Neuroplastic expansion
   in deep reinforcement learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-
   sentations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=20qZK2T7fa.
Clare Lyle, Mark Rowland, and Will Dabney. Understanding and preventing capacity loss in rein-
  forcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo Avila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney.
  Understanding plasticity in neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 23190–23211. PMLR, 2023.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Khimya Khetarpal, Hado van Hasselt, Razvan Pascanu, James Martens,
  and Will Dabney. Disentangling the causes of plasticity loss in neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.18762, 2024.
G Ma, L Li, S Zhang, Z Liu, Z Wang, Y Chen, L Shen, X Wang, and D Tao. Revisiting plasticity in
  visual reinforcement learning: Data. Modules and Training Stages, 2023.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518(7540):529–533, February 2015a.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015b.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 16828–16847. PMLR, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, and Pablo Samuel Castro. In value-based deep rein-
  forcement learning, a pruned network is a good network. In Proceedings of the 41st International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 38495–38519. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024.

Johan Samir Obando Ceron*, Ghada Sokar*, Timon Willi*, Clare Lyle, Jesse Farebrother,
  Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Doina Precup, and Pablo Samuel Cas-
  tro. Mixtures of experts unlock parameter scaling for deep RL. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  X9VMhfFxwn.

Travis E. Oliphant. Python for scientific computing. Computing in Science & Engineering, 9(3):
  10–20, 2007. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.58.

Svetlana Pavlitskaya, Christian Hubschneider, Michael Weber, Ruby Moritz, Fabian Huger, Peter
  Schlicht, and Marius Zollner. Using mixture of expert models to gain insights into semantic
  segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition Workshops, pp. 342–343, 2020.

Joan Puigcerver, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Basil Mustafa, Cedric Renggli, André Susano Pinto, Syl-
  vain Gelly, Daniel Keysers, and Neil Houlsby. Scalable transfer learning with expert models. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Joan Puigcerver, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Basil Mustafa, and Neil Houlsby. From sparse to soft
  mixtures of experts. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017.

Max Schwarzer*, Johan Samir Obando Ceron*, Aaron Courville, Marc G Bellemare, Rishabh Agar-
 wal, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Bigger, better, faster: Human-level Atari with human-level effi-
 ciency. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato,
 and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learn-
 ing, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 30365–30380. PMLR, 23–29
 Jul 2023.

Noam Shazeer, *Azalia Mirhoseini, *Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hin-
  ton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-
  experts layer. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=B1ckMDqlg.

Ghada Sokar, Elena Mocanu, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Peter Stone.
  Dynamic sparse training for deep reinforcement learning. In International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2022.

Ghada Sokar, Rishabh Agarwal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Utku Evci. The dormant neuron phe-
  nomenon in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  32145–32168. PMLR, 2023.

Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA, USA, 1st edition, 1998. ISBN 0262193981.

Adrien Ali Taiga, Rishabh Agarwal, Jesse Farebrother, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Investigating multi-task pretraining and generalization in reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Hado P Van Hasselt, Matteo Hessel, and John Aslanides. When to use parametric models in rein-
  forcement learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Guido Van Rossum and Fred L Drake Jr. Python reference manual. Centrum voor Wiskunde en
  Informatica Amsterdam, 1995.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xin Wang, Fisher Yu, Lisa Dunlap, Yi-An Ma, Ruth Wang, Azalia Mirhoseini, Trevor Darrell, and
  Joseph E Gonzalez. Deep mixture of experts via shallow embedding. In Uncertainty in artificial
  intelligence, pp. 552–562. PMLR, 2020.
Timon Willi*, Johan Samir Obando Ceron*, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite,
  and Pablo Samuel Castro. Mixture of experts in a mixture of RL settings. In Reinforcement Learn-
  ing Conference, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5FFO6RlOEm.
Brandon Yang, Gabriel Bender, Quoc V Le, and Jiquan Ngiam. Condconv: Conditionally parame-
  terized convolutions for efficient inference. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  32, 2019.
Hanrong Ye and Dan Xu. Taskexpert: Dynamically assembling multi-task representations with
  memorial mixture-of-experts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, pp. 21828–21837, 2023.
Yanqi Zhou, Tao Lei, Hanxiao Liu, Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Vincent Zhao, Andrew M Dai, Quoc V
  Le, James Laudon, et al. Mixture-of-experts with expert choice routing. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:7103–7114, 2022.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Tasks We evaluate Rainbow on 20 games from the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare
et al., 2013). We use the same set of games evaluated by Obando Ceron* et al. (2024) for di-
rect comparison. This includes: Asterix, SpaceInvaders, Breakout, Pong, Qbert, DemonAttack,
Seaquest, WizardOfWor, RoadRunner, BeamRider, Frostbite, CrazyClimber, Assault, Krull, Box-
ing, Jamesbond, Kangaroo, UpNDown, Gopher, and Hero. In addition, we run some of our main
results on all suite of 60 games.
On Atari100k benchmark, we evaluate on the full 26 games. These are: Alien, Amidar, Assault, As-
terix, BankHeist, BattleZone, Boxing, Breakout, ChopperCommand, CrazyClimber, DemonAttack,
Freeway, Frostbite, Gopher, Hero, Jamesbond, Kangaroo, Krull, KungFuMaster, MsPacman, Pong,
PrivateEye, Qbert, RoadRunner, Seaquest, UpNDown.

Hyper-parameters We use the default hyper-parameter values for DQN (Mnih et al., 2015a),
Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018), and DER (Van Hasselt et al., 2019) agents. We share the details of
these values in Table 1.

          Table 1: Default hyper-parameters setting for DQN, Rainbow and DER agents.
                                                              Atari
                        Hyper-parameter                DQN      Rainbow        DER
                        Adam’s ( )                     1.5e-4     1.5e-4     0.00015
                   Adam’s learning rate               6.25e-5    6.25e-5     0.0001
                        Batch Size                       32         32          32
                 Conv. Activation Function             ReLU       ReLU        ReLU
                   Convolutional Width                    1          1
                 Dense Activation Function             ReLU       ReLU        ReLU
                       Dense Width                      512        512         512
                      Normalization                    None       None        None
                      Discount Factor                   0.99       0.99        0.99
                       Exploration                      0.01       0.01        0.01
                   Exploration   decay                250000     250000       2000
                 Minimum Replay History                20000      20000        1600
                    Number of Atoms                       0         51          51
               Number of Convolutional Layers             3          3           3
                 Number of Dense Layers                   2          2           2
                     Replay Capacity                  1000000    1000000     1000000
                     Reward Clipping                    True       True        True
                      Update Horizon                      1          3          10
                      Update Period                       4          4           1
                       Weight Decay                       0          0           0
                      Sticky Actions                    True       True       False



B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
B.1   C OMPARISON BETWEEN TOKEN CHOICE ROUTING AND EXPERT CHOICE ROUTING

We focus in our analysis on expert choice routing, where experts select tokens, as opposed to token
choice routing, where tokens select experts. We compare these two routing strategies across different
numbers of experts using a Rainbow agent with a ResNet architecture.
Figure 12 demonstrates that expert choice routing consistently outperforms token choice routing
across varying number of experts. Moreover, this performance gap widens as the number of experts
increases, highlighting the advantages of expert choice routing in addressing the limitations of token
choice routing.



                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        7
                                                  Token Choice-2                                                                            Token Choice-4


           IQM Human Normalized Score


                                                                                                 IQM Human Normalized Score
                                        6         Expert Choice-2                                                             6             Expert Choice-4
                                        5                                                                                     5
                                        4                                                                                     4
                                        3                                                                                     3
                                        2                                                                                     2
                                        1                                                                                     1
                                        0                                                                                     0
                                            0      25      50 75 100 125 150 175 200                                              0          25     50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                                                           Number of Frames (in millions)                                                           Number of Frames (in millions)
                                     7            Token Choice-8                                                           7            Token Choice-16
        IQM Human Normalized Score


                                                                                              IQM Human Normalized Score
                                     6            Expert Choice-8                                                          6            Expert Choice-16
                                     5                                                                                     5
                                     4                                                                                     4
                                     3                                                                                     3
                                     2                                                                                     2
                                     1                                                                                     1
                                     0                                                                                     0
                                            0      25     50 75 100 125 150 175 200                                               0         25      50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                                                          Number of Frames (in millions)                                                            Number of Frames (in millions)
Figure 12: A comparison between token choice routing and expert choice routing on Rainbow
with ResNet encoder. Expert choice routing consistently outperforms token choice routing across
different number of experts. We report interquantile mean performance with error bars indicating
95% confidence intervals, over 20 games with 5 seeds each.

B.2   D ON ’ T FLATTEN TOKENIZE

In this section, we provide further analysis on the impact of tokenization and their weight com-
bination on models with varying number of experts. To this end, we investigate SoftMoE-2 and
SoftMoE-8 and compare it against the scaled SoftMoE-1 and ExpertChoice-1 (non-combined to-
kenization). Figure 13 shows that single scaled expert can reach a performance close to multiple
experts, even in the case of large number of experts. In addition, consistent with our results, com-
bined tokenization adds benefits over the sparse one. Figure 14 shows a comparison between the
learning curves of single scaled expert and multiple ones.

                                                                    SoftMoE-2

                                                        SoftMoE-1 (scaled x2)

                                                Expert Choice-1 (scaled x2)

                                                         Baseline (scaled x2)
                                                                            3.0   3.5   4.0            4.5                            5.0         5.5     6.0     6.5     7.0         7.5
                                                                                              Interquartile Mean (IQM)
                                                                    SoftMoE-8

                                                        SoftMoE-1 (scaled x8)

                                                Expert Choice-1 (scaled x8)

                                                         Baseline (scaled x8)
                                                                            3.0   3.5   4.0     4.5                               5.0         5.5       6.0     6.5     7.0     7.5
                                                                                              Interquartile Mean (IQM)
Figure 13: Combined tokenization plays a crucial role in performance. SoftMoE-1 with scaled
hidden layer achieves a comparable performance to the standard SoftMoE.


                                                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   7                                                                                                                                                                       8


      IQM Human Normalized Score


                                                                                         IQM Human Normalized Score


                                                                                                                                                                              IQM Human Normalized Score
                                   6                                                                                  6                                                                                    6
                                   5
                                   4                                                                                  4                                                                                    4
                                   3
                                   2                         SoftMoE-2                                                2                         SoftMoE-4                                                                           SoftMoE-8
                                                             SoftMoE-1 (scaled x2)                                                              SoftMoE-1 (scaled x4)                                      2                        SoftMoE-1 (scaled x8)
                                   1                         Baseline (scaled x2)                                                               Baseline (scaled x4)                                                                Baseline (scaled x8)
                                   0                         Expert Choice 1 Expert x2                                0                         Expert Choice-1 (scaled x4)                                0                        Expert Choice-1 (scaled x8)
                                        0   25   50 75 100 125 150 175 200                                                0     25   50 75 100 125 150 175 200                                                 0   25    50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                                                 Number of Frames (in millions)                                                      Number of Frames (in millions)                                                      Number of Frames (in millions)


Figure 14: Comparison between the learning curves of the scaled SoftMoE-1 and multiple experts.
We report interquantile mean performance with error bars indicating 95% confidence intervals, over
20 games with 5 seeds each.


To further assess the effect of flattening in reducing performance of agents, we replace the flattening
operation in the baseline by global average pooling. We performed these experiments on the baseline
with the default dimensionality and the scaled one in Rainbow.
                                                                                         Median                                                 IQM                                                        Mean                   Optimality Gap
                           Baseline (scaled x4) w/ Avg Pooling
                            Baseline (scaled x4) w/ Flattening
                                       Baseline w/ Avg Pooling
                                        Baseline w/ Flattening
                                                                                4.5              6.0                          7.5           5Human6 Normalized
                                                                                                                                                        7      Score6                                          8   10            0.030 0.045 0.060


Figure 15: Replacing the flattening operation by global average pooling improves the performance
of the baseline and enables scaling.

B.3                                    A NALYSIS OF S OFT M O E COMPONENTS

In this section, we present an analysis of each of SoftMoE components on the DER algorithm. As
shown in Figure 16, we observe similar tends to our findings in Section 4.2 on Rainbow. Combined
tokens offers an additional benefits over the sparse ones. Experts do seem not be specialized in
subset of the tokens. Adjusting the architectural depth and width for direct comparison with the
baseline doesn’t explain the performance gains of SoftMoE.

                                                                                  SoftMoE-4
                                                                        Baseline (scaled x4)
                                                           [i] Combined tokenization
                                                                         ExpertChoice-4
                                                             [ii] Expert specialization
                                                SoftMoE-4 (Expert's #slots = #tokens)
                                            ExpertChoice-4 (Expert's #slots = #tokens)
                                                                            [iii] Width
                                                                  SoftMoE-4 (scaled x4)
                                                                            [iii] Depth
                                                   Baseline (scaled x4) with extra layer
                                                                                       0.0                                                     0.5                  1.0                                            1.5             2.0
                                                                                                                                                       Interquartile Mean (IQM)
                                                 Figure 16: Understanding the impact of SoftMoE components on DER.

Effect of Expert width In section 5, we studied the effect of scaling up the size of the expert
hidden layer of SoftMoE-1. Here, we present the results of scaling down the size of this layer by 4.
As shown in Figure 17, SoftMoE-1 with scaled down layer still outperform the baseline despite that
it has less parameter count.

B.4                                    M ORE AGENTS

Same as our finding for DQN using SoftMoE-4, we observe that single expert has a closer perfor-
mance to the scaled baseline than SoftMoE-8, as shown in Figure 18. Further investigation is needed
to fully understand the behavior of SoftMoE on DQN.

B.5                                    E XPERT U TILIZATION

In this section we provide more analysis to understand the utilization of experts in multi expert
setting and the effect of existing techniques on improving plasticity.


                                                                                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                               7


                                                                  IQM Human Normalized Score
                                                                                               6
                                                                                               5
                                                                                               4
                                                                                               3
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                 Baseline
                                                                                               1                                 SoftMoE-1 (scaled x4)
                                                                                               0                                 SoftMoE-1 (scaled ÷4)
                                                                                                     0    25   50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                                                                                                               Number of Frames (in millions)
        Figure 17: The effect of scaling down the size of the expert hidden layer in SoftMoE-1.
                                                                  Median                                               IQM                          Mean              Optimality Gap
   ExpertChoice-1 (scaled x8)
         Baseline (scaled x8)
       SoftMoE-1 (scaled x8)
                   SoftMoE-8
                                2.5                           3.0                                  3.5    4.0 2.4   2.8 3.2 3.6         4.5              6.0   7.50.06 0.08 0.10 0.12
                                                                                                                    Human Normalized Score

Figure 18: Evaluating more agents. When combined with DQN, SoftMoE with a single scaled
expert does not provide large gains over the baseline.

B.5.1     S OME EXPERTS ARE REDUNDANT
In Section 4.2, we showed that experts are not specialized in learning subset of tokens. We expand
this analysis by assessing the redundancy of experts. To this end, we prune two experts of SoftMoE-4
during training. We studied two pruning schemes: pruning the two experts once and gradually prune
throughout training. As shown in Figure 19, pruning these experts does not change the performance
of the agent.
                                 IQM Human Normalized Score


                                                              6

                                                              4

                                                              2                                                              No pruning
                                                                                                                             Prune one at 25M, then 50M
                                                              0                                                              Prune both at 50M
                                        50 75 100 125 150 175 200            0                       25
                                       Number of Frames (in millions)
Figure 19: Pruning subset of experts in SoftMoE-4 does not lead to performance drop, suggesting
that some of the experts are redundant. We report interquantile mean performance with error bars
indicating 95% confidence intervals, over 20 games with 5 seeds each.

B.5.2     I MPROVING E XPERT U TILIZATION



Experimental details For hyper-parameter tuning, we used six games (Asterix, Demon Attack,
Seaquest, Breakout, Beam Rider, Space Invaders). For the reset period, we searched for Rainbow
over the grid [0.5 × 104 , 10 × 104 , 50 × 104 , 100 × 104 , 125 × 104 , 500 × 104 , 1000 × 104 ] gradient
steps. The best found is 125 × 104 , which corresponds to 20M environment steps. For S&P, we
searched over the values [(0.5, 0.5), (0.4, 0.1), (0.8, 0.2)] for shrink and perturb hyperparameters
respectively, as studied in (Schwarzer* et al., 2023). We used values of (0.5, 0.5).

Reset experts and router weights In investigating current techniques to improve expert utiliza-
tion, we explore reset either experts weights only or both experts and router weights. As illustrated
in Figure 20, both methods do not help in improving utilization in Rainbow and DQN, with resetting
the router weights leads to worse performance.


                                                                                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Median                 IQM                       Mean            Optimality Gap
Reset-4 (experts & router)
Reset-2 (experts & router)
         Reset-4 (experts)
         Reset-2 (experts)
                SoftMoE-4
                                6      7       8       6.4 6.8 7.2        9.6 10.2 10.8 11.4 0.0210.0240.0270.030
                                                           Human Normalized Score
                                      Median                 IQM                  Mean                 Optimality Gap
Reset-4 (experts & router)
Reset-2 (experts & router)
         Reset-4 (experts)
         Reset-2 (experts)
                SoftMoE-4
                         2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50          5.5    6.0     6.5   7.0 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12
                                                        Human Normalized Score
                                      Median              IQM                  Mean                   Optimality Gap
Reset-4 (experts & router)
Reset-2 (experts & router)
         Reset-4 (experts)
         Reset-2 (experts)
                SoftMoE-4
                             2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75   2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75      2.4 2.8 3.2            0.12 0.15 0.18 0.21
                                                       Human Normalized Score

Figure 20: Comparison between resetting experts weights only versus experts and router weights in
Rainbow (top), DQN (middle), and DER (bottom).


C     E XTRA ENVIRONMENTS
To evaluate the generality of our claims, we conducted experiments with Rainbow on Procgen
(Cobbe et al., 2019) (Figure 21) and with SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) on CALE (Farebrother &
Castro, 2024).

                             Median                   IQM                        Mean                 Optimality Gap
SoftMoE-1 (x4)
    SoftMoE-4
 Baseline (x4)
      Baseline
                 0.16 0.24 0.32 0.40 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.28 0.32                      0.36         0.64    0.68       0.72
                                           Human Normalized Score

Figure 21: Evaluating Rainbow on the 16 easy Procgen (Cobbe et al., 2019) environments
for SoftMoE-4 and SoftMoE-1 with the penultimate layer scaled by 4x. Normalization was done
using the Rmin and Rmax scores from Cobbe et al. (2019). Reporting Median, IQM, Mean, and
Optimality Gap (Agarwal et al., 2021), where higher is better for the first three. Consistent with
the results in the paper, SoftMoe yields improvements, and the scaled SoftMoE-1 is comparable to
SoftMoE-4.

                             Median                  IQM                        Mean                Optimality Gap
Tokenized (4x)
    Tokenized
 Baseline (4x)
     Baseline
                  0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.42 0.48 0.54 0.60      1.04 1.12 1.20                      0.510 0.525 0.540
                                             Human Normalized Score

Figure 22: Evaluating tokenization on the SAC encoder (Haarnoja et al., 2018) on the CALE
(Farebrother & Castro, 2024), as done in Figure 5. In these experiments, we summed over the first
dimension after tokenization. Reporting Median, IQM, Mean, and Optimality Gap (Agarwal et al.,
2021), where higher is better for the first three. Consistent with the results in the paper, tokenization
yields improvements over the baseline.


                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 C.1              P ER - GAME RESULTS

 C.1.1                D ON ’ T FLATTEN , TOKENIZE !

                               Assault                                               Asterix                                           BeamRider                                                Boxing
                                                                             Experiment                                                                                    100
           4000                                                                                                      7000
                                                               200000       TokenizedAvg (1x)
           3500                                                             TokenizedAvg (4x)                        6000                                                   80
                                                                            TokenizedSum (1x)
           3000                                                             TokenizedSum (4x)                        5000                                                   60
                                                               150000       Baseline (1x)
                                                                            Baseline (4x)
  Return


           2500                                                                                                      4000                                                   40
           2000                         Experiment         100000                                                                                     Experiment            20                             Experiment
                                       TokenizedAvg (1x)                                                             3000                            TokenizedAvg (1x)                                    TokenizedAvg (1x)
           1500                        TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                                                             TokenizedAvg (4x)                                    TokenizedAvg (4x)
                                       TokenizedSum (1x) 50000                                                       2000                            TokenizedSum (1x)       0                            TokenizedSum (1x)
           1000                        TokenizedSum (4x)                                                                                             TokenizedSum (4x)                                    TokenizedSum (4x)
                                       Baseline (1x)                                                                 1000                            Baseline (1x)           20                           Baseline (1x)
            500
                                       Baseline (4x)            0                                                                                    Baseline (4x)                                        Baseline (4x)
                                                                                                                        0                                                    40
                  0       50       100       150       200        0             50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200

            300
                               Breakout                        160000
                                                                                CrazyClimber                                         DemonAttack                                               Frostbite
                       Experiment                                                                                    40000        Experiment                                           Experiment
                      TokenizedAvg (1x)                        140000                                                            TokenizedAvg (1x)                        10000       TokenizedAvg (1x)
            250       TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                                              35000       TokenizedAvg (4x)                                    TokenizedAvg (4x)
                      TokenizedSum (1x)                        120000                                                30000       TokenizedSum (1x)                        8000        TokenizedSum (1x)
            200       TokenizedSum (4x)                                                                                          TokenizedSum (4x)                                    TokenizedSum (4x)
                      Baseline (1x)                            100000                                                25000       Baseline (1x)                                        Baseline (1x)
                      Baseline (4x)                                                                                              Baseline (4x)                                        Baseline (4x)
   Return


                                                                                                                                                                          6000
            150                                                80000                                                 20000
                                                                                                 Experiment
            100                                                60000                            TokenizedAvg (1x)    15000                                                4000
                                                                                                TokenizedAvg (4x)
                                                               40000                            TokenizedSum (1x)    10000
            50                                                                                  TokenizedSum (4x)                                                         2000
                                                               20000                            Baseline (1x)        5000
             0                                                                                  Baseline (4x)           0                                                    0
                                                                   0
                  0       50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200
                               Gopher                                                  Hero                                            Jamesbond                                               Kangaroo
                                                                                                                                  Experiment                              14000
          12000                                                50000                                                             TokenizedAvg (1x)
                                                                                                                     1000                                                 12000
                                                                                                                                 TokenizedAvg (4x)
          10000                                                40000                                                             TokenizedSum (1x)
                                                                                                                      800        TokenizedSum (4x)                        10000
           8000                                                                                                                  Baseline (1x)
                                                                                                                                 Baseline (4x)                            8000
 Return


                                                               30000                                                  600
           6000                            Experiment                                            Experiment                                                                                                Experiment
                                                                                                                                                                          6000
                                          TokenizedAvg (1x)    20000                            TokenizedAvg (1x)     400                                                                                 TokenizedAvg (1x)
           4000                           TokenizedAvg (4x)                                     TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                         4000                            TokenizedAvg (4x)
                                          TokenizedSum (1x)                                     TokenizedSum (1x)                                                                                         TokenizedSum (1x)
           2000                           TokenizedSum (4x)    10000                            TokenizedSum (4x)     200                                                 2000                            TokenizedSum (4x)
                                          Baseline (1x)                                         Baseline (1x)                                                                                             Baseline (1x)
             0                            Baseline (4x)                                         Baseline (4x)           0                                                    0                            Baseline (4x)
                                                                   0
                  0       50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200
                                 Krull                                                 Pong                                                Qbert                                           RoadRunner
           8000                                                   20                                                 20000
                                                                                                                                                                          50000
           7000
                                                                  10                                                 15000
           6000                                                                                                                                                           40000
  Return


           5000                                                    0                                                                                                      30000
                                                                                                                     10000
                       Experiment                                                                Experiment                                           Experiment                                           Experiment
           4000       TokenizedAvg (1x)                                                         TokenizedAvg (1x)                                    TokenizedAvg (1x)    20000                           TokenizedAvg (1x)
                      TokenizedAvg (4x)                            10                           TokenizedAvg (4x)                                    TokenizedAvg (4x)                                    TokenizedAvg (4x)
           3000       TokenizedSum (1x)                                                         TokenizedSum (1x)    5000                            TokenizedSum (1x)                                    TokenizedSum (1x)
                      TokenizedSum (4x)                                                         TokenizedSum (4x)                                    TokenizedSum (4x)    10000                           TokenizedSum (4x)
           2000       Baseline (1x)                                                             Baseline (1x)                                        Baseline (1x)                                        Baseline (1x)
                      Baseline (4x)                                20                           Baseline (4x)           0                            Baseline (4x)           0                            Baseline (4x)
           1000
                  0       50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200
                               Seaquest                                        SpaceInvaders                         50000
                                                                                                                                          UpNDown                                         WizardOfWor
                       Experiment                               8000         Experiment                                           Experiment
                      TokenizedAvg (1x)                         7000        TokenizedAvg (1x)                                    TokenizedAvg (1x)                        10000
         200000       TokenizedAvg (4x)                                     TokenizedAvg (4x)                        40000       TokenizedAvg (4x)
                      TokenizedSum (1x)                         6000        TokenizedSum (1x)                                    TokenizedSum (1x)
                      TokenizedSum (4x)                                     TokenizedSum (4x)                                    TokenizedSum (4x)                        8000
         150000       Baseline (1x)                             5000        Baseline (1x)                            30000       Baseline (1x)
                      Baseline (4x)                                         Baseline (4x)                                        Baseline (4x)
Return


                                                                4000                                                                                                      6000
         100000                                                                                                      20000                                                                                 Experiment
                                                                3000                                                                                                      4000                            TokenizedAvg (1x)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TokenizedAvg (4x)
          50000                                                 2000                                                                                                                                      TokenizedSum (1x)
                                                                                                                     10000                                                2000                            TokenizedSum (4x)
                                                                1000                                                                                                                                      Baseline (1x)
             0                                                                                                          0                                                    0                            Baseline (4x)
                                                                   0
                  0       50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200           0       50       100         150       200
                                 Step                                                  Step                                                 Step                                                 Step

Figure 23: Per-game results for tokenized Rainbow-lite with CNN network (corresponding to Fig-
ure 5).


                                                                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Assault                        600000
                                                                                Asterix                         10000
                                                                                                                                   BeamRider                                            Boxing
                                                                        Experiment                                                                                     100
           4000                                                        TokenizedAvg (1x)
                                                          500000       TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                                                80
                                                                       TokenizedSum (1x)                         8000
                                                          400000       TokenizedSum (4x)                                                                                60
           3000                                                        Baseline (1x)
                                                                       Baseline (4x)                             6000
  Return


                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                          300000
           2000                     Experiment                                                                                                    Experiment            20                       Experiment
                                   TokenizedAvg (1x) 200000                                                      4000                            TokenizedAvg (1x)                              TokenizedAvg (1x)
                                   TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                                                             TokenizedAvg (4x)       0                      TokenizedAvg (4x)
                                   TokenizedSum (1x)                                                                                             TokenizedSum (1x)                              TokenizedSum (1x)
           1000                    TokenizedSum (4x) 100000                                                      2000                            TokenizedSum (4x)                              TokenizedSum (4x)
                                   Baseline (1x)                                                                                                 Baseline (1x)           20                     Baseline (1x)
                                   Baseline (4x)          0                                                                                      Baseline (4x)                                  Baseline (4x)
                                                                                                                    0                                                    40
                  0   50       100       150       200      0              50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0   50      100        150       200
                           Breakout                       160000
                                                                           CrazyClimber                         140000
                                                                                                                                 DemonAttack                                           Frostbite
                                                                                                                                                                      12000
            350                                           140000                                                120000
            300                                                                                                                                                       10000
                                                          120000                                                100000
                            Experiment                                                                                        Experiment
            250            TokenizedAvg (1x)                                                                                 TokenizedAvg (1x)                        8000
                                                          100000                                                80000
                           TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                                                 TokenizedAvg (4x)
   Return


            200            TokenizedSum (1x)                                                                                 TokenizedSum (1x)                        6000
                                                          80000
                           TokenizedSum (4x)                                                Experiment          60000        TokenizedSum (4x)                                                   Experiment
            150            Baseline (1x)                                                   TokenizedAvg (1x)                 Baseline (1x)                                                      TokenizedAvg (1x)
                                                          60000                                                                                                       4000
            100            Baseline (4x)                                                   TokenizedAvg (4x)    40000        Baseline (4x)                                                      TokenizedAvg (4x)
                                                          40000                            TokenizedSum (1x)                                                                                    TokenizedSum (1x)
            50                                                                             TokenizedSum (4x)    20000                                                 2000                      TokenizedSum (4x)
                                                          20000                            Baseline (1x)                                                                                        Baseline (1x)
             0                                                                             Baseline (4x)            0                                                    0                      Baseline (4x)
                  0   50       100        150       200            0       50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0   50      100        150       200
                           Gopher                                                 Hero                                             Jamesbond                                           Kangaroo
                                                                                                                 3000         Experiment                              14000
          12000                                           50000                                                              TokenizedAvg (1x)
                                                                                                                 2500        TokenizedAvg (4x)                        12000
          10000                                                                                                              TokenizedSum (1x)
                                                          40000                                                              TokenizedSum (4x)                        10000
                                                                                                                 2000        Baseline (1x)
           8000                                                                                                              Baseline (4x)                            8000
 Return


                                                          30000
                                                                                                                 1500
           6000                       Experiment                                            Experiment                                                                6000                       Experiment
                                     TokenizedAvg (1x)    20000                            TokenizedAvg (1x)     1000                                                                           TokenizedAvg (1x)
           4000                      TokenizedAvg (4x)                                     TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                          4000                      TokenizedAvg (4x)
                                     TokenizedSum (1x)                                     TokenizedSum (1x)                                                                                    TokenizedSum (1x)
           2000                      TokenizedSum (4x)    10000                            TokenizedSum (4x)      500                                                 2000                      TokenizedSum (4x)
                                     Baseline (1x)                                         Baseline (1x)                                                                                        Baseline (1x)
             0                       Baseline (4x)                                         Baseline (4x)            0                                                    0                      Baseline (4x)
                                                              0
                  0   50       100        150       200            0       50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0   50      100        150       200
                             Krull                                                Pong                                                 Qbert                                       RoadRunner
                            Experiment                       20                                                                                                       70000
           8000            TokenizedAvg (1x)                                                                    20000
                           TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                                                                                          60000
           7000            TokenizedSum (1x)                 10
                           TokenizedSum (4x)                                                                    15000                                                 50000
                           Baseline (1x)
           6000            Baseline (4x)
  Return


                                                                                                                                                                      40000
                                                              0
                                                                                            Experiment          10000                             Experiment          30000                      Experiment
           5000
                                                                                           TokenizedAvg (1x)                                     TokenizedAvg (1x)                              TokenizedAvg (1x)
                                                              10                           TokenizedAvg (4x)                                     TokenizedAvg (4x)    20000                     TokenizedAvg (4x)
           4000                                                                            TokenizedSum (1x)     5000                            TokenizedSum (1x)                              TokenizedSum (1x)
                                                                                           TokenizedSum (4x)                                     TokenizedSum (4x)    10000                     TokenizedSum (4x)
           3000                                                                            Baseline (1x)                                         Baseline (1x)                                  Baseline (1x)
                                                              20                           Baseline (4x)            0                            Baseline (4x)           0                      Baseline (4x)
                  0   50       100        150       200            0       50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0   50      100        150       200
                           Seaquest                       25000
                                                                          SpaceInvaders                                               UpNDown                         14000
                                                                                                                                                                                  WizardOfWor
         400000                                                         Experiment                              100000        Experiment
         350000                                                        TokenizedAvg (1x)                                     TokenizedAvg (1x)                        12000
                                                          20000        TokenizedAvg (4x)                                     TokenizedAvg (4x)
                                                                       TokenizedSum (1x)                        80000        TokenizedSum (1x)
         300000                                                                                                                                                       10000
                                                                       TokenizedSum (4x)                                     TokenizedSum (4x)
         250000                                           15000        Baseline (1x)                                         Baseline (1x)
                                                                       Baseline (4x)                            60000        Baseline (4x)                            8000
Return


         200000
                                      Experiment          10000                                                                                                       6000                       Experiment
         150000                      TokenizedAvg (1x)                                                          40000                                                                           TokenizedAvg (1x)
                                     TokenizedAvg (4x)                                                                                                                4000                      TokenizedAvg (4x)
         100000                      TokenizedSum (1x)                                                                                                                                          TokenizedSum (1x)
                                                           5000                                                 20000
          50000                      TokenizedSum (4x)                                                                                                                2000                      TokenizedSum (4x)
                                     Baseline (1x)                                                                                                                                              Baseline (1x)
             0                       Baseline (4x)            0                                                     0                                                    0                      Baseline (4x)
                  0   50       100        150       200            0       50       100         150       200            0       50       100         150       200           0   50      100        150       200
                             Step                                                 Step                                                  Step                                             Step

Figure 24: Per-game results for tokenized Rainbow-lite with Impala network (corresponding to
Figure 5).


                                                                                                         22
