Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IRECT P OST-T RAINING P REFERENCE A LIGNMENT
FOR M ULTI -AGENT M OTION G ENERATION M ODELS
U SING I MPLICIT F EEDBACK FROM P RE - TRAINING
D EMONSTRATIONS
    Ran Tian1,2 , Kratarth Goel2
 1
    UC Berkeley 2 Waymo



                                            A BSTRACT

          Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized
          motion generation models in embodied applications such as autonomous driv-
          ing and robotic manipulation. While LLM-type auto-regressive motion gener-
          ation models benefit from training scalability, there remains a discrepancy be-
          tween their token prediction objectives and human preferences. As a result,
          models pre-trained solely with token-prediction objectives often generate behav-
          iors that deviate from what humans would prefer, making post-training prefer-
          ence alignment crucial for producing human-preferred motions. Unfortunately,
          post-training alignment requires extensive preference rankings of motions gen-
          erated by the pre-trained model, which are costly and time-consuming to anno-
          tate—especially in multi-agent motion generation settings. Recently, there has
          been growing interest in leveraging expert demonstrations previously used dur-
          ing pre-training to scalably generate preference data for post-training alignment.
          However, these methods often adopt an adversarial assumption, treating all pre-
          trained model-generated samples as unpreferred examples and relying solely on
          pre-training expert demonstrations to construct preferred examples. This adver-
          sarial approach overlooks the valuable signal provided by preference rankings
          among the model’s own generations, ultimately reducing alignment effectiveness
          and potentially leading to misaligned behaviors. In this work, instead of treat-
          ing all generated samples as equally bad, we propose a principled approach that
          leverages implicit preferences encoded in pre-training expert demonstrations to
          construct preference rankings among the pre-trained model’s generations, offer-
          ing more nuanced preference alignment guidance with zero human cost. We
          apply our approach to large-scale traffic simulation (more than 100 agents) and
          demonstrate its effectiveness in improving the realism of pre-trained model’s gen-
          erated behaviors, making a lightweight 1M motion generation model comparable
          to state-of-the-art large imitation-based models by relying solely on implicit feed-
          back from pre-training demonstrations, without requiring additional post-training
          human preference annotations or incurring high computational costs. Further-
          more, we provide an in-depth analysis of preference data scaling laws and their
          effects on over-optimization, offering valuable insights for future studies.


1     I NTRODUCTION

The recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023) have significantly im-
pacted the design of motion generation models for embodied tasks such as autonomous driving (Seff
et al., 2023; Philion et al., 2024), robot manipulation (Brohan et al., 2023), and humanoid locomo-
tion (Radosavovic et al., 2024). Formulating motion generation as a next-token prediction task not
only provides a unified framework for modeling sequential decision-making tasks but also provides
opportunities for leveraging pre-trained LLMs for more cost-effective training and improved gen-
eralizability (Tian et al., 2024). However, despite the remarkable progress, robots relying on these
large token-prediction models do not automatically become better at doing what humans prefer due


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Model Pre-training                                      Direct Preference Alignment          Preference Ranking via
                                                                                                     Occupancy Measure Matching Feedback
                                                                       max ℙ            ≻        𝑐)
                                                                        𝜙
                                                                                                                             Expert demo



       Multi-modal
                      ℙ(𝒂0 ; 𝑐)          ෝ 0 , 𝑐)
                                  ℙ(𝒂1 ; 𝒂          … ℙ(𝒂 ; 𝒂ෝ , 𝑐)
                                                           𝑇     <𝑇

      Scene Encoder
                        Motion Token Prediction Model


                       𝐬𝐭𝐚𝐫𝐭            ෝ0
                                        𝒂           …          ෝ 𝑇−1
                                                               𝒂

                                                                             Sample rollouts
                                                                                                          Sampled rollouts

Figure 1: Direct preference alignment from occupancy measure matching feedback for realis-
tic traffic simulation. DPA-OMF is a simple yet effective alignment-from-demonstration approach
that aligns a pre-trained traffic simulation model with human preferences. It defines an implicit
preference distance function that measures the alignment between a generated sample and an expert
demonstration in the same scene context through occupancy measure matching. This distance is then
used to rank the reference model’s generated samples for each training scene contex, enabling large-
scale automatic preference data generation to align the motion generation model. The gray dotted
lines above the motion token prediction model indicate the reference model’s motion token distri-
butions at each prediction step, and the orange lines represent the probabilities after the alignment
process. ât denotes agents’ action tokens sampled from the predicted distribution P(at ; c, ât−1 )
during inference time, c denotes the scene context representation (more details in Section 3.1).

to the misalignment between the training objective and the underlying reward function that incen-
tivizes expert demonstrations. This discrepancy underscores the challenge of ensuring that motion
models trained with next-token prediction are effectively aligned with expert-preferred behaviors.
Preference-based alignment has emerged as a crucial component in the LLM post-training stage,
aiming to reconcile the disparity between the next-token prediction objective and human prefer-
ences. Among various frameworks, direct alignment algorithms (e.g., direct preference optimiza-
tion (Rafailov et al., 2024b)) are particularly appealing due to their training simplicity and compu-
tational efficiency. Specifically, these algorithms collect human preferences over pre-trained model
generations and directly update the model to maximize the likelihood of preferred behaviors over
unpreferred ones. However, in complex embodied settings, such as joint motion generation involv-
ing hundreds of agents, obtaining such preference data at scale can be very challenging. Human
annotators must analyze intricate and nuanced motions, which is a time-consuming process, making
the scalability of direct alignment methods difficult in these scenarios.
While soliciting rankings from experts provides explicit preference information, we argue that expert
demonstrations used in the pre-training stage inherently encode implicit human preferences, which
can be reused to align a pre-trained motion generation model in a cost-effective way, beyond their
role in supervised pre-training. Recently, Alignment from Demonstrations (AFD) (Li et al., 2024;
Sun & van der Schaar, 2024; Chen et al., 2024b) has emerged as a valuable technique for auto-
matically generating preference data using pre-training expert demonstrations, allowing preference
alignment to scale at a low cost. However, previous methods typically assume a worst-case scenario:
treating all pre-trained model-generated samples as unpreferred and relying solely on pre-training
expert demonstrations to construct preferred examples (Chen et al., 2024b; Sun & van der Schaar,
2024). This adversarial approach overlooks the valuable signal provided by preference rankings
among the model’s own generations, ultimately reducing alignment effectiveness and potentially
leading to misaligned behaviors.
 Instead of treating all generated samples as equally bad, we propose leveraging the implicit prefer-
ences encoded in pre-training demonstrations to automatically construct preference rankings among
the pre-trained model’s generations, providing more nuanced guidance with zero human cost.
Our approach draws inspiration from inverse reinforcement learning (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ho &
Ermon, 2016), where alignment between a generated behavior and the expert demonstration is mea-
sured through occupancy measure matching. We propose Direct Preference Alignment from Oc-
cupancy Measure Matching Feedback (DPA-OMF), a principled approach using optimal transport
to define an implicit preference distance function. This function measures the alignment between a
generated sample and the expert demonstration through occupancy measure matching in a seman-


                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tically meaningful feature space, and is then used to rank the generated samples according to their
alignment with expert demonstrations, producing more nuanced preference data at scale to align the
motion generation model (Figure 1).
We apply our approach to large-scale traffic simulation (more than 100 agents) and demonstrate
its effectiveness in improving the realism of pre-trained model’s generated behaviors, making a
lightweight 1M motion generation model comparable to state-of-the-art large imitation-based mod-
els by relying solely on implicit feedback from pre-training demonstrations, without requiring addi-
tional post-training human preference annotations or incurring high computational costs.

    Contribution. In this work, we consider the problem of efficient post-training alignment
    of a token-prediction model for multi-agent motion generation. We propose Direct Prefer-
    ence Alignment from Occupancy Measure Matching Feedback (DPA-OMF), a simple yet
    principled approach that leverages pre-training expert demonstrations to generate implicit
    preference feedback and significantly improves the pre-trained model’s generation quality
    without additional post-training human preference annotation, reward learning, or complex
    reinforcement learning. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to demonstrate
    the benefits of preference alignment for large-scale multi-agent motion generations using
    implicit feedback from pre-training demonstrations. Additionally, we provide a detailed
    analysis of preference data scaling laws and their impact on preference over-optimization.


2   R ELATED W ORKS
Scaling alignment using AI feedback. Previous works have proposed leveraging synthetic AI feed-
back to scale preference data in LLM applications, either from a single model (Bai et al., 2022; Lee
et al.; Mu et al.), an ensemble of teacher models (Tunstall et al., 2023), or through targeted context
prompting, where the model is instructed to generate both good and bad outputs for comparison
(Yang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024). Unfortunately, these frameworks are not directly applicable to
embodied contexts, such as autonomous driving, due to the absence of high-quality, open-source,
and input-unified foundation models. What makes input-unified foundation models especially chal-
lenging is that different embodied models often use incompatible input modalities or features, mak-
ing it difficult to transfer feedback across models effectively.
Alignment from expert demonstrations. Alignment from Demonstrations (AFD) has emerged
as a valuable technique for automatically generating preference data using expert demonstrations,
enabling preference alignment to scale effectively. For example, Chen et al. (2024b) fine-tunes a
pre-trained reference model in a self-play manner, where the optimized model maximizes the log-
likelihood ratio between expert demonstrations and self-generated samples. However, this method
treats all model-generated samples as unpreferred, overlooking the valuable information embedded
in the preference rankings among those samples. Additionally, it suffers from bias introduced by
the heterogeneity of the preference data: since the preference data are drawn from two different
sources (human vs. optimized model), the discrimination objective may emphasize the differences
between models rather than focusing on the key aspects that truly evaluate the quality of the gen-
erated behaviors. To address the heterogeneity issue, Sun & van der Schaar (2024) proposes using
expert demonstrations to first fine-tune the reference model through supervised learning, creating
an expert model. Then, samples generated by the fine-tuned expert model are treated as positive
examples, while samples from the initial model are treated as negative examples to construct a pref-
erence dataset. While this approach helps mitigate the heterogeneity problem, it requires training
an additional expert model, and there is no guarantee that all generations from the expert model
will consistently be superior to those from the initial model. Unlike previous works, our approach
constructs preference rankings among the generations produced by the reference model, effectively
addressing the heterogeneity issue while providing more nuanced guidance at a lower cost.
Motion alignment via divergence minimization. Adversarial imitation learning (IL) aims to align
the behavior of the learning agent with expert demonstrations by minimizing the Jensen-Shannon
divergence between the agent’s action occupancy measure and that of the expert (Ho & Ermon,
2016; Song et al., 2018). These methods jointly train a policy model and a discriminator: the policy
model is trained to imitate expert demonstrations, while the discriminator is trained to separate the
generated samples from the expert demonstrations and informs the policy model. Additionally, ad-
versarial training is known for its instability and high computational cost (Kodali et al., 2017; Yang


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2022), making it particularly problematic in post-training alignment, where stability and com-
putational efficiency are crucial. Similar to adversarial IL, we employ occupancy measure matching
to assess the alignment between generated samples and expert demonstrations. However, our ap-
proach differs by using preference rankings over the generated samples to inform the alignment
process, rather than relying on a signal learned from separating all generated samples from expert
demonstrations. Our approach provides more informative guidance while also being significantly
more computationally efficient and more suitable for post-training alignment.
Preference alignment for realistic traffic simulation. Preference-based alignment has recently
been used to enhance the realism of traffic generation (Cao et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b). How-
ever, these previous works rely on Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) as the
alignment approach and learn rewards from low-fidelity simulator data. In contrast, our work seeks
to improve traffic generation models without the need for reinforcement learning or explicit reward
learning. Instead, we utilize an implicit preference distance derived from real human demonstrations
to guide the alignment, and demonstrate improvements in a much larger scale.

3     E FFICIENT P OST-T RAINING P REFERENCE A LIGNMENT FOR
      M ULTI -AGENT M OTION G ENERATION
3.1   P RE - TRAINING OF M ULTI - AGENT MOTION GENERATION M ODEL

We assume access to a set of expert demonstrations, De , where each example consists of a joint
action sequence ξ = {a0 , . . . , aT } and a scene context representation c. The joint action sequence
represents the behaviors of N agents over a generation horizon T , conditioned on the given scene
context c. Each joint action at time step t is a collection of action tokens for all N agents, denoted
as at = (a1t , . . . , aN
                        t ). Following Seff et al. (2023), our learning objective is to train a generative
model parameterized by θ, which maximizes the likelihood of the ground truth joint action at time
step t, conditioned on all previous joint actions and the initial scene context:
                                   max E(ξ,c)∼De ΠTt=0 πθ (at |a<t ; c) ,

                                                                                                       (1)
                                   θ

where πθ (at |a<t ; c) := P(at |at−1 , . . . , a0 ; c). We denote the model pre-trained with the above
token prediction objective as the reference model πref . Note that the optimal solution to (1) cor-
responds to finding a policy π that minimizes the forward Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence from
the expert policy: minθ KL(πe ||πθ ). As a result, the learned policy typically exhibits mass-covering
behavior (Wang et al., 2024a), making it prone to deviations from the expert’s true policy. This
misalignment necessitates post-training preference alignment.

3.2   I MPLICIT PREFERENCE FEEDBACK FROM PRE - TRAINING DEMONSTRATIONS

In this section, we introduce our approach to leveraging pre-traning expert demonstrations for scal-
able preference feedback generation. The key idea is to define an implicit preference distance func-
tion that measures the alignment between a generated sample and the expert demonstration given
the same scene context. This distance is then used to rank the reference model’s generated samples
for each training scene context.
Specifically, we aim to find a preference distance function d that approximately measures the
preference-based notion of similarity over a triplet (ξe , ξsi , ξsj ), where ξe represents a pre-training
expert demonstration and ξsi,j are two rollouts sampled from the reference model given the scene
context of ξe . We treat ξei as an anchor; if the preference distance between ξsi and ξe is smaller than
that between ξsj and ξe , then ξsi is considered more aligned with the anchor than ξsj and is thus more
preferred according to the expert preference encoded in ξe : d(ξe , ξsj ) > d(ξe , ξsj ) =⇒ ξsi ≻ ξsj .
Fundamental work in IRL (Abbeel & Ng, 2004) advocates for using occupancy measure matching
to assess the alignment between the policy induced by a recovered reward function and human
preference. A policy whose occupancy measure closely matches that of a human is considered
better aligned with the human’s true preferences Building on this insight, we leverage the Optimal
Transport (OT) method (Villani et al., 2009) as a principled approach to define an implicit preference
distance function that measures the occupancy measure matching between a policy rollout and the
expert demonstration. We then use this preference distance to rank rollouts from the reference


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


model to construct the preference dataset. OT has been successfully used to measure alignment
between behaviors in prior single-agent reinforcement learning works (Xiao et al., 2019) with the
key difference in our work being used in multi-agent settings to fine-tune a generative model without
the need for reinforcement learning (see Q4 in Appendix A for more details).
Occupancy measure. Let o = {ot }Tt=0 represent a sequence of scene observations obtained by
rolling out a joint action sequence ξ in the initial scene c over T time steps. The empirical occupancy
                                                                                            PT
measure associated with (ξ, c) is a discrete probability measure defined as ρ(ξ,c) = T1 t=0 δΦ(ot ) ,
where δΦ(ot ) is a Dirac distribution centered on Φ(ot ) = [ϕ(o1t ), . . . , ϕ(oN
                                                                                t )]. Here, ϕ is a feature
encoder that maps each agent’s information into a feature vector. Intuitively, a policy rollout occu-
pancy measure represents the distribution of features visited by the generation policy throughout the
generation horizon.
Implicit preference distance. Optimal transport quantifies the distance between two occupancy
measures by solving the optimal coupling µ∗ ∈ RT ×T that transports a rollout occupancy measure,
ρ(ξs ,c) , to the expert occupancy measure, ρ(ξe ,c) , with minimal cost. Instead of computing the scene-
level optimal coupling, we compute the agent-level optimal coupling and then aggregate them for
computing the scene-level alignment, assuming the generative model only generates the behaviors of
pre-defined agents but not insert nor remove agents from the scene. Specifically, for each agent i, we
compute optimal coupling between agent i’s empirical occupancy measure induced by the sampled
rollout ξ i and agent i’s empirical occupancy measure from the demonstration ξei by minimizing the
Wasserstein distance between the two:
                                                       T X
                                                       X T
                       µi,∗ =                                        c̄ ϕ(oit,s ), ϕ(oit’,e ) µt,t′ .

                                      arg min                                                                          (2)
                                µ∈M(ρ(ξi ,c) ,ρ(ξi ,c) ) t=1 t′ =1
                                          e       s


where M(ρ(ξsi ,c) , ρ(ξei ,c) ) = {µ ∈ RT ×T : µ1 = ρ(ξsi ,c) , µT 1 = ρ(ξei ,c) } is the set of coupling
matrices, c̄ : Rn × Rn → R is a cost function defined on the support of the measure (e.g., cosine
distance), and n is the dimension of the feature space. This gives rise to the following distance that
measures the preference-based notion of similarity between a rollout and the expert demonstration:
                                              N X
                                              X   T
                                                T X
                                                               c̄ ϕ(oit,e ), ϕ(oit’,e ) µi,∗

                           d(ξs , ξe ; c) =                                              t,t′ .                        (3)
                                              i=1 t=1 t′ =1


Preference data curation. With the reference model pre-trained using the next-token prediction
objective (1), we construct a rollout set, Dπref , consisting of generated motions sampled from the
model. Each example in Dπref includes a pre-training scene context c (drawn from Dπe ), the corre-
sponding expert demonstration, and a set of K rollouts, {ξ 1 , . . . , ξ K }, sampled from the reference
model given c. We use the implicit preference distance function defined in (3) to rank the K rollouts
of each training example in Dπref and construct the preference dataset Dπpref . Each example in Dπpref
contains Npref pairwise comparisons, (ξ + ≻ ξ − )1,...,Npref , along with the associated scene context c.
We note that this preference dataset is constructed without any human annotations, relying solely on
pre-training expert demonstrations.

3.3   D IRECT PREFERENCE ALIGNMENT VIA CONTRASTIVE PREFERENCE LEARNING

Using the automatically constructed preference dataset Dπpref , we apply a multi-agent extension of
the contrastive preference learning algorithm (Hejna et al., 2023) to directly fine-tune the reference
motion generation model:
                                                                                                      
                                                                   π (a+ |a+ ,c)
                                               exp t γ t α log π θ (at+ |a<t
                                                     P
                                                                            +
                                                                    ref t   <t ,c)
  max E(ξ+ ,ξ− ,c)∼Dpref − log                                                                         . (4)
                                                                                                      
                                                                                            − −
    θ                              P t          πθ (a+ |a+
                                                            ,c)         P     t α log π θ (a  |a   ,c)
                                exp t γ α log π (at+ |a<t +
                                                            ,c)
                                                                + exp     t γ               t
                                                                                             − −
                                                                                                <t
                                                                                      π (a |a ,c)
                                                         ref   t    <t                                  ref   t   <t



4     E XPERIMENT D ESIGN
Realistic traffic scene generation. We validate our approach in the large-scale realistic traffic scene
generation challenge (WOSAC), where the model is tasked with generating eight seconds of realistic


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            Aligned         Partially aligned        Misaligned
                          Sample
       Reference Multi-   rollouts
        Agent Motion
       Generation Model


           Ground truth


                                     𝑑 𝜉𝑒 , 𝜉𝑠 = 0.38   𝑑 𝜉𝑒 , 𝜉𝑠 = 1.82        𝑑 𝜉𝑒 , 𝜉𝑠 = 4.69

Figure 2: Alignment visualization. The heat map visualizes the optimal coupling between a gener-
ated traffic simulation and the ground truth scene evolution. More peaks along the diagonal indicate
better alignment between the behaviors (i.e., a smaller preference distance). The traffic simulation
with a small preference distance (left) shows behavior that is well-aligned with the ground truth,
while the simulation with a larger distance (right) exhibits inconsistencies, such as the pedestrian’s
generated motion colliding with an oncoming vehicle.

interactions among multiple heterogeneous agents (up to 128) at 10 Hz, based on one second of past
observations (Montali et al., 2024). The WOSAC challenge uses a realism metric to evaluate the
quality of the traffic generation model. The realism of a generative model is defined as the empirical
negative log likelihood of the ground truth scene evolution under the distribution induced by 32
scene rollouts sampled from that model (binned into discrete histograms).
Token prediction model and preference dataset construction. We use the MotionLM model
(Seff et al., 2023) as our generation model (1M trainable parameters) (more details in Appendix C)
and first train it using the next-token prediction objective on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset for
1.2M steps to obtain a reference model. For each training example, we sample 64 rollouts from
the reference model and rank them using the preference distance function. The 16 closest rollouts
are treated as preferred samples, while the 16 farthest are considered unpreferred, constructing 16
comparisons per example. Following previous work on learning rewards for autonomous driving
(Sun et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2024a), we use features that capture the modeled agent’s safety, com-
fort, and progress to encode the agent’s state information at each time step when building the rollout
occupancy measure, including: [collision status, distance to road boundary, minimum clearance to
other road users, control effort, speed]. When solving the optimal transport plan (2), we use the L2
cost between features with the following weights: [10, 5, 2, 1, 1]. These features are also used to
encode the agent’s state in the realism metric. It is important to note that the preference distance is
not the same as the realism metric. The preference distance measures the alignment between a roll-
out and the expert demonstration, whereas the realism metric assesses the likelihood of the expert
demonstration given all the rollouts.

5     R ESULTS
5.1   O N THE VALIDITY OF THE IMPLICIT PREFERENCE DISTANCE FUNCTION

In this section, we qualitatively and quantitatively investigate if the implicit preference distance
reflects the behavior alignment (i.e., smaller distance means more aligned behavior).
Qualitative example. In Figure 2, we present a qualitative example illustrating how the coupling
matrix reflects the behavior alignment between generated traffic simulations and expert demonstra-
tions. Traffic simulations with smaller preference distances exhibit behavior more closely aligned
with the expert demonstrations. Additional qualitative examples can be found in the AppendixD.
Baseline. To quantitatively evaluate our preference distance function in a controlled experiment, we
conduct a post-selection analysis, where we select sampled traffic simulations from the reference
model and analyze the relationship between the realism of these samples and their group-averaged
distance to the expert demonstration. We use the Average Displacement Error (ADE) (L2 distance


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


between a sampled traffic simulation and the expert demonstration) as a baseline, which is a com-
monly used distance for evaluating trajectory generation performance in autonomous driving.
Experiment setup. We control the distance to the expert demonstration, and measure the realism
of the selected sampled traffic simulations. Specifically, we first sample 128 traffic simulations
from the pre-trained reference model, rank them using the candidate distance (ADE or preference
distance), and then select traffic simulations as the final model output using a sliding window of
size 32. For example, model variant 1 outputs the top 32 ranked traffic simulations, model vari-
ant 2 outputs simulations ranked from 2 to 33, and so on. We then measure the corresponding
WOSAC realism of each model variant to study its relationship to each candidate distance metric.

Results. In Figure 3, we illustrate the relationship be-
tween the WOSAC realism of selected traffic simulations
and their group-averaged distance from the expert demon-
stration. We observe that ADE is informative in reflecting
behavior alignment only up to a certain point: initially,
as ADE decreases, the realism improves. However, once
the traffic simulations reach a reasonable level of realism,
further reductions in ADE do not result in significant im-
provements in the realism. In contrast, the preference dis-                          Realism
tance function correlates more strongly with the realism
and demonstrates a better effective range when using the          Figure 3: Relationship between the
same reference model. This highlights its effectiveness in        WOSAC realism of selected traffic sim-
measuring the alignment between a generated traffic sim-          ulations and their group-averaged dis-
ulation and the expert demonstration.                             tance from the expert demonstration.


5.2   O N THE VALUE OF PREFERENCE ALIGNMENT

In this section, we compare our approach with various post-training alignment methods to demon-
strate its effectiveness. Our experiments focus on evaluating the impact of two factors: 1) different
feedback signals, and 2) the alignment approach.
Baseline. We compare DPA-OMF against (1) DPA-                          SFT-bestOA–pref.         DPA-OMF–Pref.
ADEF, which constructs preference rankings using ADE                   SFT-bestOA–unpref.       DPA-OMF–Unpref.

as the distance function to rank traffic simulations sam-
pled from the reference model, then fine-tunes the refer-
ence model using (4); (2) SFT-bestOA, which selects the
                                                                   − 𝐥𝐨𝐠 [ℙ 𝝃𝒔 ]


top 32 ranked traffic simulations, measured by the prefer-
ence distance, from the reference model and uses them
as new labels for supervised fine-tuning, aiming to di-
rectly distill the preference into the reference model; (3)
SFT-bestADE, similar to SFT-bestOA but use the ADE
to pick the top ranked samples;(4) We also list the per-
formance of SOTA models that are typically much larger                            Train steps (x100)
with sophisticated designs. We use the same reference
model for post-training alignment and fine-tune for 200k Figure 4: The log-likelihood of pre-
steps in all experiments.                                    ferred/unpreferred rollouts from the ref-
                                                             erence model when using DPA-OMF
Results. We present the quantitative evaluation of each versus SFT-bestOA for alignment.
method’s realism and trajectory L2 error in Table 1. DPA-
OMF significantly outperforms all baselines in terms of alignment between the generated traffic
simulations and the expert demonstrations, while the baselines struggle to improve—and in some
cases, even degrade (DPA-ADEF and SFT-bestADE)—the realism. Interestingly, SFT-bestOA
does not seem to improve the realistic metric too much although it is using the same preferred traffic
simulations as learning signals just like DPA-OMF. Figure 4 sheds more light on this. In Figure 4,
we show the negative-loglikelihood of both preferred and unpreferred traffic simulations geenrated
from the reference model when using DPA-OMF and SFT-bestOA to align the model. We can see
that the likelihood of preferred traffic simulations is increasing and the likelihood of unpreferred
traffic simulations is decreasing when using DPA-OMF to align the model, while the likelihood


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Expert                                           DPA-OMF(Ours)                                     Ref. motionLM



                                                                                                                   collision



DPA-ADEF                                         SFT-bestOA                                        SFT-bestADE


                                did not turn                                        did not turn                                   collision

Expert                                           DPA-OMF(Ours)                                     Ref. motionLM


                                                                                                                   did not yield


DPA-ADEF    not enough                           SFT-bestOA                                        SFT-bestADE
            lateral gap


                                                                 did not yield                                     did not yield


Figure 5: Traffic simulation generation visualization. Our approach produces traffic simulations
that are more closely aligned with expert demonstrations, while baseline models generate simula-
tions that are only partially aligned or misaligned (highlighted in red texts).

of unpreferred traffic simulations is increasing when using SFT-bestOA to align the model. This
may be due to the fact that both the preferred and the unpreferred samples are from the same dis-
tribution. This demonstrates the importance of explicitly considering the negative signals when
aligning the model. In Figure 5, we present a qualitative visualization of the generated traffic sim-
ulations from each approach. We sample 64 rollouts from each model and display the most likely
generation. Our approach produces traffic simulations that are more closely aligned with expert
demonstrations, whereas the baseline models generate simulations that are only partially aligned or
misaligned. While our approach improves the reference model through cost-effective preference
alignment, it still falls short a bit compared to some SOTA methods. We provide more discussions
in Q3 of Appendix A.

 Method                                        Kinematic ↑    Interactive↑       Map compliance↑        Composite realism↑           minADE↓
 MotionLM (1M reference model)                    0.417          0.778                0.815                  0.721                     1.398
 DPA-ADEF                                         0.393          0.780                0.812                  0.714                     1.379
 SFT-bestADE                                      0.406          0.773                0.816                  0.715                     1.392
 SFT-bestOA                                       0.410          0.781                0.826                  0.723                     1.428
 DPA-OMF (ours)                                   0.415          0.786                0.867                  0.739                     1.413
 BehaviorGPT(Zhou et al., 2024) (3M)              0.433          0.799                0.859                  0.747                     1.415
 Trajeglish(Philion et al., 2024) (35M)           0.415          0.786                0.867                  0.721                     1.544
 SMART(Wu et al., 2024) (102M)                    0.479          0.806                0.864                  0.761                     1.372
Table 1: Realism of different methods. Our approach improves the realism of the reference model
(shaded in gray) without requiring additional human-cost, reward learning or reinforcement learning.

On the importance of features. Despite the OT-based preference score’s effectiveness in measuring
the alignment between a generated traffic simulation and the expert demonstration, the relationship
between the OT-based preference score and human preference is not strictly monotonic. This re-
lationship heavily depends on the features used to compute the rollout occupancy measure. We
consider a set of features commonly used in IRL research to compute the preference distance (de-
scribed in Section 4). In Table 2, we present an ablation study analyzing the effect of each feature
on the effectiveness of the approach. Although the best performance is achieved when all features
are active, it is interesting to note that using only the collision status when computing the preference
distance for model alignment still leads to improvements. We hypothesize that this is because the
reference model already performs reasonably well in generating behaviors but lacks awareness of
collisions. However, when using only the progress or comfort feature to compute the preference


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distance, both the realism (due to an increased collision rate) and ADE regress. This highlights the
importance of using a comprehensive set of features to accurately characterize driving behaviors.
Further discussions on the limitations and potential solutions can be found in Q1 of Appendix A.

  Features            Kinematic      Interactive      Map compliance          Composite realism   minADE
  Collision only        0.389           0.788             0.833                   0.724            1.527
  Progress only         0.421           0.760             0.812                   0.710            1.483
  Comfort only          0.411           0.744             0.820                   0.705            1.581
  Full                  0.415           0.786             0.867                   0.739            1.413

             Table 2: The effect of each feature on the effectiveness of our approach.


5.3   C OMPARISON WITH ADVERSARIAL PREFERENCE ALIGNMENT FROM DEMONSTRATIONS

We further compare our method with the standard AFD approach, which treats all samples from
the reference model as negative samples. For each training sample, we construct 16 rankings by
sampling 16 generated traffic simulations from the reference model (i.e., both our method and AFD
utilize the same amount of preference data). We measure the WOSAC realism of the fine-tuned
model, the model’s ability to assign higher likelihood to preferred traffic simulations ranked by our
preference distance (measured as classification accuracy), and the minADE. As shown in Table 3,
our approach significantly outperforms the adversarial AFD in all metrics, demonstrating the effec-
tiveness of our method.

                   Features          Classification accuracy ↑   Composite realism ↑   minADE ↓
                   Ours                         0.84                  0.739              1.413
                   Adversarial AFD              0.52                  0.720              1.539

Table 3: The comparison between DPA-OMF with adversarial AFD. Our approach significantly
outperforms the adversarial AFD in all metrics.

To further analyze why adversarial preference
alignment is less effective, we plot the neg-
ative log-likelihood of expert demonstrations,
preferred and unpreferred traffic simulations
(ranked by our preference distance) in Fig-
ure 6. The results reveal that the likelihood
of expert demonstrations is consistently much
higher than that of both preferred and unpre-
ferred samples throughout the alignment pro-
cess. This stems from the pre-training phase,
where expert demonstrations are used to train
the reference model. Moreover, during the pref-
erence alignment phase, the model primarily in- Figure 6: The log-likelihood of expert demos and
creases the likelihood of expert demonstrations preferred/unpreferred rollouts from the reference
while leaving the likelihood of preferred and model when AFD for alignment.
unpreferred samples relatively unchanged. This
indicates that the model is unable to capture nuanced differences between preferred and unpreferred
samples, leading to suboptimal alignment performance (see more analysis in Appendix F).

5.4   P REFERENCE SCALING

One of the key advantages of DPA-OMF is its ability to leverage expert demonstrations to auto-
matically construct preference rankings without requiring additional human annotations, making it
highly scalable. In this section, we evaluate the performance of DPA-OMF as we scale the number
of preference rankings. In Figure 7 (left), we show the relationship between the aligned model’s
performance and the average number of preference rankings per training example (e.g., a value of
4 indicates that the dataset used for alignment is four times larger than the original training set).
Interestingly, we observe that a small amount of preference feedback not only fails to improve the


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


model but actually degrades it. However, as the number of preference rankings increases, the align-
ment objective begins to demonstrate its effectiveness. We hypothesize that this degradation is due
to preference over-optimization, which we explore further in the next section.


                                                                     0.5    8     16


                                                       Realism
 Realism


                 Ave. rankings per sample

Figure 7: [left - preference scaling]: Performance of the alignment under different preference train-
ing data sizes. The gray line represents the performance of the reference model; [right - preference
over-optimization]: The trade-off between the policy drift and the fine-tuning performance gain
under various preference data sizes
                                                   .
5.5 P REFERENCE OVER EXPLOITATION

Preference over-optimization has been studied in the context of LLMs for both online methods (e.g.,
RLHF) and direct preference alignment methods (Tang et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2024a). In this
section, we investigate this phenomenon in the context of multi-agent motion generation. While
previous research has focused on the impact of preference over-optimization across different model
sizes, our study examines its effects with varying data sizes.
Goodhart’s law states that “when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure”
(Goodhart & Goodhart, 1984). In our case, this effect manifests when there is insufficient feedback,
causing the model to over-optimize an incomplete preference signal. Following (Tang et al., 2024),
we examine this effect by measuring the KL divergence between the reference model and the fine-
tuned model at various preference data sizes during the alignment process. KL divergence quantifies
how much the optimized policy deviates from the reference model’s policy during preference learn-
ing, and can be interpreted as the optimization cost incurred by the alignment. In Figure 7 (right),
with little preference data (e.g., 0.5 rankings per training example), the optimized policy drifts away
from the reference but degrades performance. As we scale the preference data, the same policy drift
budget results in better performance, though further increases in the KL budget eventually reduce
performance. Nevertheless, this investigation shows that scaling preference data can mitigate the
effects of preference over-optimization and highlights the importance of doing so in a cost-effective
manner.

6          C ONCLUSION
In this work, we consider the problem of efficient post-training alignment for multi-agent motion
generation. We propose Direct Preference Alignment from Occupancy Measure Matching Feed-
back, a simple yet principled approach that leverages pre-training expert demonstrations to generate
implicit preference feedback and improves the pre-trained model’s generation quality without addi-
tional post-training human preference annotation, reward learning, or complex reinforcement learn-
ing. We presented the first investigation of direct preference alignment for multi-agent motion gen-
eration models using implicit preference feedback from pre-training demonstrations. We applied our
approach to large-scale traffic simulation (more than 100 agents) and demonstrated its effectiveness
in improving the realism of pre-trained model’s generated behaviors, making a lightweight 1M mo-
tion generation model comparable to state-of-the-art large imitation-based models by relying solely
on implicit feedback from pre-training demonstrations, without requiring additional post-training
human preference annotations or incurring high computational costs. Additionally, we provided an
in-depth analysis of preference data scaling laws and their effects on over-optimization, offering
valuable insights for future investigations.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reproducibility Statement. To enhance the reproducibility of our research, we have provided a
detailed explanation of our motion generation model and its source in Appendix C. Additionally, we
have thoroughly described the calculation of the preference distance in Section 3.2 and the process
of constructing our preference dataset in Section 4.

R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Yulong Cao, Boris Ivanovic, Chaowei Xiao, and Marco Pavone. Reinforcement learning with human
  feedback for realistic traffic simulation. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), pp. 14428–14434. IEEE, 2024.
Zhaorun Chen, Siyue Wang, Zhuokai Zhao, Chaoli Mao, Yiyang Zhou, Jiayu He, and Albert Sibo
  Hu. Escirl: Evolving self-contrastive irl for trajectory prediction in autonomous driving. In 8th
  Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024a.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play fine-tuning
  converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335,
  2024b.
Charles AE Goodhart and CAE Goodhart. Problems of monetary management: the UK experience.
  Springer, 1984.
Joey Hejna, Rafael Rafailov, Harshit Sikchi, Chelsea Finn, Scott Niekum, W Bradley Knox, and
  Dorsa Sadigh. Contrastive prefence learning: Learning from human feedback without rl. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.13639, 2023.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Annie S Chen, Thomas Kollar, Chelsea Finn, Dorsa Sadigh,
  and Percy Liang. Language-driven representation learning for robotics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12766, 2023.
Naveen Kodali, Jacob Abernethy, James Hays, and Zsolt Kira. On convergence and stability of gans.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07215, 2017.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Thomas Mesnard, Johan Ferret, Kellie Ren Lu,
  Colton Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, Abhinav Rastogi, et al. Rlaif vs. rlhf: Scaling rein-
  forcement learning from human feedback with ai feedback. In Forty-first International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning.
Jiaxiang Li, Siliang Zeng, Hoi-To Wai, Chenliang Li, Alfredo Garcia, and Mingyi Hong. Getting
   more juice out of the sft data: Reward learning from human demonstration improves sft for llm
   alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17888, 2024.
Aiwei Liu, Haoping Bai, Zhiyun Lu, Xiang Kong, Simon Wang, Jiulong Shan, Meng Cao, and
  Lijie Wen. Direct large language model alignment through self-rewarding contrastive prompt
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11907, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yicheng Luo, zhengyao jiang, Samuel Cohen, Edward Grefenstette, and Marc Peter Deisen-
  roth. Optimal transport for offline imitation learning. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  MhuFzFsrfvH.
Nico Montali, John Lambert, Paul Mougin, Alex Kuefler, Nicholas Rhinehart, Michelle Li, Cole
  Gulino, Tristan Emrich, Zoey Yang, Shimon Whiteson, et al. The waymo open sim agents chal-
  lenge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Tong Mu, Alec Helyar, Johannes Heidecke, Joshua Achiam, Andrea Vallone, Ian Kivlichan, Molly
  Lin, Alex Beutel, John Schulman, and Lilian Weng. Rule based rewards for language model
  safety.
Nigamaa Nayakanti, Rami Al-Rfou, Aurick Zhou, Kratarth Goel, Khaled S Refaat, and Benjamin
  Sapp. Wayformer: Motion forecasting via simple & efficient attention networks. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2980–2987. IEEE, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Jonah Philion, Xue Bin Peng, and Sanja Fidler. Trajeglish: Traffic modeling as next-token predic-
  tion. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Ilija Radosavovic, Bike Zhang, Baifeng Shi, Jathushan Rajasegaran, Sarthak Kamat, Trevor Darrell,
   Koushil Sreenath, and Jitendra Malik. Humanoid locomotion as next token prediction. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2402.19469, 2024.
Rafael Rafailov, Yaswanth Chittepu, Ryan Park, Harshit Sikchi, Joey Hejna, Bradley Knox, Chelsea
  Finn, and Scott Niekum. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization in direct alignment
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02900, 2024a.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Ari Seff, Brian Cera, Dian Chen, Mason Ng, Aurick Zhou, Nigamaa Nayakanti, Khaled S Re-
  faat, Rami Al-Rfou, and Benjamin Sapp. Motionlm: Multi-agent motion forecasting as language
  modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  8579–8590, 2023.
Jiaming Song, Hongyu Ren, Dorsa Sadigh, and Stefano Ermon. Multi-agent generative adversarial
   imitation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Hao Sun and Mihaela van der Schaar. Inverse-rlignment: Inverse reinforcement learning from
  demonstrations for llm alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15624, 2024.
Liting Sun, Wei Zhan, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Probabilistic prediction of interactive driving
  behavior via hierarchical inverse reinforcement learning. In 2018 21st International Conference
  on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 2111–2117. IEEE, 2018.
Yunhao Tang, Daniel Zhaohan Guo, Zeyu Zheng, Daniele Calandriello, Yuan Cao, Eugene Tarassov,
  Rémi Munos, Bernardo Ávila Pires, Michal Valko, Yong Cheng, et al. Understanding the perfor-
  mance gap between online and offline alignment algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08448,
  2024.
Ran Tian, Chenfeng Xu, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Jitendra Malik, and Andrea Bajcsy. What mat-
  ters to you? towards visual representation alignment for robot learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.07932, 2023.
Thomas Tian, Boyi Li, Xinshuo Weng, Yuxiao Chen, Edward Schmerling, Yue Wang, Boris
  Ivanovic, and Marco Pavone. Tokenize the world into object-level knowledge to address long-tail
  events in autonomous driving. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes Belkada,
  Shengyi Huang, Leandro von Werra, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, et al. Zephyr: Direct
  distillation of lm alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16944, 2023.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Chaoqi Wang, Yibo Jiang, Chenghao Yang, Han Liu, and Yuxin Chen. Beyond reverse kl: Gener-
  alizing direct preference optimization with diverse divergence constraints. In The International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a.
Yuting Wang, Lu Liu, Maonan Wang, and Xi Xiong. Reinforcement learning from human feedback
  for lane changing of autonomous vehicles in mixed traffic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04447,
  2024b.
Wei Wu, Xiaoxin Feng, Ziyan Gao, and Yuheng Kan. Smart: Scalable multi-agent real-time simu-
 lation via next-token prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15677, 2024.
Huang Xiao, Michael Herman, Joerg Wagner, Sebastian Ziesche, Jalal Etesami, and Thai Hong
  Linh. Wasserstein adversarial imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08113, 2019.
Ceyuan Yang, Yujun Shen, Yinghao Xu, Deli Zhao, Bo Dai, and Bolei Zhou. Improving gans with
  a dynamic discriminator. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15093–15104,
  2022.
Kevin Yang, Dan Klein, Asli Celikyilmaz, Nanyun Peng, and Yuandong Tian. Rlcd: Rein-
  forcement learning from contrast distillation for language model alignment. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.12950, 2023.
Amy Zhang, Rowan McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning invari-
 ant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2020.
Zikang Zhou, Haibo Hu, Xinhong Chen, Jianping Wang, Nan Guan, Kui Wu, Yung-Hui Li, Yu-Kai
  Huang, and Chun Jason Xue. Behaviorgpt: Smart agent simulation for autonomous driving with
  next-patch prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17372, 2024.


                                                13
