Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PRDP: P ROGRESSIVELY R EFINED D IFFERENTIABLE
P HYSICS
 Kanishk Bhatia* , Felix Koehler*1, Nils Thuerey
 Technical University of Munich
 {kanishk.bhatia,f.koehler,nils.thuerey}@tum.de
 *
   Equal contribution



                                               A BSTRACT
            The physics solvers employed for neural network training are primarily itera-
            tive, and hence, differentiating through them introduces a severe computational
            burden as iterations grow large. Inspired by works in bilevel optimization, we
            show that full accuracy of the network is achievable through physics significantly
            coarser than fully converged solvers. We propose progressively refined differen-
            tiable physics (PRDP), an approach that identifies the level of physics refinement
            sufficient for full training accuracy. By beginning with coarse physics, adaptively
            refining it during training, and stopping refinement at the level adequate for train-
            ing, it enables significant compute savings without sacrificing network accuracy.
            Our focus is on differentiating iterative linear solvers for sparsely discretized dif-
            ferential operators, which are fundamental to scientific computing. PRDP is ap-
            plicable to both unrolled and implicit differentiation. We validate its performance
            on a variety of learning scenarios involving differentiable physics solvers such as
            inverse problems, autoregressive neural emulators, and correction-based neural-
            hybrid solvers. In the challenging example of emulating the Navier-Stokes equa-
            tions, we reduce training time by 62%.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Differentiable Physics is a paradigm which allows learning algorithms to interact with gradients
of classical physics solvers. This has proven effective across many domains, e.g., solving inverse
problems (Bendsoe & Sigmund, 2013), integrating physical constraints (Raissi et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2024), and especially, creating hybrid models that blend classical numerical techniques with learned
components (Um et al., 2020; Kochkov et al., 2021; 2024). Despite their promise, neural-hybrid
models for differential equations face limited adoption due to the computational cost of executing
and differentiating through classical solvers during training. At the core of most classical solvers for
differential equations are iterative processes that can be tuned for accuracy, typically by adjusting
parameters such as step size or iteration count. Traditionally, these methods prioritize achieving
the highest possible accuracy in the physics solver. In contrast, our work takes a novel approach,
drawing inspiration from bi-level optimization (Pedregosa, 2016). Rather than focusing solely on
maximum physics accuracy, we explore how numerical solvers can be strategically adjusted to sub-
stantially accelerate the training process without losing network accuracy.
Our work applies to training pipelines involv-
ing differentiable physics, as exemplified in fig-
ure 1. Repeatedly querying a solver with sev-
eral iterations in the forward pass – and differ-
entiating through its iterations in the backward
pass – introduces a severe computational bottle-
neck during training. Since deep learning is in-      Figure 1: A neural network training pipeline using
herently based on noisy gradient estimates, we        a differentiable physics solver PK . Black and red
show that neither the physics nor the physics’        arrows show the forward and backward passes, re-
Jacobian must be fully converged at training          spectively. As solver iterations K grows, the cost
    1
        Munich Center for Machine Learning            of passes through PK becomes severe.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                      40                                                         125


                                                          Physics solver iterations
                     100                    Converged
                                            PRDP


                                                                                                                             Training Time [s]
                                                                                                                                                 100

 Validation Error
                                                                                      30
                                                                                               IC Savings
                    10 1                                                              20                                                          75
                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                      10       PR Savings
                    10 2                                                                                                                          25
                                                                                      0                                                            0
                           0   25    50       75    100                                    0         25     50    75   100                             Converged PRDP
                                    Epoch                                                                 Epoch
                                    (a)                                                                     (b)                                              (c)

Figure 2: Progressively Refined Differentiable Physics (PRDP) reduces the training time of neural
networks containing numerical solver components (c). The fidelity of iterative components is in-
creased only if validation metrics plateau. This leads to savings by using fewer iterations in the
beginning (PR savings in (b)) and by ending at a refinement level significantly below full fidelity
(IC savings in (b)). The achieved validation error is identical (a).
time to attain a good generalization. Using differentiable numerical solvers at a level significantly
coarser than needed for tight tolerances and progressively refining it starting from an even coarser
level is sufficient to achieve full accuracy of the network.
Differentiable Physics can be understood as a type of bilevel optimization. In the context of hyper-
parameter optimization (a typical bilevel optimization problem), Pedregosa (2016) explored the idea
of successively refining an inner solver to make increasingly accurate updates in an outer optimizer.
Under strict assumptions of convexity, it was shown that with a summable sequence of refinement
levels (in terms of increasingly tighter tolerances for both forward and backward solve), conver-
gence in the low-dimensional hyperparameter space can be achieved. We build upon this work but
instead, treat the nonconvex learning of neural network parameters as an outer problem. Our in-
ner problem is the most elementary operation in any scientific computing, the solution of a linear
system of equations from the discretization of a physical model. In this more general setting, we
observe that we cumulatively reduce inner iterations not only by progressive refinement but also by
ending the refinement at a level significantly coarser than needed for full physics convergence. This
is possible because of the approximative nature of neural network training for which highly accurate
gradients are not required. Similar approaches have been investigated for Deep Equilibrium Models
(Bai et al., 2019), which have nonlinear root-finding with dense Jacobians as the inner problem, e.g.,
by (Shaban et al., 2019; Fung et al., 2021; Geng et al., 2021). In contrast, we focus on the sparse lin-
ear systems arising from the discretization of partial differential equations (PDEs) admitting special
solution characteristics that have been unexplored in the context of deep learning. For realistically
large and sparse linear systems of equations, the prevalent class of solution methods are iterative
linear solvers (Saad, 2003). By controlling the number of iterations in these solvers (and during
their backward passes), we can directly balance physics refinement and computational cost.
Reducing the cumulative number of solver iterations performed throughout the network training re-
sults in considerable compute savings since linear solves typically dominate run times. However,
the optimal refinement schedule and the sufficient level of refinement are problem-dependent. To
automatically determine them during the network training, we present a novel algorithm, Progres-
sively Refined Differentiable Physics, in which the refinement of the physics is adaptively increased
if a plateau in terms of validation metrics is encountered. This idea is visualized in figure 2.
Our experiments focus on efficiently training neural networks with differentiable linear solvers in the
loop. We address unrolled as well as implicit differentiation methods, showing that PRDP applies ef-
fectively to both. The approach is tested on training tasks across a range of PDE problems, including
the Poisson, heat diffusion, Burgers, and Navier-Stokes equations. Empirical insights into PRDP’s
behavior are presented for 1D problems, and its performance is validated through more complex 2D
and 3D time-stepping problems. We demonstrate its effectiveness in a variety of settings such as
inverse problems, differentiable physics losses, and correction-based approaches.
In summary, our main contributions are the following.

                      • We empirically demonstrate that full network performance can be achieved with a coarse
                        level of physics refinement, well below the typical refinement required for full convergence,
                        leading to significant computational savings.


                                                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • We introduce the Progressively Refined Differentiable Physics (PRDP) algorithm, which
         adaptively identifies the optimal level of physics refinement during training.
       • We validate the effectiveness of PRDP across various differentiable physics learning sce-
         narios, demonstrating its broad applicability.

2     D IFFERENTIATING I TERATIVE L INEAR S OLVERS
A theoretical understanding of differentiating iterations can be gained through the example of
an inverse problem involving a parameterized linear system Auh = bh . Such systems arise
in the numerical solution of discretized PDEs, where h refers to the spatial discretization width
(Ames et al., 2014). For this, both the system matrix A and the right-hand side bh arise from
the assembly routines Λ(θ) and β(θ), respectively. An iterative solver Φ creates a sequence of
            [0]   [1]      [K]            [0]
guesses {uh , uh , . . . uh } = {Φk (uh ; A, bh )}K   k=0 that should converge to the analytical solu-
       [K]      ∗       −1
tion uh ≈ uh = A bh , up to a given tolerance ϵ. We denote the number of solver iterations
required to achieve this tolerance by Kϵ . Clearly, the set of parameters θ ∈ RP affect the solution
to this linear system of equations. Let PK denote a function mapping from the parameters θ to
                                                           [K]
the iterative solution of the linear system of equations uh via first assembling the system matrix
A = Λ(θ) and the right-hand side bh = β(θ) and then employing the iterator Φ for K steps. An
example of the corresponding compute graph is shown in figure 21 in the appendix. The inverse
problem is solved by performing an optimization over the parameter space, aiming to minimize the
discrepancy against a reference solution urh via
                                              1
                min L(θ) = l(uh (θ)) = ∥uh (θ) − urh ∥22 s.t. Λ(θ)uh = β(θ).                       (1)
                  θ                           2
This forms a bilevel problem where the outer optimization concerns minimizing the loss L(θ), while
the inner optimization pertains to solving the linear system PK . Then, the loss function’s evaluation
can be explicitly written as L(θ) = l(PK (θ)).
Solving the outer optimization using a first-order method requires the gradient ∇θ L. We can differ-
entiate this chained function using reverse-mode automatic differentiation (AD, Griewank & Walther
(2008)) to find the (transposed) gradient as
                                                           

                           (∇θ L)T = θ̄T = ⃗1T Jl |PK (θ)           JPK |θ .                     (2)
                                                          
                                                | {z }                | {z }
                                                    primal inacc.   adjoint inacc.
Clearly, the quality of the gradient depends on the number of iterator steps K. Inaccuracies in the
physics operator PK propagate to the loss gradient ∇θ L through two sources: primal inaccuracy,
i.e., the Jacobian of the loss function Jl evaluated at the approximate solution PK (θ), and adjoint
inaccuracy, i.e., the Jacobian JPK |θ of the (approximate) iterative solver itself.

2.1   L INEAR S OLVER VJP S

AD frameworks do not assemble the full Jacobian; rather, they employ vector-Jacobian products
(VJP) to reverse-propagate the gradient information (Murphy, 2023; Blondel & Roulet, 2024). The
programmatic implementation for the VJP of the loss function ūTh = ⃗1T Jl |PK (θ) is straightforward
to perform via AD. On the other hand, the VJP over the approximate physics PK requires reverse
propagation over the solver and the assembly routines, which we detail in appendix C. Conceptually,
there are two approaches.

Implicit Differentiation The backpropagation over the iterative linear solve can be framed as the
solution of another linear system in terms of an auxiliary variable λ with AT λ = ūh . This requires
the transpose system matrix AT . Implicit differentiation over any kind of implicit relation gives rise
to a linear solve with the system’s linearized form being transposed. It can be derived automatically
with AD tools (Blondel et al., 2022). Having a linear solve in the primal execution as well is a
special case, as the same system matrix appears in the forward as well as the backward pass. Hence,
it is reasonable to employ the same iterator in the VJP as in the primal, but with the transposed
system matrix and the different right-hand side Φ(· ; AT , ūh ). The number of iterates required to
converge can be different from the primal and provide a way to control the adjoint inaccuracy.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Unrolled Differentiation Unrolled differentiation applies AD directly to an iterative program,
treating each iteration as an individual computational step. It thereby accesses the VJP through the
iterator Φ and accumulates each iterate’s contribution. This inherently requires access to all primal
iterates. Since the AD engine unrolls as many iterations as in the primal pass, the adjoint accuracy
is naturally coupled with the primal accuracy.

2.2   S CHEDULING INNER ITERATIONS

Since the outer problem of equation 1 is solved iteratively, the gradient ∇θ L can be coarse at the
beginning of the outer iterations and only requires the highest fidelity towards the end (Pedregosa,
2016). This fundamental idea was developed in the domain of hyperparameter optimization, and we
demonstrate its application to physical inverse problems. Consider the Poisson equation, which is
a prototypical elliptic partial differential equation found in many areas of science and engineering.
Most discretization techniques lead to a linear system of equations with N degrees of freedom (for
an example discretization, refer to section D.1).
       ∆u(x) = −p(x, θ), x ∈ Ω ⊂ RD             =⇒                             Auh = bh , uh , bh ∈ RN , A ∈ RN ×N             (3)
We consider a setting on the one-dimensional unit interval Ω = (0, 1) with homogeneous Dirichlet
boundary conditions, u(0) = 0 = u(1). Assuming the parameter space is one-dimensional, we
design the right-hand side as p(x, θ) = θ sin(2πx) and discretize it on the domain. The outer
optimization problem over θ ∈ R can be exactly solved in this case.
We employ a Jacobi scheme to solve the linear
system which converges to ϵ = 10−5 within                # physics solver iterations         Fully converged
Kϵ = 600 iterations; so does its unrolled Ja-             0         300        600           Scheduled
cobian. Under a gradient descent optimizer in                                                PR savings



                                                                                                 # physics solver iterations
                                                                                     600
                                                    Parameter relative error


the parameter space of θ, it requires a total of
125 outer iterations to bring the relative pa-      10 1
rameter suboptimality against θr also down to                                        400
10−5 . By using simple scheduling that starts       10 3
the outer optimization at a coarse inner resolu-                                     200
tion of K = 25, and progressively increases         10 5
the inner iterations by ∆K = 6 in every outer                                          0
iteration, all the way to Kϵ , we can reduce the          0         100                  0          100
overall computational cost of the optimization                Outer iteration              Outer iteration
while achieving the same parameter subopti-
                                                  Figure 3: Progressively refining the differentiable
mality. These results are visualized in figure 3.
                                                  physics during outer optimization of a Poisson in-
Despite requiring slightly more outer iterations,
                                                  verse problem achieves full convergence of the
fewer inner iterations are necessary. This re-
                                                  parameter with fewer cumulative iterations of the
sults in an overall reduction of 28% of the total
                                                  physics solver, leading to progressive refinement
number of inner iterations. These savings rep-
                                                  (PR) savings.
resent one component of the final cost savings.
As they are obtained due to scheduling fidelity
of the physics solve, we denote them as progressive refinement (PR) savings.

2.3   N ETWORK T RAINING UNDER I NCOMPLETELY C ONVERGED D IFFERENTIABLE P HYSICS

Going beyond simple convex inverse problems, more sophisticated compute graphs arise. For ex-
ample, assume the linear system is assembled from a prior variable that is given as the output of a
neural network gh := f (· ; θ) (ignoring the input to the network for now). In this case, we have
A = Λ(gh ) and bh = β(gh ). Hence, the optimization over θ turns into the nonconvex learning
problem in the weight space of the neural network. The extended reverse-mode AD operation reads

                    (∇θ L)T = θ̄T = ⃗1T Jl |PK (f (· ;θ)) JPK |f (· ;θ) Jf |θ .                 (4)

The approximate solution to the linear system of equations using K steps and its differentiation
remain the sources of gradient inaccuracy. Yet, the effect of the neural network alters the solution
characteristics of the iterative linear solver through the assembly of the system matrix (influencing
its spectrum) and right-hand side.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Conversely, we hypothesize that neural network training can also work under approximate gradients.
To illustrate this, consider the one-dimensional heat equation on a periodic unit interval with a time-
implicit discretization
                          ∂u     ∂2u                                   [t+1]    [t]
                             = ν 2 , x ∈ (0, 1) =⇒ (I − ν∆t L1 )uh           = uh ,                    (5)
                          ∂t     ∂x
where L1 represents the matrix from the spatial discretization of the second derivative (see sec-
                                                                                                 [t+1]
tion D.2 for more details). The physics operator now advances from one step to the next uh              =
      [t] 2
P(uh ). Consider the scenario in which a neural network performs a first prediction in time from an
                      [1]       [0]
initial state, i.e., uh = f (uh ; θ), followed by the physics operator involving K iterator steps which
                                             [2][K]          [1]
provides the second time step solution uh           = PK (uh ). The loss in equation 1 is computed
                                                                                    [2],r      2     [0]
against a reference given by applying the converged physics operator twice uh             = PK   ϵ
                                                                                                   (uh ).
Hence, the network is trained to emulate one application of P. We solve the linear system of equa-
tions using the Jacobi method (B.1), which converges within Kϵ = 25 iterations. The implicit
differentiation’s linear solve requires equally many iterations.
Figure 4 shows the results of multiple network             # physics solver iterations
training runs performed at different levels of               1      10            25
physics refinement, i.e., different values of K                                               Kmax           K
                                                       10 2
                                                        Validation Error during training
that are kept constant for each training run.


                                                                                           Validation Error at final epoch
We observe that beyond a refinement threshold
                                                       101
Kmax , no further improvements of the neural
emulator’s performance on a validation metric          100
are noticeable. Hence, we conclude that net-                                                      IC savings
works can attain a high level of accuracy, even       10 1
when trained through incompletely converged           10 2
(IC) physics. As explained in equation 2,
this incomplete physics convergence subsumes                 0         50         100   0       10       20 25
coarseness of its Jacobian. In the example of                        Epoch             # physics solver iterations
the heat emulator, we obtain Kmax = 10, which
reduces the number of physics solver iterations Figure 4: Network accuracy does not improve be-
for training by 60%. We denote this second yond a refinement level of differentiable physics
type of reductions as IC savings.                  (Kmax ) significantly lower than full convergence
While we could not isolate a single cause for (Kϵ ) constituting incomplete convergence (IC)
these IC savings, we hypothesize that it is likely savings.
due to a combination of factors: (1) the more
critical components of the gradient may converge more rapidly than less important ones, (2) the
inherent noisiness of neural network training due to stochastic mini-batching, (3) the usage of
momentum-based optimizers, and (4) the inherently approximative nature of machine learning mod-
els. Taken together, these factors presumably reduce the need for full convergence in the differen-
tiable physics solver, resulting in very substantial cost savings.

3    P ROGRESSIVELY R EFINED D IFFERENTIABLE P HYSICS
The inner iterations saved by progressive refinement (PR) and incomplete convergence (IC) can
greatly reduce training time without impeding accuracy. However, a suitable refinement schedule
and Kmax are unknown a priori. They depend on the PDE, its discretization (given by Λ and β), the
iterative linear solver, and the learning dynamics.
To arrive at a practical method, we automate the progressive refinement and the detection of Kmax
based on the observation that training progress in terms of a validation metric stagnates when the
physics inaccuracy is too large. This stagnation corresponding to different physics refinement levels
is exemplified in figures 3 and 4. Conversely, we track training progress over time to automatically
increase physics refinement by ∆K linear solver iterations when training plateaus. Typically PRDP
starts at K0 = 1.
   2
     Throughout this work, we use superscripts in square brackets to denote sequence entries, for example for
temporal snapshots or iterates of a linear solver.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    def update(model, state_in, state_out, inner_iterations):
        # neural network gives first time step, physics gives second time step
        state_1 = model(state_in)
        state_2 = physics(state_1, inner_iterations)
        loss, grad = value_and_grad(loss_fn)(state_2, state_out)
        model = update_model(model, grad)
        return model, loss

    inner_iterations = 1
    val_loss_history = [evaluate(model, val_dataloader))]
    for epoch in range(epochs):
        for state_in, state_out in dataloader:
            model, loss = update(model, state_in, state_out, inner_iterations)
        val_loss_history.append(evaluate(model, val_dataloader))
        if should_refine(val_loss_history):
            inner_iterations += 1



Listing 1: A typical mixed-chain learning pipeline (figure 1) as used in our neural emulator
learning experiments. Training begins with coarse physics, using, e.g., 1 solver iteration. The
should refine function applies PRDP, determining when to refine and progressively increasing
the inner solver iterations during training.


Controlling Refinement Given an exponentially smoothed his-
                              [e]
tory of validation metrics {L̃val }e after a representative training in-
terval, for which we can either use epochs or a fixed number of
update steps, we distinguish three trends:

      1. Validation metric plateaus: If the ratio of the latest vali-
         dation error and the value of several grace intervals δ ear-
                       [−1]   [−δ]
         lier, r = L̃val /L̃val , is above a threshold r > τstep , it
         indicates that the network has achieved the highest possi-
         ble accuracy at the current refinement level. Then, sub-
         ject to the following checks, the refinement is increased by
         ∆K. We record the validation metric before refinement
                                   [−1]
         as a checkpoint c ← L̃val . Identifying this trend leads to
         full utitilization of each refinement level and contributes
         the PR savings.
      2. Adequate refinement is achieved: We compute the Figure 5: Top: the typ-
         improvement of the current plateaued validation metric ical training progress of a
         against the checkpoint, rc = L̃val /c. If the stagnation neural network supported by
                                              [−1]

         is greater than its threshold, i.e., rc > τstop , the refinement PRDP, showing the ratios r
         level is retained. This identifies the adequate level of re- and rc . Bottom: a simpli-
         finement necessary, Kmax , enabling the IC savings.              fied flowchart representation
                                                                          of the PRDP control algo-
      3. Initially divergent regime: For some scenarios, there is a rithm.
         minimum number of iterations Kmin which if K < Kmin
         lead to the convergence of the network to a worse value
         than its initialization, e.g., for K = 1 and K = 2 in figure 4. To overcome this, we also
         refine if rc > 1.0.

Figure 5 illustrates the basic concept of the PRDP control algorithm. The exact algorithm is detailed
in pseudocode in Algorithm 4. Its implementation in a training pipeline that uses differentiable
physics is represented by the should refine function in listing 1.

Applying Refinement Intrinsically, PRDP pertains to refinement of the primal physics. As we
showed in section 2.1, the adjoint refinement is controlled based on the kind of differentiation used.
In implicit differentiation, an additional linear system solve is performed via a custom differentia-
tion rule. This approach inherently decouples the convergence of the primal and its Jacobian. We
maintain their coupling by using the same solver and number of inner iterations for the primal solve
and the VJP solve. This setup ensures that adjustments to the number of inner iterations consistently
affect the primal and the VJP. When using unrolled differentiation, progressive refinement of the
primal trivially extends to progressive refinement of the Jacobian. This is because the number of
iterations unrolled by the automatic differentiation engine is the same as that of the primal solve.


                                                    6
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               102                                                                                                                                                     coarse


                                                                                                      2-step nMSE x-velocity


                                                                                                                                                  Physics Refinement
               101
2-step nMSE


                                                                     5-step nMSE
               100
              10 1
              10 2
                                                                                                                                                                       fine
                      0    50      100 0 25 50 70 0     50     100                 0    50      100                            0    50      100                         PRDP
                          Epochs         Epochs       Epochs                           Epochs                                      Epochs
                      (a) Heat 1D      (b) Heat 2D (c) Heat 3D                     (d) Burgers                          (e) Navier Stokes
    Figure 6: PRDP achieves the same network accuracy as fully converged physics (baseline in dark
    purple). It does so by adjusting physics accuracy adaptively over the training if validation perfor-
    mance plateaus, which is particularly noticeable in Heat 2D.


    4           E XPERIMENTS

    To validate our approach across problems of varying complexities, a combination of different learn-
    ing and physics scenarios are chosen. This includes the convex optimization of an exactly solvable
    inverse problem with the Poisson equation as described in section 2.2, the learning of autoregressive
    neural emulators in the spirit of Bar-Sinai et al. (2019) and Brandstetter et al. (2022) for the diffusion
    and Burgers equation but with a loss setup involving differentiable physics, and third, the learning of
    a neural-hybrid emulator in a setting similar to Um et al. (2020). When training neural networks, our
    results show the aggregation over ten different initialization seeds. The validation metric used is the
    normalized mean squared error (nMSE) over the validation dataset. Further specifics are provided
    in appendix F.

    4.1              L INEAR I NVERSE P ROBLEM

    In section 2.2, we demonstrated the potential progressive refinement savings on a doubly-
    convex inverse Poisson problem when employing a pre-defined linear scheduling of in-
    ner iterations across outer iterations. This schedule was hand-tuned based on exhaustive
    runs. PRDP is designed to be problem-independent and adjust the inner iterations adap-
    tively. To confirm this, we apply PRDP in the same setting and achieve a saving of 33%
    due to progressive refinement. This is slightly higher than the manually achieved 28%.
    Moreover, we extended this inverse prob-
    lem to a three-dimensional parameter
                                                     P Type Diff          Cost        Red.     PR. Sav.
    space, with each entry scaling the first
    three eigenmodes, and covered a combi-           1   Jac      Unr     75K       24.87K       33%
    nation of different setups, including the        1   Jac     Impl     75K       24.87K       33%
    steepest descent solver (SD), and implicit
                                                     3   Jac      Unr 337.5K         163K        48%
    differentiation (Impl) next to unrolled dif-
                                                     3   Jac     Impl 337.5K         163K        48%
    ferentiation (Unr). The results presented
                                                     3   SD       Unr    192K        82.7K       43%
    in the table to the right show that PRDP
                                                     3   SD      Impl    192K        82.7K       43%
    universally applies to each combination
    and is, hence, agnostic to the linear solver
    and the differentiation method. The qualitative behavior of all combinations is displayed in appendix
    figure 15. For brevity, we only list the PR savings achieved using PRDP by displaying the cost of
    optimization with Kϵ and the corresponding reduction (Red.). Importantly, under the larger param-
    eter space within each of the four setups, PRDP works equally well, achieving PR savings of 48%
    and 43% for the Jacobi method and the steepest descent solver, respectively.

    4.2              L INEAR N EURAL E MULATOR L EARNING

    We train a multilayer perceptron (outer problem) to function as an autoregressive emulator,
    i.e., a replacement for the numerical time stepper of a heat diffusion equation. Following
    the differential physics paradigm, the numerical heat equation solver (inner problem) is in-
    cluded in the gradient loop during training. This training pipeline is depicted in figure 1.

                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In section 2.3, using a 1D case                                                  3000


                                      Cumulative solver iterations
                                        2500                 3000
of the same setup, we demon-            2000
strated that savings due to in-                         IC   2000            IC  2000            IC
                                        1500
complete convergence are actu-
                                        1000                                     1000
ally achievable, and that they                          PR   1000                                PR
                                         500                                 PR
are likely caused by the nature
                                           0                    0                   0
of the training in deep learn-               Converged PRDP       Converged PRDP      Converged PRDP
ing. We identified Kmax based
on an exhaustive search of dif-
                                           Figure 7: Total Inner iters in Heat 1D, 2D & 3D.
ferent K values. This is infea-
sible in practice. Hence, PRDP is designed to automatically find the upper refinement threshold
and prevent further superfluous refinement. In figure 6(a), (b) & (c), this can be seen as its con-
vergence follows certain refinement levels. We can confirm that the same Kmax = 10 is found by
PRDP constituting the aforementioned 60% IC savings. Moreover, as figure 7(a) reveals, the total
PRDP savings are 79% against the fully converged run with Kϵ = 25 because PRDP additionally
contributes 19% savings due to progressive refinement. We repeated a similar experiment in two
and three dimensional settings. In the 2D case, the difference between Kϵ = 43 and Kmax = 12
constitutes 72% IC savings. Together with 14% PR savings, this totals 86% savings due to applying
PRDP as visualized in figure 7. Similarly training a ResNet (He et al., 2016) in the 3D case, the
total savings due to PRDP were 81%. This corresponded to a reduction in total training time by
24% and 78% in the 2D and 3D cases, respectively, which underscores PRDP’s potential for large
computational savings in more difficult, higher-dimensional settings.

4.3   N ONLINEAR N EURAL E MULATOR L EARNING

The preceding tests constituted inner problems where only the linear sys-
tem’s right-hand side was dependent on the trainable parameters. We ex-



                                                                                Cumulative solver iterations
pect our PRDP algorithm to work equally well when training through in-              2000            IC
ner problems with a non-constant matrix assembly function Λ. To illus-              1500
trate this, we train a ResNet to function as an autoregressive emulator                             PR
                                                                                    1000
for the one-dimensional Burgers equation on a periodic unit interval with
a time-implicit upwinding discretization. Additionally, this yields a non-           500
symmetric matrix requiring the more sophisticated GMRES solver (Saad &                 0
Schultz, 1986). We use a linearization around the previous point in time, re-            Converged PRDP
sulting in an Oseen problem (Turek, 1999). When training a ResNet under a
similar mixed scenario as in section 4.2, we can again confirm the working Figure 8: Total inner
of PRDP in this case. It amounts to 30% savings by incomplete conver- iters in Burgers.
gence reducing Kϵ = 23 to Kmax = 16. An additional 29% PR savings
yield a total of 59% PRDP savings. The Burgers emulation problem was particularly challenging,
requiring us to set K0 = 4 to overcome a strongly divergent regime if the physics was too coarse
at the beginning of training. This is noticeable in the initial epochs in figure 6(c). This figure also
shows that since the fanning between the different (convergent) refinement levels is not as strong
as before, the IC savings are lower. However, we still see significant savings due to progressive
refinement.

4.4   N EURAL -H YBRID E MULATOR FOR THE NAVIER -S TOKES E QUATION

Tightly combining classical numerical solvers
and neural networks is a promising research di-
rection (Kochkov et al., 2021; Um et al., 2020).
It differs from our previous experiments in that
the solver is not just part of the training com-
pute graph but will also be executed during the
inference of the model.
We mimic the setup of Um et al. (2020) to Figure 9: The training (top) and evaluation (bot-
have a neural component correct the discretiza- tom) pipelines for neural-hybrid emulator.
tion error of an incompressible Navier-Stokes
solver by training it against a reference pro-


                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


duced at a higher resolution of discretization. The training and evaluation setups are shown in
figure 9. The outer and inner problems correspond to the network training and the Navier-Stokes
solver in the training loop, respectively. Similarly to the Burgers example, we choose an upwind-
based discretization with the linearization around the previous step in time. The additional incom-
pressibility constraint leads to a saddle point structure (Turek, 1999). We choose to solve it in a
coupled form with the GMRES algorithm (Saad & Schultz, 1986).
In this complex scenario, PRDP likewise gives substantial benefits:


                                                                               Cumulative solver iterations
                                                                            4000
It is able to save 65% inner iterations due to incomplete conver-
                                                                            3000
gence and 16% iterations in progressive refinement. Ultimately,                             IC
reducing the number of iterations by a total of 81% results in a            2000
reduction in wall clock training time by 62%, as shown in fig-                              PR
                                                                            1000
ure 2(c). Since neural-hybrid approaches execute the fully con-
verged physics solver during inference and consequently during                 0
validation, PRDP’s reliance on a validation metric necessitates this             Converged PRDP
additional cost. In our experiments, we found that compared to
training with fully converged physics without computing the vali- Figure 10: Total inner iters in
dation loss, PRDP was still faster by 57%.                           Navier Stokes.


5    R ELATED W ORK

Differentiation through implicit relations Fischer (1991) established an implementation frame-
work for unrolled differentiation and investigated the convergence of the derivative, focusing on
linear solvers. Charles (1992) extended this work to a broader class of iterative processes. As an
alternative to unrolled differentiation, Christianson (1998) derived the implicit differentiation rules
over linear solves. Beyond linear systems, implicit differentiation has since gained prominence in
the machine learning community, particularly for hyperparameter optimization (Bengio, 2000) and
other bilevel optimization (BLO) applications that require differentiating through inner optimiza-
tions, such as deep equilibrium models (Bai et al., 2019) and meta-learning (Andrychowicz et al.,
2016). We view differentiable physics (Thuerey et al., 2021) as another type of BLO with the spe-
cialty of sparse linear systems. The practicality of implicit differentiation is largely due to its reduced
memory footprint and lower reverse-mode computational cost, especially as modern automatic dif-
ferentiation (AD) tools can automatically handle the necessary propagation rules (Blondel et al.,
2022). Additionally, implicit differentiation allows for the black-box use of solver implementations,
enabling the integration of third-party components into differentiable computational graphs (Giles,
2008). However, unrolled differentiation remains an active research area, with work focusing on
non-asymptotic analyses (Scieur et al., 2022) and other aspects (Maclaurin et al., 2015; Franceschi
et al., 2017; Grazzi et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2021).

Analysis and cost-reduction of bilevel optimization To address the computational cost of bilevel
optimization, Fung et al. (2021) presented Jacobian-free backpropagation, where the Jacobian of the
implicit solver is approximated as the identity, eliminating the need for adjoint linear solves. Geng
et al. (2021) introduced phantom gradients, where the matrix inversion is replaced with an approxi-
mate inverse, and provided theoretical guarantees on the convergence of stochastic gradient descent
as the outer problem. Lorraine et al. (2020) approximates the implicit linear solves with a reduced
number of conjugate gradient steps. Moreover, Shaban et al. (2019) and recently Bolte et al. (2023)
discuss unrolled differentiation through only a reduced number of iterations. All the aforemen-
tioned works consider (what we call) incomplete convergence (IC) savings, albeit in the setting of
deep equilibrium models (Bai et al., 2019) or hyperparameter optimization (Feurer & Hutter, 2019).
On the other hand, Pedregosa (2016) studied approximate hypergradients by adjusting the tolerances
of inner primal and implicit linear solves following a pre-defined schedule. This work proves (what
we call) progressive refinement (PR) savings. Prior to this, Domke (2012) investigated outer train-
ing with unrolled AD through incompletely converged iterations, specifically for gradient descent,
heavy ball, and L-BFGS methods as inner optimizers. They note the advantage of implementing
incomplete convergence using the number of inner iterations rather than inner tolerance. Our ap-
proach uniquely combines PR and IC savings – through both unrolled and implicit differentiation
– targeting iterative solvers for sparse linear systems embedded within neural network training. To
our knowledge, no prior work has applied these techniques in this context.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6    L IMITATIONS AND O UTLOOK

Limitations While PRDP is designed to work across a range of differentiable physics settings,
there are, of course, way more potential linear systems that can arise, all with their specific charac-
teristics. Albeit we believe that the approach using scheduling over iterations rather than scheduling
via tolerances might be more generally applicable, it remains to be tested how PRDP applies to un-
structured discretizations in higher dimensions potentially also involving multiple physics. PRDP is
limited to settings that involve iterative linear solvers. As such, it can not be used for purely explicit
numerical solvers (e.g., found in strongly hyperbolic problems) or when the linear systems are solved
spectrally (Kochkov et al., 2024). However, most other simulations in science and engineering en-
tail linear solvers either due to more efficient implicit time stepping or when solving steady-state
problems. Moreover, whenever dynamics are constrained, e.g., the incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations, even if purely explicit time stepping is used, iterative processes are required to resolve
the constraints.

Outlook and Impact Progressively Refined Differentiable Physics (PRDP) provides a means to
exploit both savings due to progressive refinement and incomplete convergence, thereby greatly re-
ducing the cost of neural network training with differentiable physics. This could enable settings that
so far have been infeasible due to prohibitive expenses like long temporal unrollings or differentiable
physics on high resolutions or in three dimensions.
Our work opens up many interesting directions for future investigations, such as smoother relations
between the achieved plateau ratio r and the conducted iterations/prescribed tolerance in the physics
solver. Potentially, those could be faster than the linear increments we used in this work. For
neural-hybrid emulators, IC savings via Kmax could also extend to the inference stage. So far, PRDP
couples primal and adjoint (in-)accuracy. One can use the unique properties of either unrolled or
implicit differentiation for more sophisticated approaches. This can include an imbalanced number
of iterations in the primal solve and the implicit linear solve. For unrolled differentiation, one can
unroll a different number of iterations either reversely following Bolte et al. (2023) or Shaban et al.
(2019) or from the beginning. Other levels of refinement than by the number of iterations of a
linear solver are likewise interesting directions for future work, e.g., using differences in spatial or
temporal resolution together with resolution-agnostic neural emulators.

7    C ONCLUSION

This work investigated neural network training through incompletely converged differentiable
physics. Our objective was to reduce the cost of gradient computation without sacrificing training
accuracy. Prevalent research on training with incompletely converged gradients focuses on bilevel
optimization problems, primarily in meta-learning or hyperparameter optimization contexts. This
work extends the research in the differentiable physics space, focusing on iterative linear system
solves associated with discretized differential operators.
We have demonstrated that neural networks can be trained through differentiable physics solvers
significantly coarser than full convergence. Our approach of Progressively Refined Differentiable
Physics combines compute savings from both progressive refinement and incomplete convergence.
This yielded favorable outcomes across all our test scenarios. It makes initial training progress
cheap using coarse physics and carefully improves training accuracy using adaptive physics refine-
ment over time, ending the training at a refinement significantly below primal convergence. In total,
we achieve up to 86% fewer cumulative number of physics solver iterations than training with fully
converged physics, and 78% reduction in training time. Our approach has the potential for numer-
ous practical improvements in learning pipelines that involve differentiable numerical solvers and
could facilitate integrating simulators into training that were previously considered computationally
infeasible.

8    R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To ensure reproducibility, we detail all physics parameters, discretization schemes, boundary con-
ditions, iterative solvers, network architectures, optimizers, learning rate schedules, data generation


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


methods, train-test splits, and batch sizes in the appendix. Additionally, the full source code for our
experiments is available at https://github.com/tum-pbs/PRDP.

R EFERENCES
W.F. Ames, W. Rheinboldt, and A. Jeffrey. Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equa-
  tions. Applications of Mathematics Series. Elsevier Science, 2014. ISBN 9781483262420. URL
  https://books.google.de/books?id=haviBQAAQBAJ.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Matthew W. Hoffman, David
 Pfau, Tom Schaul, and Nando de Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient
 descent. In Daniel D. Lee, Masashi Sugiyama, Ulrike von Luxburg, Isabelle Guyon, and Ro-
 man Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, pp.
 3981–3989, 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/hash/
 fb87582825f9d28a8d42c5e5e5e8b23d-Abstract.html.
Shaojie Bai, J. Zico Kolter, and Vladlen Koltun. Deep equilibrium models. In H. Wal-
  lach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
  file/01386bd6d8e091c2ab4c7c7de644d37b-Paper.pdf.
Yohai Bar-Sinai, Stephan Hoyer, Jason Hickey, and Michael P Brenner. Learning data-driven dis-
  cretizations for partial differential equations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  116(31):15344–15349, 2019.
Martin Philip Bendsoe and Ole Sigmund. Topology optimization: theory, methods, and applications.
 Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
Yoshua Bengio. Gradient-based optimization of hyperparameters. Neural Comput., 12(8):1889–
  1900, 2000. doi: 10.1162/089976600300015187. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/
  089976600300015187.
Mathieu Blondel and Vincent Roulet. The Elements of Differentiable Programming. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.14606, 2024.
Mathieu Blondel, Quentin Berthet, Marco Cuturi, Roy Frostig, Stephan Hoyer, Felipe Llinares-
 Lopez, Fabian Pedregosa, and Jean-Philippe Vert. Efficient and modular implicit differentiation.
 In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 5230–5242. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
 file/228b9279ecf9bbafe582406850c57115-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Jérôme Bolte, Edouard Pauwels, and Samuel Vaiter. One-step differentiation of iterative algo-
    rithms. 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
    f3716db40060004d0629d4051b2c57ab-Abstract-Conference.html.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.
Johannes Brandstetter, Daniel E. Worrall, and Max Welling. Message passing neural PDE solvers.
  In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event,
  April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  vSix3HPYKSU.
Gilbert Jean Charles. Automatic differentiation and iterative processes. Optimization Methods
  & Software, 1:13–21, 1992. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  120894038.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bruce Christianson. Reverse accumulation and implicit functions. Optimization Methods and Soft-
  ware, 9(4):307–322, 1998. doi: 10.1080/10556789808805697.

DeepMind, Igor Babuschkin, Kate Baumli, Alison Bell, Surya Bhupatiraju, Jake Bruce, Peter
  Buchlovsky, David Budden, Trevor Cai, Aidan Clark, Ivo Danihelka, Antoine Dedieu, Clau-
  dio Fantacci, Jonathan Godwin, Chris Jones, Ross Hemsley, Tom Hennigan, Matteo Hessel,
  Shaobo Hou, Steven Kapturowski, Thomas Keck, Iurii Kemaev, Michael King, Markus Kunesch,
  Lena Martens, Hamza Merzic, Vladimir Mikulik, Tamara Norman, George Papamakarios, John
  Quan, Roman Ring, Francisco Ruiz, Alvaro Sanchez, Laurent Sartran, Rosalia Schneider, Eren
  Sezener, Stephen Spencer, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Miloš Stanojević, Wojciech Stokowiec, Luyu
  Wang, Guangyao Zhou, and Fabio Viola. The DeepMind JAX Ecosystem, 2020. URL http:
  //github.com/google-deepmind.

Justin Domke. Generic methods for optimization-based modeling. In Neil D. Lawrence and Mark
  Girolami (eds.), Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, volume 22 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 318–326, La Palma,
  Canary Islands, 21–23 Apr 2012. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v22/domke12.html.

Matthias Feurer and Frank Hutter. Hyperparameter optimization. Automated machine learning:
 Methods, systems, challenges, pp. 3–33, 2019.

Herbert Fischer. Automatic differentiation of the vector that solves a parametric linear system. Jour-
  nal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 35(1):169–184, 1991. ISSN 0377-0427. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(91)90205-X. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/037704279190205X.

Luca Franceschi, Michele Donini, Paolo Frasconi, and Massimiliano Pontil. Forward and reverse
  gradient-based hyperparameter optimization. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW,
  Australia, 6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1165–
  1173. PMLR, 2017. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/franceschi17a.
  html.

Samy Wu Fung, Howard Heaton, Qiuwei Li, Daniel Mckenzie, Stanley J. Osher, and Wotao Yin.
  Jfb: Jacobian-free backpropagation for implicit networks. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:238198721.

Zhengyang Geng, Xin-Yu Zhang, Shaojie Bai, Yisen Wang, and Zhouchen Lin. On training im-
  plicit models. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 24247–24260. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2021/file/cb8da6767461f2812ae4290eac7cbc42-Paper.pdf.

Mike B Giles. Collected matrix derivative results for forward and reverse mode algorithmic differ-
 entiation. In Advances in Automatic Differentiation, pp. 35–44. Springer, 2008.

Riccardo Grazzi, Luca Franceschi, Massimiliano Pontil, and Saverio Salzo. On the iteration com-
  plexity of hypergradient computation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:220250381.

Andreas Griewank. Achieving logarithmic growth of temporal and spatial complexity in reverse
  automatic differentiation. Optimization Methods and software, 1(1):35–54, 1992.

Andreas Griewank and Andrea Walther. Evaluating Derivatives. Society for Industrial and Applied
  Mathematics, second edition, 2008. doi: 10.1137/1.9780898717761. URL https://epubs.
  siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9780898717761.

Francis H Harlow and J Eddie Welch. Numerical calculation of time-dependent viscous incompress-
  ible flow of fluid with free surface. The physics of fluids, 8(12):2182–2189, 1965.

                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR
  2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, pp. 770–778. IEEE Computer Society, 2016. doi:
  10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Raad I Issa, AD Gosman, and AP Watkins. The computation of compressible and incompressible
  recirculating flows by a non-iterative implicit scheme. Journal of Computational Physics, 62(1):
  66–82, 1986.
Kaiyi Ji, Junjie Yang, and Yingbin Liang. Bilevel optimization: Convergence analysis and enhanced
  design. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4882–4892. PMLR, 2021.
Patrick Kidger and Cristian Garcia. Equinox: neural networks in JAX via callable PyTrees and
  filtered transformations. Differentiable Programming workshop at Neural Information Processing
  Systems 2021, 2021.
Dmitrii Kochkov, Jamie Alexander Smith, Ayya Alieva, Qing Wang, Michael Brenner, and Stephan
 Hoyer. Machine learning accelerated computational fluid dynamics. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences USA, 2021.
Dmitrii Kochkov, Janni Yuval, Ian Langmore, Peter Norgaard, Jamie Smith, Griffin Mooers, Milan
 Klöwer, James Lottes, Stephan Rasp, Peter Düben, et al. Neural general circulation models for
 weather and climate. Nature, pp. 1–7, 2024.
Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu, Kamyar
  Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial
  differential equations. ACM / IMS J. Data Sci., 1(3), may 2024. doi: 10.1145/3648506. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3648506.
Jonathan Lorraine, Paul Vicol, and David Duvenaud. Optimizing millions of hyperparameters by
  implicit differentiation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  1540–1552. PMLR, 2020.
Dougal Maclaurin, David Duvenaud, and Ryan Adams. Gradient-based hyperparameter optimiza-
  tion through reversible learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2113–2122.
  PMLR, 2015.
Kevin P. Murphy. Probabilistic Machine Learning: Advanced Topics. MIT Press, 2023. URL
  http://probml.github.io/book2.
Fabian Pedregosa. Hyperparameter optimization with approximate gradient. In Maria Florina
  Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 737–746,
  New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v48/pedregosa16.html.
J.Blair Perot. An analysis of the fractional step method. Journal of Computational Physics, 108
   (1):51–58, 1993. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/jcph.1993.1162. URL https:
   //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999183711629.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. J. Comput. Phys., 378:686–707, 2019. doi: 10.1016/J.JCP.2018.10.045.
 URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045.
Yousef Saad. Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems. Society for Industrial and Applied
  Mathematics, second edition, 2003. doi: 10.1137/1.9780898718003. URL https://epubs.
  siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9780898718003.
Yousef Saad and Martin H Schultz. Gmres: A generalized minimal residual algorithm for solving
  nonsymmetric linear systems. SIAM Journal on Scientific and Statistical Computing, 7(3):856–
  869, 1986. doi: 10.1137/0907058.

                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Damien Scieur, Gauthier Gidel, Quentin Bertrand, and Fabian Pedregosa.    The curse
  of unrolling: Rate of differentiating through optimization. In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 17133–17145. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/6d53193a098b982229340a7c3eb0ecbf-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Amirreza Shaban, Ching-An Cheng, Nathan Hatch, and Byron Boots. Truncated back-propagation
 for bilevel optimization. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 1723–1732. PMLR, 2019.
Nils Thuerey, Philipp Holl, Maximilian Mueller, Patrick Schnell, Felix Trost, and Ki-
  won Um.       Physics-based Deep Learning.      WWW, 2021.         URL https://
  physicsbaseddeeplearning.org.
Stefan Turek. Efficient Solvers for Incompressible Flow Problems - An Algorithmic and Com-
  putational Approach, volume 6 of Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering.
  Springer, 1999. ISBN 978-3-642-63573-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-58393-3. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-58393-3.
Kiwon Um, Robert Brand, Yun (Raymond) Fei, Philipp Holl, and Nils Thuerey. Solver-
  in-the-loop: Learning from differentiable physics to interact with iterative pde-solvers. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6111–6122. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/43e4e6a6f341e00671e123714de019a8-Paper.pdf.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    N OTATION

This section lists the primary notations used throughout the paper for clarity and ease of reference.

       • Ω ⊂ RD : Spatial domain of the physics problem.
       • h: Spatial discretization width.
       • t: Time step index in time-stepping problems.

VARIABLES AND O PERATORS
       • uh ∈ RN : The discretized solution vector.
       • u∗h : The direct solution to the linear system Auh = bh .
       • A ∈ RN ×N : The system matrix of the discretized PDE.
       • bh ∈ RN : The right-hand side vector.
       • ∆: The Laplacian operator, e.g., ∆u(x).
       • ∇: The gradient operator.
       • λ: Auxiliary variable used in implicit differentiation.
       • β(θ): Function mapping parameters θ to bh .
       • Λ(θ): Funcion mapping parameters θ to A.
       • Φ(.): Function representing each iteration of an iterative solver.
       • ∥ · ∥: Matrix or vector norm.
       • f (.; θ): Neural network parameterized by θ.
       • .T : Transpose of a matrix or vector.
       • ⃗1: Identity matrix.
       • θ: Trainable parameters of the neural network or physical model.
       • K: Number of iterations performed by the iterative solver.
       • Kϵ : Number of solver iterations required to achieve tolerance ϵ.
       • PK : Differentiable physics operator, approximating the solution of a linear system after K
         iterations.
           [K]
       • uh : Approximate solution of the linear system after K iterations of the solver.
       • urh : Reference solution to the linear system, computed using either a direct solver or a fully
         converged iterative solver.
       • L(θ): Outer loss function, which measures the discrepancy between the predicted solution
         and a reference solution.
       • Jl , JPK : Jacobians of the loss function and the physics operator, respectively.

PARAMETERS AND T OLERANCES
       • ϵ: Convergence tolerance for iterative solvers.
       • τstep : Threshold for the stepping criterion in PRDP.
       • τstop : Threshold for the stopping criterion in PRDP.
       • δ: Grace window for epoch intervals.
       • e: Exponential averaging window
       • ∆K: Increment in solver iterations used in progressive refinement.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ISCELLANEOUS
       • Kϵ : Number of iterations required to reach a specified tolerance ϵ in the iterative solver.
       • Kmax : Maximum number of inner iterations sufficient for training accuracy.
       • Kmin : Minimum number of inner iterations required to prevent divergence during training.
       • r, rc : Ratios used to evaluate the stepping and stopping criteria for progressive refinement,
         based on the validation metric’s behavior.


B     I TERATIVE L INEAR S OLVERS

The solution to linear systems of equations is fundamental to scientific computing. Especially for
partial differential equations discretized using fine resolutions or in higher dimensions, the discrete
linear systems become large and sparse. Oftentimes, iterative solvers are the only practical way of
solving them (Saad, 2003).
For our efforts to reduce the cost of differentiable physics as part of neural network training,
we consider three different iterative solvers. The Jacobi method belongs to the class of smooth-
ing/relaxation methods. When reformulating a linear system solve as a convex quadratic optimiza-
tion problem, the algorithm of steepest descent naturally arises. To solve asymmetric and compli-
cated systems, we also use the more sophisticated GMRES method. We implemented the Jacobi
method and steepest ourselves. For the GMRES, we used the version of JAX1 .
In all tests, the linear solvers were zero-initialized. Convergence is achieved if the relative residuum
error using the 2-norm
                                                    [k]
                                                 ∥Auh − bh ∥2
                                       ξ [k] =                                                      (6)
                                                    ∥bh ∥2
is below the threshold ϵ, which we set to ϵ = 10−5 due to single precision. We use the maximum
number of iterations K as a way to control the refinement of the physics simulation. The iterative
solvers return if either the maximum number of iterations K is reached or the tolerance threshold
ξ [k] < ϵ is met.

B.1   JACOBI RELAXATION

The Jacobi method is a relaxation-type method based on the decomposition of the system matrix
A into a strictly lower diagonal L, a diagonal D, and a strictly upper diagonal U part such that
A = L + D + U . We present its algorithm in 1.

Algorithm 1: Jacobi Method for Solving Auh = bh
Input: Matrix A ∈ RN ×N , vector bh ∈ Rn , tolerance ϵ, maximum iterations K
Output: Approximation of the solution uh ∈ RN
                                         [0]                [0]
Decompose L + D + U = A Initialize uh ∈ RN to zeros uh = 0;
for k = 0, 1, . . . , K − 1 do
      [k+1]                        [k]
    uh      = D −1 bh − (L + D)uh
                                                          [k+1]
    Compute relative residuum norm: ξ [k+1] = ∥Auh                − bh ∥2 /∥bh ∥2 ;
    if ξ [k+1] < ϵ then
          break;
    end
end
           [k+1]
return uh

  1
    https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_autosummary/jax.scipy.sparse.
linalg.gmres.html


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As a smoothing method, the convergence of the Jacobi method depends on the spectral radius of the
iterator matrix (Saad, 2003) via
                                 [k+1]                                [k]
                               ∥rh       ∥2 ≤ ρ(D −1 (L + R))∥rh ∥2 .                             (7)

Loosely speaking, the condition number of the system matrix A affects the spectrum of the Ja-
cobi iterator matrix in that high condition numbers lead to spectral radii close to 1.0, causing slow
convergence.

B.2   S TEEPEST D ESCENT

The steepest descent method follows the gradient of the convex quadratic optimization problem
associated with solving a linear system of equations, which is also given by the negative residuum.
However, in contrast to the gradient descent methods typically found in more general optimization
problems (like for training neural networks), the optimal step size for maximum decrease α[k] can
be determined in each iteration (Saad, 2003). We present the steepest descent in algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2: Steepest Descent Method for Solving Auh = bh
Input: Matrix A ∈ RN ×N , vector bh ∈ RN , tolerance ϵ, maximum iterations K
Output: Approximation of the solution uh ∈ RN
             [0]               [0]
Initialize uh ∈ RN to zeros uh = 0;
                        [0]        [0]
Set initial residual rh = bh − Auh ;
for k = 0, 1, . . . , K − 1 do
                                 [k]   [k]
                               rh ·rh
    Compute step size α[k] =    [k]  [k]     ;
                               rh ·Arh
                      [k+1]     [k]      [k]
    Update solution uh      = uh + α[k] rh ;
                     [k+1]     [k]         [k]
    Update residual rh      = rh − α[k] Arh ;
                                      [k+1]          [k+1]
    Compute relative residuum norm: ξ            = ∥rh       ∥2 /∥bh ∥2 ;
    if ξ [k+1] < ϵ then
          break;
    end
end
           [k+1]
return uh

It can be shown that the residuum norm converges exponentially linear in the asymptotic regime
based on the condition number of the system matrix κ(A) via (Saad, 2003)

                                 [k+1]        κ(A) − 1      [k]
                               ∥rh     ∥2 ≤              ∥rh ∥2 .                           (8)
                                              κ(A) + 1

B.3   GMRES

The General Method of RESiduals (GMRES) builds a subset of the Krylov basis associated with
system matrix A and finds an approximation to the solution of the linear system via least-squares.
Typically, it is restarted to rebuild a new Krylov basis each m iteration. We call an iteration k the
construction of the entire m-dimensional Krylov subspace and subsequent least-squares solve. We
use the "batched" mode of the JAX implementation, which can only terminate after a restart but
not within a restart.

C     M ORE D ETAILS ON DIFFERENTIATING OVER ITERATIVE LINEAR SOLVERS
For convenience, we restate the simple computational graph involving a linear solver with K steps
subject to reverse-mode automatic differentiation (AD) as

                    (∇θ L)T = θ̄T = ⃗1T Jl |PK (f (· ;θ)) JPK |f (· ;θ) Jf |θ .               (9)


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3: GMRES Method for Solving Auh = bh
Input: Matrix A ∈ RN ×N , vector bh ∈ RN , tolerance ϵ, maximum iterations K, restart
           parameter m
Output: Approximation of the solution uh ∈ RN
               [0]                    [0]
Initialize uh ∈ RN to zeros uh = 0;
                          [0]               [0]
Set initial residual rh = bh − Auh ;
               [0]
Set β = ∥rh ∥2 ;
               [0]
Set v1 = rh /β (first Krylov basis vector);
for k = 0, 1, . . . , K − 1 do
     for j = 1, 2, . . . , m do
           Compute wj = Avj ;
           for i = 1, . . . , j do
                Compute hij = vi · wj ;
                Update wj = wj − hij vi ;
           end
           Set hj+1,j = ∥wj ∥2 ;
           Normalize vj+1 = wj /hj+1,j ;
     end
     Solve the least-squares problem: minimize ∥βe1 − H [k] y [k] ∥2 ;
                              [k+1]     [k]
     Update solution: uh            = uh + v [k] y [k] ;
                                                         [k+1]
     Compute relative residuum norm: ξ [k+1] = ∥rh             ∥2 /∥bh ∥2 ;
          [k+1]
     if ξ        < ϵ then
           break;
     end
     Restart GMRES after every m iterations if convergence not met;
end
             [k+1]
return uh


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this setting, one has to compute three vector-Jacobian products (VJPs). The VJP over the loss
function ūTh = ⃗1T Jl |PK (f (· ;θ)) and into the network’s parameter space θ̄T = ḡhT Jf |θ can be
straightforwardly evaluated by the AD engine as they consist of explicit operations.
On the other hand, the VJP over the approximative solver ḡhT = ūTh JPK |f (· ;θ) is nontrivial as
it requires handling the iterative solver and the assembly routines. We detail the two prominent
approaches below. They are visually depicted in figure 11.

C.1   I MPLICIT D IFFERENTIATION

We first solve an auxiliary linear system for an adjoint variable λh (Christianson, 1998)
                                              AT λh = ūh .                                        (10)
Since the convergence behavior of most iterative linear solvers is dependent on the spectrum of
the system matrix and since transposition does not effectively change this, it is reasonable to em-
ploy the same iterator as in the primal solution but with a transposed system matrix and differ-
                                                                           [0]  [1]  [2]       [K̃]
ent right-hand side Φ(· ; AT , ūh ). The convergence of the iterates {λh , λh , λh , . . . , λh } =
       [0]
{Φk (λh ; AT , ūh )}K̃
                     k=0 can potentially be different than in the primal solution. In other words, K̃ϵ
for tolerance ϵ can be different from primal the Kϵ .
Once λh is determined, it directly equals the intermediate gradient on the right-hand side b̄h = λh .
The intermediate gradient on the system matrix arises as the negative outer product with the primal
                                                                           [K]
solution Ā = −λh uTh . Hence, it is sufficient to only save the solution uh from the primal pass;
no further iterates are required.
Then, the reversely propagated intermediate gradient on the input of the physics operator is given by
                             ūTh JPK |gh = ḡhT = b̄Th Jβ |gh + ĀT JΛ |gh ,                      (11)
                                                                 | {z }
                                                                  =Ā:JΛ |gh

under the abuse of notation to consider the gradient matrix Ā as a vector. Alternatively, this can also
be expressed as the left double contraction. It must be noted that typically Ā is only evaluated on
the sparsity pattern of A, if it is materialized at all.
In case only the right-hand side bh is parameterized, there will be no reverse propagation through
the matrix assembly Λ. For example, this was the case for the Poisson and heat emulator examples
in section 2.2 and section 2.3, respectively.
Since we use matrix-free implementations for most linear solvers, the primal system is not solved
with a materialized matrix A but a function that is linear in its first argument
                                                    ∧
                                        Λ(gh )uh = ψ(uh ; gh ).                                    (12)
In this case, we compute the system matrix’ contribution to the previous intermediate gradient via
the negative VJP over its second argument
                             ūTh JPK |gh = ḡhT = b̄Th Jβ |gh − λTh Jψ,2 |gh .                    (13)
To employ the iterator Φ on a matrix-free version of the transposed matrix, we need to program-
matically transpose the function ψ, which can be done with JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018). Moreover,
there is a function in JAX to automatically register linear solvers with correct propagation rules2 .
More generally speaking, implicit differentiation is powerful because it allows differentiation over
various implicit relations simply by solving a linear system of equations. Modern AD engines
allow the effortless linearization of optimality conditions. This allows for easily registering custom
propagation rules by employing matrix-free Krylov solvers (Blondel et al., 2022). Note, however,
that the focus of this paper is the differentiation over linear system solutions in which the primal
operation is the same as in the implicit propagation rule.
  2
    https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_autosummary/jax.lax.custom_
linear_solve.html


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   U NROLLED D IFFERENTIAION

Unrolled differentiation of an iterative program is the direct application of standard automatic dif-
ferentiation tools to its algorithmic implementation. AD unrolls the program’s iterations and writes
them as individual computational steps.
We find the intermediate gradients on both the system matrix Ā and right-hand side b̄h via first
computing the intermediate gradient on all iterates using the VJP of the iterator Φ with respect to its
first argument
                                   T          k
                              [k]
                                             Y
                            ūh      = ūTh       JΦ,1 |u[l] =Φl (u[0] ;A,b ) .                   (14)
                                                                   h        h      h
                                               l=K−1

Then we can aggregate each contribution using the VJP over the iterator Φ with respect to its condi-
tioned arguments
                                         K−1
                                         X             T
                                unroll          [k]
                           ĀT =               ūh         JΦ,2 |u[k] =Φk (u[0] ;A,b ) ,             (15)
                                                                   h         h      h
                                         k=0
                                         K−1
                                         X             T
                                unroll          [k]
                            b̄Th =             ūh         JΦ,3 |u[k] =Φk (u[0] ;A,b ) .             (16)
                                                                   h         h      h
                                         k=0

Since the VJP of the iterator has to be evaluated at primal inputs, typically, all iterates must be stored
on the tape or recomputed. There are approaches that balance compute and memory (Griewank,
1992). However, for simplicity, we only implement unrolled differentiation by retaining the entire
sequence of iterates.
After the intermediate gradients have been obtained, the gradients are further backpropagated via
equation 11. While the mathematical description of unrolled differentiation is more elaborate than
for implicit differentiation, its implementation in AD engines like JAX is easier given the algorithm
fully uses differentiable operations.
The non-asymptotic study of Scieur et al. (2022) revealed that the convergence of unrolled differen-
tiation can exhibit a burn-in phenomenon. We also investigated this for our iterative linear solvers
but found it to be practically irrelevant. While it theoretically can occur for problems with parame-
terized system matrices or for Krylov methods in general, we believe that for large enough parameter
spaces, the potential burn-in of some gradient components is compensated by the entirety. Moreover,
since we applied PRDP using both unrolled and implicit differentiation and observed almost identi-
cal savings in both cases, we further conclude that even if there was a burn-in, the PRDP approach
would be unaffected by it.

D     D IFFERENTIABLE S OLVERS

In this section, we describe the discretization choices behind the differentiable solvers. They are
based on finite difference approximations on uniform cartesian grids with Dirichlet or periodic
boundary conditions. Linear PDEs naturally lead to a linear system of equations for which only
the right-hand assembly remains a dependency on the prior compute graph, e.g., is built upon infor-
mation previous in time. In the case of the nonlinear PDEs, we choose a Picard-based approximation
leading to Oseen-like problems (Turek, 1999). Those have both the right-hand side as well as the
system matrix depending on the prior parts of the compute graph.
The discretizations are implemented matrix-free in JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018). Matrices are only
materialized when needed for smoothing methods or for direct decomposition-based solvers.
Once fully discretized and re-formulated, each problem is cast in the standard form of a linear system
of equations
                                            Auh = bh ,                                             (17)
using the assembly routines A = Λ(gh ) and bh = β(gh ). In the simplest case we have directly
                                                                          [t−1]
gh = θ but other setups like information from a previous time step gh = uh      are common. Then,
we define the physics operator P as the function mapping from the prior point in the compute graph


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: The iterative solution of a linear system of equations spawns a long sequential compute
graph that constitutes the primal pass (in black). The step from prior variable gh to approximate
            [K]
solution uh can be capsuled as the physics operator PK (in blue). Under reverse-mode AD,
differentiation over PK (blue curvy line) can be done in two ways. Implicit Differentiation spawns
an auxiliary iterative linear solve using the transposed matrix AT (in purple). On the other hand,
unrolled differentation opens the black box and reversely propagates through each iterator step Φ
(in yellow). Both approaches yield intermediate gradients on system matrix Ā and b̄h , which are
subsequently backpropagated into ḡh via the VJP over their assembly routines.


gh to the solution of the linear system of equations
                                                                −1
                           P(gh ) := uh = A−1 bh = (Λ(gh ))          β(gh )                      (18)
If P is given without subscript this refers to an exact solver of the linear system. This can be a
direct method based on matrix decomposition or a fully converged iterative solver. Either way, the
residuum norm of this solver’s result is guaranteed to be below the relative tolerance threshold ϵ via
                                   ∥Λ(gh )P(gh ) − β(gh )∥2
                                                            < ϵ.                                 (19)
                                          ∥β(gh )∥2
If not mentioned otherwise, we set ϵ = 10−5 because we exclusively work in single precision
floating format. An approximate solver with K iterations is written PK (·). The iterative linear
solvers we employed are introduced in section B.

D.1   P OISSON E QUATION IN 1D

We solve the Poisson equation on the unit interval with homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions
and a parameterized right-hand side
                              d2 u(x)
                                       = −p(x, θ)      u(0) = 0 = u(1)                           (20)
                                dx2
For a finite difference discretization, the domain Ω = (0, 1) is divided equidistantly into N + 2
grid points, out of which two are related to the prescribed value on the boundary and can, hence,
be ignored. As such, there are N degrees of freedom that make up the discrete solution vector
uh ∈ RN . Equally, the right-hand side is discretized at the same points and negated, yielding bh .
At index i interior to the domain, the second derivative is approximated with the three-point stencil
                                  1
                                      (ui−1 − 2ui + ui+1 ) = −bi ,                               (21)
                                (∆x)2

                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with the spacing ∆x = N1+1 . This leads to the system of linear equations

                            −2        1       0       ...        0          0     u1       b1
                                                                                
                           1        −2       1       ...        0          0   u2   b2 
                       1  0         1      −2       ...        0          0  u3  =  b3  ,
                                                                                   
                                                                                                    (22)
                     (∆x)2 
                            ...             ..                  ..            .   . 
                                                                                ..   .. 
                                                .                 .
                                0     0          0    ...        1      −2        uN       bN
                     |                      {z                                }
                                       =:L̃1 =A

in which the first matrix is due to the discretized Laplace operator in one dimension. We denote it
L̃1 (the tilde is to distinguish it from the Laplacian matrices on periodic boundaries of the following
sections). The subscript is to indicate the one-dimensional setting. It is tridiagonal and solely defines
the system to be solved with A = L̃1 as
                                                  Auh = β(bh ).                                     (23)
with the right-hand side assembly function just element-wise negating the input. The system matrix
is not parameter-dependent, i.e., Λ(g) = L̃1 .

D.2   H EAT D IFFUSION IN 1D

We consider the time-dependent diffusion equation in one dimension on the unit interval under
homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions

                               ∂u   ∂2u
                                  =ν 2                     u(t, 0) = 0 = u(t, 1).                   (24)
                               ∂t   ∂x
Similarly to section D.1, we equidistantly divide the domain into N + 2 grid points. The matrix
associated with the discretized second derivative in one dimension is again
                                         −2 1          0 ... 0 1
                                                                       
                                         1 −2 1 . . . 0 0 
                                    1  0       1 −2 . . . 0 0 
                          L̃1 :=      2
                                                                        .                (25)
                                 (∆x)  ..
                                                     ..         ..     
                                           .             .        .     
                                           1     0     0 . . . 1 −2
With it equation 24 can be discretized in space via the method of lines
                                              duh
                                                  = νL1 uh .                                        (26)
                                               dt
Applying an implicit Euler discretization to the time derivative yields
                                          [t+1]           [t]
                                     uh       − uh          [t+1]
                                                   = ν L̃1 uh ,                                     (27)
                                             ∆t
with two subsequent time levels on the state vector. This can be rearranged into the standard form
of a linear system of equations as

                                                    [t+1]    [t]
                                     I − ν∆tL̃1 uh        = uh .                               (28)
                                   |     {z     }
                                             :=A

This is also referred to as the backward-in-time central-in-space (BTCS) discretization of the dif-
fusion equation. Advancing the state by one time level requires solving a linear system with the
constant system matrix A and with the assembly function β(·) simply being the identity. Hence, the
physics operator maps to the next state in time with
                                                  [t+1]               [t]
                                             uh            = P(uh ).                                (29)


                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3   H EAT D IFFUSION IN 2D

The equation for heat diffusion in two dimensions on the unit square with homogeneous Dirichlet
boundary conditions reads
                2
                ∂ u ∂2u

     ∂u
         =ν          + 2            u(t, 0, y) = 0 = u(t, 1, y), u(t, x, 0) = 0 = u(t, x, 1) (30)
      ∂t        ∂x2     ∂y
              |     {z       }
                      ∆u


The Laplacian matrix in two dimensions can be written in a block structure using the one-
dimensional Laplacian L̃1 and appropriately sized identity matrices I
               (∆x)2 L̃1 − 2I
                                                                                               
                                      I                   0         0 ... 0 0           0
                    I          (∆x)2 L̃1 − 2I            I         0 ... 0 0           0       
         1          0                I                 2
                                                  (∆x) L̃1 − 2I I . . . 0 0             0
                                                                                                
L̃2 =                                                                                           .
                                                                                               
      (∆x)  2 
                     ..                                               ..               ..      
                      .                                                  .              .      
                                                                                      2
                     0                0                   0         0 . . . 0 I (∆x) L̃1 − 2I
                                                                                           (31)
                                                                      2
With this two-dimensional Laplacian matrix, the state vector uh ∈ RN is advanced similarly via
solving
                                                       [t+1]       [t]
                                      I − ν∆tL̃2 uh            = uh .                              (32)
                                    |     {z    }
                                     :=A∈RN 2 ×N 2
Similar to the one-dimensional BTCS scheme, the system matrix is constant. The right-hand side
assembly is again the identity.

D.4   H EAT D IFFUSION IN 3D

The equation for heat diffusion in three dimensions reads
                                             2
                                             ∂ u ∂2u ∂2u

                                  ∂u
                                      =ν         + 2 + 2 .                                         (33)
                                  ∂t         ∂x2   ∂y     ∂z
                                           |         {z      }
                                                       ∆u

We again use homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions on all six sides of the unit cube
u(t, 0, y, z) = 0 = u(t, 1, y, z), u(t, x, 0, z) = 0 = u(t, x, 1, z), u(t, x, y, 0) = 0 = u(t, x, y, 1).
                                                                                                    (34)
We consider the unit-cube Ω = (0, 1)3 with N degrees of freedom per dimension, in total N 3 .
The Laplacian matrix in three dimensions can again be written in a block structure using the two-
dimensional Laplacian L̃2 and appropriately sized identity matrices I
              (∆x)2 L̃2 − 2I
                                                                                                          
                                       I                 0          0 ... 0 0              0
                                     2
                    I          (∆x)   L̃ 2 − 2I         I          0 .  . . 0  0          0               
        1           0                 I          (∆x)2 L̃2 − 2I I . . . 0 0               0
                                                                                                           
L̃3 =                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                          
      (∆x)2 
             
                     ..                                                . ..                 ..             
                     .                                                                      .             
                       0                 0                     0         0   ...  (∆x)2 L̃2 − 2I
                                                                                   0   I
                                                                                            (35)
                                                                      3
With this three-dimensional Laplacian matrix, the state vector uh ∈ RN is advanced similarly via
solving
                                                       [t+1]       [t]
                                      I − ν∆tL̃3 uh            = uh .                              (36)
                                    |     {z    }
                                     :=A∈RN 3 ×N 3
Similar to the one-dimensional BTCS scheme, the system matrix is constant. The right-hand side
assembly is again the identity.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.5   B URGERS IN 1D

The Burgers equation on the one-dimensional unit interval in non-conservative form with periodic
boundary conditions reads
                            ∂u     ∂u      ∂2u
                               +u      =ν 2         u(t, 0) = u(t, 1).                      (37)
                            ∂t     ∂x      ∂x
We will discretize the domain into N + 1 grid points. Under periodic boundaries, only one of
the boundary points can be eliminated. By convention, we choose the right-most point, leaving
N degrees of freedom (including the left-most point). The matrix associated with the discretized
second derivative in one dimension now reads
                                        −2 1        0 ... 0 1
                                                                      
                                        1 −2 1 . . . 0 0 
                                  1   0     1 −2 . . . 0 0 
                         L1 :=       2
                                                                       .                   (38)
                                (∆x)  ..
                                                  ..          ..      
                                         .            .         .      
                                         1    0     0 . . . 1 −2
It differs from the former Laplacian matrix in that it is not exclusively tri-diagonal but also has
entries in the top right and bottom left corners. Additionally, we now have ∆x = 1/N .
The convection term requires special treatment because of its nonlinearity and the advection char-
acteristic of the first derivative. Let F1 and B1 represent the forward or backward approximation of
the first derivative in one dimension on periodic boundaries, respectively, via
                  −1 1          0 ... 0 0                            1      0    0 ...      0 1
                                                                                             
                 0 −1 1 . . . 0 0                                −1 1         0 ...      0 0
             1    0      0    −1    . . . 0   0                1  0    −1     1   . . .  0 0
   F1 :=                                              B1 :=                                  
           ∆x     .
                 ..           . ..        .
                                           ..
                                                              ∆x   .
                                                                    ..         . ..        ..  
                                                                                            .  
                   1      0     0 . . . 0 −1                         0      0    0 . . . −1 1
                                                                                                (39)
Again, note the element in the corner entries of the matrices. Then, we can build an upwind differ-
entiation matrix based on the winds wh
                                                                                        
                                                                               
                       s−1 (wh ) + wh                       s1 (wh ) + wh
 Γ1 (wh ) = diag max                  , 0  B1 + diag max                 , 0  F1 . (40)
                                                                             
                              2                                   2          
                  |          {z           }             |          {z          }
                            positive winds                             negative winds

Deducing the positive and negative winds from neighboring averages (using the periodic forward
shift s−1 and backward shift s1 operators) is necessary to have correct movement if the winds
change sign over the domain. If we use the discrete state vector uh as winds wh , we can discretize
the continuous equation via the method of lines as
                                     duh
                                          + Γ1 (uh )uh = νL1 uh .                                (41)
                                      dt
Naturally, the spatial discretization of a nonlinear PDE leads to a system of nonlinear ODEs. To
fully resolve the nonlinearity, one could resort to a Newton-Raphson or a quasi-Newton method.
However, for simplicity, we will apply the trick to linearize the upwind matrix using the state previ-
ous in time (Turek, 1999), which gives
                             [t+1]       [t]
                           uh      − uh          [t] [t+1]         [t+1]
                                         + Γ1 (uh )uh      = νL1 uh .                            (42)
                                ∆t
This can be rearranged into the standard form as

                                           [t]             [t+1]     [t]
                              I + ∆tΓ1 (uh ) − ∆tνL1 uh          = uh .                          (43)
                            |             {z            }
                                               [t]
                                        =A=Λ(uh )

As such, the system matrix is dependent on the previous state in time, i.e., it is dependent on the
previous variables in the compute graph. The right-hand side assembly routine is again the identity.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, different from before is that the system matrix A is now asymmetric, which necessitates
special linear solvers.
Iteration over re-assembly and solution is possible but we omit this for simplicity, accepting that
the nonlinear residuum is not fully converged. This introduces an error of order O(∆t), which is
acceptable since our temporal discretization is first order. It must be noted that despite the nonlin-
ear residuum is not fully converged, the linear residuum associated with the linearization will be,
assuming we use the converged solver P.

D.6   B URGERS IN 2D

While we did not investigate any experiments with a two-dimensional Burgers solver, we will still
present it here as it naturally helps with understanding the two-dimensional Navier-Stokes solver.
In two dimensions, the continuous solution function to the Burgers PDE becomes vector-valued with
two channels. Using a symbolic notation, we can write
                                        ∂u
                                           + (u · ∇)u = ν∆u.                                     (44)
                                        ∂t
An alternative way to write the two-dimensional Burgers equation is in its two components
                                                       2
                                                                ∂ 2 u1

                         ∂u1       ∂u1      ∂u1         ∂ u1
                              + u1     + u2      =ν           +           ,
                          ∂t        ∂x       ∂y         ∂x2      ∂y 2
                                                       2                                         (45)
                                                                ∂ 2 u2

                         ∂u2       ∂u2      ∂u2         ∂ u2
                              + u1     + u2      =ν           +           .
                          ∂t        ∂x       ∂y         ∂x2      ∂y 2
Our domain Ω is again the unit square.
Under a two-dimensional biperiodic domain, both the right-most and the top-most boundary nodes
are eliminated, see figure 12a. We consider the unit-square Ω = (0, 1)2 with equally many degrees
of freedom per dimension, in total N 2 .
The Laplacian matrix in two dimensions can be written in a block structure using the one-
dimensional Laplacian L̃1 and appropriately sized identity matrices I
                (∆x)2 L1 − 2I             I                 0        0 ... 0 0         I
                                                                                              
                                        2
                     I           (∆x) L1 − 2I              I        0 ... 0 0         0       
         1           0                   I         (∆x)  2
                                                            L   − 2I I . . . 0 0       0       
L2 =        2
                                                             1                                .
      (∆x)           ..                                               ..             ..      
                        .                                                  .            .      
                      I                   0                 0        0 . . . 0 I (∆x)2 L1 − 2I
                                                                                          (46)
Note the identity blocks in the top right and bottom left corner.
Let F2,1 and F2,2 be the forward derivative operator in two dimensions in the direction of dimen-
sions one and two, respectively. Moreover, B2,1 and B2,2 are the same for the backward derivative
operator. Hence, we can build an upwinding operator for the first direction as
                                                                                           
                                                                                         
                        s−1 (wh,1 ) + wh,1                        s1 (wh,1 ) + wh,1
Γ2,1 (wh ) = diag max                      , 0  B2,1 +diag max                     , 0  F2,1 ,
                                                                                       
                                2                                        2             
                   |           {z              }              |           {z             }
                              positive winds                                 negative winds
                                                                                                 (47)
which only needs the winds in direction one. Similarly, we get for the other direction
                                                                                              
                                                                                         
                        s−1 (wh,2 ) + wh,2                        s1 (wh,2 ) + wh,2
Γ2,2 (wh ) = diag max                      , 0  B2,2 +diag max                     , 0  F2,2 .
                                                                                       
                                2                                        2             
                   |           {z              }              |           {z             }
                              positive winds                                 negative winds
                                                                                                 (48)


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let us combine these into one joint upwind discretization

                                       Γ2 (wh ) = Γ2,1 (wh ) + Γ2,2 (wh )                             (49)


This allows for discretizing the component-wise equation 45 first in space via the method of lines,
afterward similarly in time as before to get the Oseen problem

                               [t+1]       [t]
                              uh,1 − uh,1               [t]   [t+1]         [t+1]
                                                  + Γ2 (uh )uh,1 = νL2 uh,2 ,
                                   ∆t                                                                 (50)
                               [t+1]  [t]
                              uh,2 − uh,2               [t]   [t+1]         [t+1]
                                                  + Γ2 (uh )uh,2 = νL2 uh,2 .
                                   ∆t

Note that for the discretization of each component, we need both components from the previous
time level to assemble the upwinding matrix. We can re-arrange and write the system jointly as
         "                                                                  #"        # "      #
                        [t]                                                     [t+1]      [t]
             I + ∆tΓ2 (uh ) − ∆tνB2                         0                  uh,1       uh,1
                                                            [t]                 [t+1] =    [t]   .    (51)
                        0                        I + ∆tΓ2 (uh ) − ∆tνB2        uh,2       uh,2
         |                                 {z                               } | {z } | {z }
                                                  [t]                               [t+1]       [t]
                                       =A=Λ(uh )                              =uh           =β(uh )


The assembly routine for the system matrix yields a block-diagonal structure while the right-hand
side assembly is just the identity.


D.7   C OUPLED NAVIER -S TOKES IN 2D

We solve the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations which can be written in symbolic notation as

                                   ∂u
                                      + (u · ∇)u = −∇p + ν∇2 u,                                       (52)
                                   ∂t
                                            ∇ · u = 0.                                                (53)

The domain is again unit-square with bi-periodic boundary conditions. This is a system of partial
differential equations for three unknowns, which are the two components of the velocity u and
the scalar pressure field p. The pressure acts as a constraint to enforce incompressibility given by
the second equation. The coupling of velocity and pressure can be challenging, but a simple way
for a finite difference discretization is the staggered grid (Harlow & Welch, 1965). As depicted in
figure 12b, it also accounts for bi-periodicity by ignoring the top-most and right-most grid points but
uses different locations to store the three unknowns. In this setting, there are equally many degrees
of freedom per variable and direction. Each variable contributes N 2 entries. Hence, in total, there
are 3N 2 .
Evaluating the convection term for both derivative directions requires mapping between the two
staggered representations of the velocity grid. Let us denote the mapping operator M1 that moves all
variables to the grid representation of the first velocity component. The operator M2 does the same
for the second velocity component. These operators can be easily realized via bi-linear interpolation,
which in the uniform cartesian grid simply amounts to the average of the four neighbors. Then
the convection operator for velocity components one and two are Γ2 (M1 (uh )) and Γ2 (M2 (uh )),
respectively.
The discretization of the pressure gradient and the velocity divergence requires a mapping between
the velocity and the pressure representations. It turns out that a forward derivative F2,1 or F2,2
also maps from the velocity representation to the pressure representation. Hence, we can define the
divergence operator on velocity components as D1 = F2,1 and D2 = F2,2 , respectively. Vice
versa, the gradient operators mapping from pressure to velocity representations are the backward
differences, i.e., G1 = B2,1 and G2 = B2,2 .


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   →◦→◦→◦→◦
       ×        ×          ×         ×                              ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
                                                                   →◦→◦→◦→◦
       ×        ×          ×         ×                              ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
                                                                   →◦→◦→◦→◦
       ×        ×          ×         ×                              ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
                                                                   →◦→◦→◦→◦
       ×        ×          ×         ×                              ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
                                                      (b) Backward Staggering for bi-periodic domain. Hor-
(a) Bi-periodic (collocated) grid. The top-most and izontal arrows denote the location degrees of freedom
right-most vertices have no degrees of freedom due to for the x-velocity are saved. Vertical arrows corre-
periodicity.                                          spond to y-velocity. Red circles are for pressure.

     Figure 12: Arrangement of degrees of freedom on two-dimensional bi-periodic domains.


The method of line discretization with the linearization of convection matrices around the previous
state in time then yields
                   [t+1]       [t]
                 uh,1 − uh,1                        [t]    [t+1]     [t+1]         [t+1]
                                     + Γ2 (M1 (uh ))uh,1 = −G1 uh,3 + νL2 uh,1                       (54)
                      ∆t
                  [t+1]  [t]
                 uh,2 − uh,2                        [t]    [t+1]     [t+1]         [t+1]
                                     + Γ2 (M2 (uh ))uh,2 = −G2 uh,3 + νL2 uh,2                       (55)
                       ∆t
                                          [t+1]            [t+1]
                                      D1 uh,1 + Duh,2 = 0                                            (56)
We can write this in matrix form as
                     [t]
                                                                                  [t+1]   [t] 
                                                                                   uh,1

  I + ∆tΓ2 (M1 (uh )) − ∆tνL2                    0                           G1                u
                                                   [t]                             [t+1]   h,1[t] 
                 0                 I + ∆tΓ2 (M2 (uh )) − ∆tνL2              G2  uh,2    = uh,2 
                 D1                            D2                            0      [t+1]
                                                                                   u            0
|                                   {z                                          } | h,3
                                                                                     {z } | {z }
                                              [t]                                                    [t]
                                      :=A=Λ(uh )                                    uh
                                                                                      [t+1]     =β(uh )
                                                                                                  (57)
which reveals the saddle-point nature of the coupled Navier-Stokes system given by the zero block
in the bottom right (Turek, 1999). Many popular solution techniques to the Navier-Stokes equations,
like PISO (Issa et al., 1986), can be interpreted as efficient preconditioners to this coupled system
as argued in Perot (1993). For simplicity and to not get nested iterative linear solvers, we solve the
coupled system without further modifications, which is reasonable for the low employed resolution
despite the considerably high condition number.
Similar to the Burgers simulators, the system matrix A is asymmetric and needs to be re-assembled
from information given by the previous state in time. However, only the previous velocity compo-
                [t]       [t]                                           [t]
nents in time uh,1 and uh,2 are needed. The previous pressure state uh,3 does not affect the matrix
assembly. It is also not relevant for the right-hand side assembly function β(·).

E    M ORE D ETAILS ON PRDP PARAMETERS
Stepping Threshold τstep The stepping criterion defines the threshold at which the validation met-
ric is considered sufficiently flat before the physics is refined. This value should not exceed 1, as


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


values greater than 1 would trigger refinement only when the error increases. Higher values (less
than 1) allow the metric to be flatter before the physics is refined. In other words, a lower value
enables faster progressive refinement and trades off PR savings. Refinement can also be made faster
by making larger steps in refinement ∆K. In practice, we found that τstep values between 0.9 and 1
with ∆K = 1 sufficed in all our network training runs.

Stopping Threshold τstop The stopping criterion on the checkpoint ratio governs how strictly the
stagnation in network accuracy should be over different refinement levels. A lower value implies
a stricter check, and progressive refinement would stop in a lower Kmax region, and vice versa. In
other words, a lower value of τstop enables a more aggressive strategy for IC savings.
The grace window of intervals δ controls the length of lookback to calculate the stepping ratio r.
This is helpful in the case of strong epoch-to-epoch oscillations. On the other hand, the effect of
oscillations on the stepping ratio is mitigated through exponential smoothing. We found a window
of 3 worked for most scenarios. The grace window goes hand-in-hand with the stepping criterion -
a longer window requires stricter (smaller) τstep values.


F     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

An algorithmic description of Progressively Refine Differentiable Physics is given in algorithm 4.
Our choice of PRDP parameters based on section E are listed in each problem setup as follows.
Our scheduling is via changing the number of inner iterations via ∆K each time PRDP triggers a
refinement. In figure 13, we demonstrate that this is identical to scheduling with relative tolerance
thresholds.

Validation Metric For test cases based on the Heat diffusion, Burgers equation, and Navier
Stokes, the validation metric we use for PRDP is the solution’s error against a reference solution
at a specific time step t, normed over space, and normalized against the reference solution. This
error is mean-squared over the validation set. Mathematically, this can be written as

                                                                                    !2
                                                              [t]           [t],r
                                                1 X         ∥ui − ui ∥2
                            Validation Error =                      [t],r
                                                                                                   (58)
                                               |V|            ∥ui ∥2
                                                      i∈V

where:
            [t]
         • ui : the predicted solution at time step t for validation example i,
            [t],r
         • ui : the reference solution at time step t for validation example i,
         • ∥ · ∥: the norm over the spatial domain,
         • V: the validation set.

The corresponding specifics for the Poisson inverse problem are explained in F.1.

Seed statistics For the neural network training setups, we conducted trials with 10 different initial-
ization seeds. Each run uses a different network initialization and a different stochastic minibatching,
but the same data. The results shown in the work visualize the mean over these runs (shown as solid
lines), along with its variability (represented by the shaded area). The shaded areas indicate the
range within one standard deviation of the mean.

F.1   P OISSON E QUATION - I NVERSE P ROBLEM

The Poisson inverse problem is our simplest test example that incorporates differentiable physics
into a learning pipeline for a doubly convex problem optimizing in a low-dimensional parameter
space. We set up the discretized Poisson problem as described in section F.1 with degrees of freedom
N = 30. The resulting linear system is parameterized, similar to section 2. The iterative linear solver
applied to this system represents the physics PK in this problem.


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                40                                                                                            residuum
                                                                                                                                10 1                        primal convergence


                                     Linear solver iterations
                                                                30                                                                                          PRDP


                                                                                                                                   Relative residuum
                                                                                                                                10 2
                                                                20                                                                                             maxiter
                                                                                                                                10 3                        primal convergence
                                                                                                                                                            PRDP
                                                                10                                                              10 4

                                                                                                                                10 5
                                                                0
                                                                     0   20      40     60              80       100
                                                                                   Epoch


Figure 13: PRDP refines the physics by progressively increasing the solver iterations throughout
training until training accuracy in terms of a validation metric stagnates. Progressively increasing
the number of iterations is equivalent to progressively decreasing the tolerance threshold, as shown
here for the example of the training the Navier-Stokes emulator of section 4.4,


Algorithm 4: Determine Whether to Refine Physics
Input: τstep = 0.95, τstop = 0.9, δ = 3, ∆e = 6
            [e]
Data: {Lval }e
Output: Boolean indicating whether to refine
    [e]                [e]
{L̃val }e = ema({Lval }e , ∆e)                                            ▷ Smooth with Exponential Moving Average
        [−1]    [−δ]
r = L̃val /L̃val                                                                   ▷ Relative change to δ epochs prior
if r > τstep then
              [−1]
     rc = L̃val /c                                                               ▷ Relative change to previous plateau
     if rc < τstop ∨ rc > 1.0 then
                  [−1]
          c ← L̃val                                                                             ▷ Save current plateau
          return True                                                                                       ▷ Refine!
     else
          return False                      ▷ Do not further refine because we reached Kmax , =⇒ yields IC savings

else
    return False                                                              ▷ Do not refine to keep coarse physics for economic reasons, =⇒ yields PR savings


                               (a) 1P                                             Right-hand side                                                      Solution          (b) 3P
                  2                                                               0.10                                            7.5
                                                                                                                                  5.0                                             0.050
                  1                                                               0.05
Right-hand side


                                                                                                              Right-hand side


                                                                                                                                  2.5                                             0.025
                                                                                         Solution (u)


                                                                                                                                                                                          Solution (u)


                  0                                                               0.00                                            0.0                                             0.000
                                                                                                                                  2.5                                              0.025
                  1                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                  5.0                                              0.050
                  2                                                                0.10                                           7.5
                      0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                                                                                                         0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                 x                                                                                                                                           x

Figure 14: The Poisson PDE can be interpreted as the deformation of a thin string subject to a load.
We consider two scenarios. In (a), the load (=right-hand side) only consists of one sine mode whose
amplitude is scaled by a single (1P) θ parameter. The second case (b) uses the first three sine modes
with a parameterized amplitude each.



                                                                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For simplicity, we keep the system matrix A constant and only parameterize the right hand side
bh = β(θ). The map β is a sum of the first P sine modes in the unit interval whose amplitudes are
given by the parameter vector θ ∈ RP .
                                                P
                                                X
                                       β(θ) =         θi sin(2iπx)
                                                i=1

We design two inverse problems, one with a single sine mode (P = 1), and one with three sine
modes (P = 3). A qualitative example is given in figure 14.
                                                                                                     [K]
The outer optimization’s objective is the MSE (mean-squared error) in the physics solution of uh
against a reference solution uh,r . The reference is generated by direct solution of the linear system at
a reference parameter value θr . In other words, uh,r = A−1 bh,r , where bh,r = β(θr ). Optimization
is performed using gradient descent algorithm.

One-dimensional parameter space We use θr = 2.0, and an initial guess for gradient descent
θinit = 5.0. 170 update steps are performed with a constant learning rate of 275. For PRDP, we set
the control parameter values to τstep = 0.92, τstop = 0.98, δ = 2 . Training was started with K0 = 25
linear solver iterations. At every refinement, it was incremented by ∆K = 10. A relatively high
value for ∆K and a aggressive refinement strategy with relatively smaller value of τstep are suitable
for cases where Kmax is significantly higher than the number of outer iterations. In this case, the
physics converges at Kϵ = 600 (which is also Kmax due to the double-convex problem). PRDP was
successful at enabling 33% solver iteration savings

Three-dimensional parameter space We use θr = [0.62, 1.86, 5.1], and an initial guess for gra-
dient descent θinit = [3.0, 3.0, 3.0]. 750 update steps are performed when using Jacobi as the inner
problem and 800 when using steepest descent, with a constant learning rate of 3500. The physics
converged with 450 or 240 inner iterations when using Jacobi or steepest descent, respectively. In
this case, a less aggressive PRDP strategy was suitable since the update steps were much higher than
Kϵ . Hence, we found control parameter values τstep = 0.99, τstop = 0.99, δ = 2, with ∆K = 2
and K0 = 1 was suitable. PRDP was successful at enabling 40-50% savings for both Jacobi and
steepest descent with both unrolled and implicit differentiation.
The results of these experiments are presented in figure 15.

F.2   H EAT D IFFUSION - AUTOREGRESSIVE N EURAL E MULATOR T RAINING

In this setup, a neural emulator learns the diffusion equation solvers presented in sections D.2 and
D.3. For the physics, we use a diffusivity of ν = 0.001 and a time step size of ∆t = 1, see
equation 5. We discretize the space, into 32 grid points (including boundaries) in each dimension,
which, after applying homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions, results in 30 and 900 degrees
of freedom in the 1D and 2D cases, respectively. In the 3D case, we have 22 grid points including
boundaries, i.e. 20 interior grid points, corresponding to 8000 degrees of freedom. The resulting
linear system is solved using the Jacobi method. This constitutes the physics operator PK . We
employ our own implementations of the Jacobi solver. The initial conditions are generated as a
truncated Fourier series. For 1D, we sum the first 5 sine and cosine modes defined on the unit
interval. For 2D, we use the products of the first 5 sine and cosine modes defined as:
                           X
               u0 (x, y) =    (an sin(2nπx) sin(2nπy) + bn cos(2nπx) cos(2nπy)+
                            n
                                 cn sin(2nπx) cos(2nπy) + dn cos(2nπx) sin(2nπy))
We similarly extend this procedure to 3D. All amplitudes are randomly sampled from a uniform
distribution U(−1, 1). A qualitative example of the dynamics is given in figure 16 for 1D, figure 17
for 2D, and figure 18 for 3D.

Training Procedure We intentionally chose simple architectures as the focus of this work is not
architecture but training methodology. For 1D and 2D cases, a multilayer perceptron (MLP) fθ is
trained to emulate PK . For the 1D case, the MLP has 3 hidden layers, each of width 64, and for the


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               # physics solver iterations                                                Fully converged                                      # physics solver iterations                                                Fully converged
                                   0        300          600                                              PRDP                                                     0        300          600                                              PRDP
                                                                                                          PR savings                                                                                                                      PR savings

                                                          # physics solver iterations


                                                                                                                                                                                          # physics solver iterations
                                                                                            600                                                                                                                             600
 Parameter relative error


                                                                                                                                 Parameter relative error
                            10 1                                                                                                                            10 1
                                                                                            400                                                                                                                             400
                            10 3                                                                                                                            10 3
                                                                                            200                                                                                                                             200
                            10 5                                                                                                                            10 5
                                                                                             0                                                                                                                               0
                                   0            125 170                                           0            125 170                                             0            125 170                                           0            125 170
                                       Outer iteration                                                Outer iteration                                                  Outer iteration                                                Outer iteration
                                       (a) 1 P, Jacobi, Unrolled diff.                                                                                                  (b) 1 P, Jacobi, Implicit diff.


                               # physics solver iterations                                                Fully converged                                      # physics solver iterations                                                Fully converged
                                   0        225          450                                              PRDP                                                     0        225          450                                              PRDP
                                                                                                          PR savings                                                                                                                      PR savings
                             100                                                                                                                             100
                                                          # physics solver iterations


                                                                                                                                                                                          # physics solver iterations
 Parameter relative error


                                                                                                                                 Parameter relative error


                                                                                            400                                                                                                                             400
                            10 2                                                            300                                                             10 2                                                            300
                                                                                            200                                                                                                                             200
                            10 4                                                            100                                                             10 4                                                            100
                                                                                              0                                                                                                                               0
                                   0                750                                           0                 750                                            0                750                                           0                 750
                                       Outer iteration                                                Outer iteration                                                  Outer iteration                                                Outer iteration
                                       (c) 3 P, Jacobi, Unrolled diff.                                                                                                  (d) 3 P, Jacobi, Implicit diff.


                               # physics solver iterations                                                Fully converged                                      # physics solver iterations                                                Fully converged
                                   0        120          240                                              PRDP                                                     0        120          240                                              PRDP
                                                                                                          PR savings                                                                                                                      PR savings
                             100                                                                                                                             100
                                                              # physics solver iterations


                                                                                                                                                                                              # physics solver iterations
 Parameter relative error


                                                                                                                                 Parameter relative error


                                                                                            200                                                                                                                             200
                            10 2                                                                                                                            10 2
                                                                                            100                                                                                                                             100
                            10 4                                                                                                                            10 4
                                                                                              0                                                                                                                               0
                                   0                 800                                          0                 800                                            0                 800                                          0                 800
                                       Outer iteration                                                Outer iteration                                                  Outer iteration                                                Outer iteration
                              (e) 3 P, Steepest Descent, Unrolled diff.                                                                                        (f) 3 P, Steepest Descent, Implicit diff.

Figure 15: Results of the Poisson equation inverse problem visualizing the parameter error during
training and the savings enabled by PRDP for both the 1 parameter and 3 parameter setup using dif-
ferent combinations of physics solvers (Jacobi, steepest descent) and solver differentiation methods
(unrolled, implicit).


                                                                                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         IC        1 step        2 steps
                      IC 1                            IC 2                           IC 3
       2
       1
       0
u(x)


       1
       2
           0.0        0.5          1.0 0.0             0.5         1.0 0.0           0.5          1.0
                       x                               x                              x

Figure 16: Example of three different trajectories over three temporal snapshots for the one-
dimensional heat equation.


2D case, 3 hidden layers each of width of 3000. Corresponding to the physical problem’s degrees of
freedom, it has 30 input and 30 output nodes (900 for 2D). For the 3D case, we train a classic ResNet
that supports 3 dimensional input and output tensors with 1 channel. It contains 6 blocks, each
with 32 hidden channels. Its convolutions implement homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions.
All networks are initialized with random weights. Non-linearization is enabled by applying ReLU
activation after each hidden layer.
The compute graph consists of the neural emulator fθ stepping from an initial condition to the first
time step solution, and the physics operator PK stepping from the neural network’s solution to the
solution at the second time-step. The nMSE between this solution at the second time-step against
a reference solution forms the loss function for training. This mixed-chain approach (depicted in
figure 22 allows gradients to flow through PK and lets the network training to be informed with the
physics’s dynamics. We use implicit differentiation for the 1D case, and unrolled differentiation for
the 2D and 3D cases. The custom VJP rules of the physics use the same iterative linear solvers as
the primal solve and are resolved to the same number of iterations as the primal, as explained in
section 2.1.
For the outer (training) problem, we use the Adam optimizer from the Optax library (DeepMind
et al., 2020). The learning rate is scheduled as exponentially decaying with an initialization of 10−3 ,
decay rate of 0.94 for 1D (0.9 for 2D), and 100 transition steps, while for 3D, the initialization is
10−4 , with a decay rate of 0.92 and 100 transition steps. We train in mini-batches of 25 samples per
iteration and for a total of 70 epochs in the 1D case, and 100 epochs in the 2D and 3D cases.

Data Generation The reference solution at the second time-step is computed by two applications
of the physics operator on the initial condition, where the iterative solver is replaced by a direct
solver. Hence, the iterates {u[2][k] }K
                                      k=0 converge to the reference solution. 205 samples are generated
for training, with a train:validation split of 200:5.

PRDP PRDP is controlled using the validation metric of equation 58 computed at t = 2, and
refinement is applied to the iterative linear solver PK that steps from u[1] to u[2] . For the 1D case,
we use parameter values τstep = 0.98, τstop = 0.9, δ = 3, exponential smoothing is performed
over a time window of 8. The 2D case uses fewer epochs, hence a less aggressive refinement using
τstep = 0.9 with a smoothing window of 6 was suitable. In the 3D case, which uses 100 epochs, used
a less aggressive refinement with τstep = 0.97, similar to the 1D case, along with τstop = 0.9, δ = 3,
exponential smoothing is performed over a time window of 6.

F.3    B URGERS E QUATION - AUTOREGRESSIVE N EURAL E MULATOR

We solve the discretized Burgers equation presented in section D.5 on the unit interval with
ν = 0.001 and time step size ∆t = 0.01. The spatial domain is discretized into 257 points in-


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              i=0, t=0           i=1, t=0           i=2, t=0               i=3, t=0             i=4, t=0                i=5, t=0
   1
                                                                                                                                       3

                                                                                                                                       2
   0
              i=0, t=1           i=1, t=1           i=2, t=1               i=3, t=1             i=4, t=1                i=5, t=1       1
   1


                                                                                                                                               Solution (u)
                                                                                                                                       0
   0                                                                                                                                       1
              i=0, t=2           i=1, t=2           i=2, t=2               i=3, t=2             i=4, t=2                i=5, t=2
   1
                                                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                                                           3
   0
          0              1   0              1   0              1       0              1     0              1        0              1

Figure 17: Example of six different trajectories over three temporal snapshots for the two-
dimensional heat equation.


          i=0, t=0            i=1, t=0          i=2, t=0               i=3, t=0             i=4, t=0                  i=5, t=0         1.00

                                                                                                                                       0.75

                                                                                                                                       0.50
          i=0, t=1            i=1, t=1          i=2, t=1               i=3, t=1             i=4, t=1                  i=5, t=1         0.25

                                                                                                                                       0.00

                                                                                                                                           0.25
          i=0, t=2            i=1, t=2          i=2, t=2               i=3, t=2             i=4, t=2                  i=5, t=2             0.50

                                                                                                                                           0.75

                                                                                                                                           1.00


Figure 18: Example of six different trajectories over three temporal snapshots for the three-
dimensional heat equation.


                                 IC 1                                 IC 2                                     IC 3
          1.00
                                                                                                                                       2
          0.75
                                                                                                                                           solution u
space x


          0.50                                                                                                                         0
          0.25
                                                                                                                                           2
          0.00
                  012 5          10      15     20 012 5              10        15        20 012 5             10       15       20
                             time step t                           time step t                         time step t

                  Figure 19: Three example trajectories of the one-dimensional Burgers equation.


                                                                           33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cluding the boundaries, which results in N = 256 degrees of freedom when applying a periodic
boundary condition. Since the system matrix A is now asymmetric, we use the GMRES linear
solver (B.3) with restart set to 2. Although much higher restarts are possible and preferred in prac-
tice, we used fewer restarts to emphasize the difference between network accuracies trained using
different number of GMRES iterations since our test problem was relatively easy to solve.

Data Generation The initial conditions are generated as a truncated Fourier series as described
in section F.2. The first 20 sine and cosine modes defined over the unit interval are summed, with
their amplitudes sampled from a uniform distribution U(−1, 1). Qualitative example trajectories are
given in figure 19

Training Procedure We train a neural network fθ to learn the Burgers stepper which represents
the physics P. We use a classic ResNet architecture (He et al., 2016) consisting of 6 blocks, each
with 32 hidden channels, and ReLU activation. The convolutions implement the physics’ periodic
boundary condition by circular padding. The weights are randomly initialized. We use our own
implementation of the architecture using the Equinox library (Kidger & Garcia, 2021).
The loss function for training the network is defined similarly to the mixed-chain setup of section
F.2. The ResNet steps from an initial condition to the first time step solution, and the physics PK
steps from the first to the second time-step solution. The nMSE error between this solution at the
second time-step against a reference solution forms the loss function for training.
The reference solution at the second time-step is computed by two applications of the physics,
with a direct solver replacing the iterative solver. 205 samples are generated for training, with a
train:validation split of 200:5.
We use the Adam optimizer from the Optax library, with an exponential learning rate decay using
an initialization of 10−3 , a decay rate of 0.7, and 100 transition steps. We train in mini-batches of
25 samples per iteration.

PRDP PRDP is controlled using the validation metric of equation 58 computed at t = 5, and
refinement is applied to the iterative linear solver PK that steps from u[1] to u[2] . This presents an
interesting application scenario, where the training objective uses a relatively short temporal rollout
of 2 steps while PRDP favors generalization over a longer rollout at the fifth time step. We use
PRDP parameter values τstep = 0.9, τstop = 0.9, and δ = 3. Due to high oscillations in the validation
metric, we used exponential smoothing with a longer window of 15.


F.4   NAVIER S TOKES - N EURAL -H YBRID C ORRECTOR L EARNING

In this example, we train a network to learn to correct for discretization errors in the solver described
in section D.7. Such neural-hybrid methods apply to correction learning setups as investigated by
Um et al. (2020). Our problem setup is visualized in figure 23.
We distinguish between a spatially-coarse solver, Ps,K , and a spatially-fine solver, Pr (following the
terminology of source and reference from Um et al. (2020)). In our test problem, Ps,K operates on
a solution manifold that has half the spatial resolution of Pr . We use 97 spatial degrees of freedom
for Pr (i.e., a total of 291 degrees of freedom considering the three components of u ), and 48 for
Ps,K (i.e., a total of 144). Both solvers are set up for ν = 0.0001 and ∆t = 0.1 and employ the
GMRES solver (section B.3) with restart set to 8.

Data generation To generate initial conditions for the data, we initialize a solution field in the
manifold of Pr with each component sampled from the standard normal distribution. This random
field is passed through a low pass filter, then normalized to have zero mean and standard deviation of
                                                                          [0]                      [t]
1, and finally passed through an incompressibility projection, giving ur . Data trajectories {ur }Tt=0
                                                                                          [0]
are produced by repeated applications of Pr (uses a fully-converged GMRES) to ur . These tra-
                                                               [t] T
jectories are then downsampled to the source manifold {us }t=0 . 205 trajectories are generated for
training, with a train:validation split of 200:5. Qualitative example trajectories are given in figure 20.


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      i=0, u0, t=0   i=0, u1, t=0   i=1, u0, t=0   i=1, u1, t=0   i=2, u0, t=0   i=2, u1, t=0         u0         u1
  1
                                                                                                1.0        1.0


  0                                                                                             0.8        0.8
      i=0, u0, t=1   i=0, u1, t=1   i=1, u0, t=1   i=1, u1, t=1   i=2, u0, t=1   i=2, u1, t=1
  1                                                                                             0.6        0.6

                                                                                                0.4        0.4
  0
      i=0, u0, t=2   i=0, u1, t=2   i=1, u0, t=2   i=1, u1, t=2   i=2, u0, t=2   i=2, u1, t=2
  1                                                                                             0.2        0.2

                                                                                                0.0        0.0
  0
      0          1 0            1 0            1 0            1 0            1 0            1

Figure 20: Three example trajectories of the Navier-Stokes scenario with the two velocity compo-
nents each.


 Figure 21: The compute graph and the reverse pass associated with the Poisson inverse problem.


Training Procedure The neural-hybrid model operates in the source manifold. We use a classic
ResNet architecture (He et al., 2016) consisting of 3 blocks, each with 64 hidden channels. The
convolutions implement the physics’ periodic boundary condition by circular padding. The weights
are randomly initialized. We implement the network architecture using the Equinox library (Kidger
& Garcia, 2021).
The loss function is defined as the sum of MSE errors of the first and second time-step solutions. We
use the Adam optimizer from the Optax library, with a cosine learning rate decay schedule using an
initialization of 10−3 and decay steps = 800. We train in mini batches of 25 samples per iteration
and for a total of 100 epochs, i.e., 800 update steps.

PRDP PRDP is controlled using the validation metric of equation 58 computed on the x-velocity
at t = 5. We used parameter values τstep = 0.98, τstop = 0.9, and δ = 3. For the exponential
smoothing, we used a window size of 6. Since this problem setup has 2 executions of PK (refer
figure 23), three options arise for applying progressive refinement - a) progressively refining only
the first execution, b) progressively refining only the second execution, and c) progressively refining
both executions. We opted for c in order to gain savings from both solvers. In general, correction
learning setups would have as many physics executions as the number of temporal unrolling steps
in the loss function.


                                                        35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 22: In the mixed-chain approach an emulator prediction is chained with an application of the
differentiable solver, effectively to the training loss computed over a two step unrolling. Reference
data is computed with full refinement, only the physics of the second step solver is refined with
PRDP. The yellow reversely pointing error indicates the differentiable physics over the approximate
solver.


(a) Sequential Correction Setup                        (b) Two-step supervised unrolling

Figure 23: The neural hybrid emulator is at the place of ”NN” in the right figure. Each
backpropagation-through-time also triggers the differentiation over the physics. Note that even if
there is no differentiation over the first neural-hybrid emulator application (i.e., no differentiation
over the first coarse solver usage), it is also affected by PRDP because we also limit its exactness
in the primal execution. Here, one could think of it as ”Progressively Refined Physics” instead of
”Progressively Refined Differentiable Physics”.


                                                  36
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       G                S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
       G.1                PRDP S AVINGS IN TERMS OF COMPUTE TIME

      In figure 24, we present wall-clock training times with PRDP and with a fully converged differen-
      tiable solver. For the smaller 1D problems with small system matrices of the order of ≈ 100 × 100,
      other overhead in the compute graph dominates the training runtime. As such, the reduction in inner
      iterations does not translate to savings in wall clock time. Starting with 2D problems leading to
      larger matrices, decreases in training time converge to the reductions in inner iterations. For exam-
      ple, in the 3D heat emulator scenario, 81% reduction in inner iteration count aligned with wall clock
      time savings of 78%. As the share of iterative linear solves in the total training cost increases, e.g.
      in high-dimensional problems, so do the savings enabled by PRDP.

       G.2                N EURAL N ETWORK PERFORMANCE - PRDP VS . BASELINE

      The PRDP method is aimed at reducing the end-to-end computational cost of training neural net-
      works with physics solvers in the loop, without significantly affecting the trained neural network’s
      performance. This is depicted qualitatively in figure 6. In table 1, we provide the mean validation er-
      ror values at the last epoch of training along with standard deviation over 10 seeds used for network
      initialization and stochastic minibatching.


                                                        3.0                                                       Converged
                                      30                                   120                   50
                    3                                   2.5                                                       PRDP
                                      25                                   100
Training Time [s]


                                                                                                 40
                                      20                2.0                 80
                    2                                                                            30
                                      15                1.5                 60
                                      10                1.0                                      20
                    1                                                       40
                                       5                0.5                 20                   10
                    0                  0                0.0                  0                   0
                           Heat               Burgers          Heat              Navier Stokes        Heat
                            1D                 (1D)             2D                   (2D)              3D
      Figure 24: While all experiments reduced the number of inner iterations across the outer optimiza-
      tion (see section 4 bar charts), savings in training time become noticeable the larger and more com-
      plex the setup gets. Once the problem is of sufficient size, linear solve times dominate the training
      compute graph, and hence, PRDP can deliver the highest amount of savings in wall clock time.
      Eventually, savings in training compute time converge against the reductions in inner iterations.

      Table 1: Numeric values of the validation accuracy of the neural emulators and neural-hybrid emula-
      tors according to the experiments of section 4. The mean and standard deviation are computed based
      on ten different random seeds that affected neural network initialization and stochastic minibatching.

                        Outer training task        Inner physics   Val. error with Converged Physics         Val. error with PRDP
                                                                                (×10−2 )                            (×10−2 )
                  Neural Emulator                    Heat 1D                       2.1 ± 0.39                     2.1 ± 0.38
                  Neural Emulator                    Heat 2D                       1.4 ± 0.08                     1.1 ± 0.06
                  Neural Emulator                    Heat 3D                       0.4 ± 0.09                     0.5 ± 0.10
                  Neural Emulator                    Burgers                       5.5 ± 1.38                     6.2 ± 2.13
               Neural-Hybrid Emulator              Navier Stokes                   0.6 ± 0.05                     0.7 ± 0.04


                                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                              100

Validation error of trained network
                                                                            Converged


                                                                                             % Savings in Solver Iterations
                                                                            PRDP                                              80
                                      2 × 10 2
                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                           Total savings
                                                                                                                              40                           PR savings
                                                                                                                                                           IC savings
                                                                                                                              20
                                         10 2
                                                                                                                               0
                                                 104                                105                                             104                                105
                                                       Network Parameters                                                                 Network Parameters

Figure 25: As expected with neural networks, the validation error falls over the number of param-
eters due to a larger network indicating a higher expressiveness. However, PRDP savings remain
unaffected.


G.3                                     PRDP S AVINGS VS . N EURAL N ETWORK E XPRESSIVENESS

While we could not identify a single cause for the IC savings observed when solving the outer
problem of learning in the high-dimensional, nonconvex weight space of a neural network, we hy-
pothesized several contributing factors in the last paragraph of section 2.3. One hypothesis is that
the inherently approximative nature of machine learning models plays a role. Specifically, limited
model expressiveness—such as insufficient parameterization—might contribute to IC savings. In
this view, a more expressive model would result in reduced IC savings.
To test this hypothesis, we conducted an ablation study by increasing the parameter count of the
MLP emulator for the 1D Heat example in section 4.2 by an order of magnitude and retraining
with PRDP. As expected, the larger model achieved higher accuracy, with a convergence rate of
approximately n−1/5 . However, the impact on IC savings was minimal. Interestingly, the largest
model exhibited slightly higher savings, likely due to triggering one fewer refinement level during
training. Nonetheless, PRDP consistently yields savings of around 80% in terms of solver iterations
across the varying network sizes.

G.4                                     PRDP BASED ON A VALIDATION METRIC VS . ON TRAINING LOSS

We motivated Progressively Refined Differentiable Physics (PRDP) by showing how different
physics refinement levels K correspond to distinct plateaus in performance metrics other than train-
ing loss. This phenomenon is evident in figure 3 (a) and figure 4 (a). The PRDP control algorithm
leverages this behavior by economically increasing the refinement levels, as visibly pronounced in
figure 6 (a) and (b).
As introduced in section 3, the PRDP control algorithm relies on a performance metric that triggers
refinement when it plateaus. In the main text, we used validation error for this purpose, as it exhibited
clear plateaus for K < Kmax , and since hyperparameter tuning is typically done using a validation
set. In this section, we ablate this choice by instead using the training loss as the guiding metric for
PRDP. The results, shown in figure 26, reveal that training loss can also serve as a valid performance
metric for PRDP.
Interestingly, when using training loss, PRDP adopts a slower refinement strategy since training loss
often continues to decrease even after the validation loss has plateaued. While this approach yields
slightly higher PR savings, the overall IC savings and final accuracy remain comparable.
Despite these findings, we recommend caution when applying PRDP with training loss as the guid-
ing metric. For more complex problems, such as those with multi-modality or spurious minima, the
training loss may be less reliable than validation loss. Additionally, as shown in figure 26, PRDP
guided by validation loss results in smoother convergence for both training and validation losses.
This smoother progression is likely a consequence of the more uniform refinement schedule, mak-
ing validation loss the preferable choice for broader applications.


                                                                                        38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Neural emulator learning for 2D heat equation: PRDP based on validation error (top) vs. training loss
(bottom)


(b) Neural emulator learning for 3D heat equation: PRDP based on validation error (top) vs. training loss
(bottom)


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(c) Neural emulator learning for Burgers equation: PRDP based on validation error (top) vs. training loss
(bottom)


(d) Neural emulator learning for Navier Stokes equation: PRDP based on validation error (top) vs. training loss
(bottom)

Figure 26: PRDP based on training loss also successfully trains the network but leads to a slower
refinement strategy since the training loss oftentimes continues to reduce even if the validation metric
plateaued.


                                                      40
