Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D EBIASING F EDERATED L EARNING WITH
C ORRELATED C LIENT PARTICIPATION

     Zhenyu Sun∗, Ziyang Zhang∗, Zheng Xu†, Gauri Joshi‡, Pranay Sharma‡, Ermin Wei∗
            ∗
             Northwestern University, † Google Research, ‡ Carnegie Mellon University
            {zhenyusun2026,ziyangzhang2024}@u.northwestern.edu,
            xuzheng@google.com, {pranaysh,gaurij}@andrew.cmu.edu,
                            ermin.wei@northwestern.edu


                                             A BSTRACT
         In cross-device federated learning (FL) with millions of mobile clients, only a
         small subset of clients participate in training in every communication round, and
         Federated Averaging (FedAvg) is the most popular algorithm in practice. Exist-
         ing analyses of FedAvg usually assume the participating clients are independently
         sampled in each round from a uniform distribution, which does not reflect real-
         world scenarios. This paper introduces a theoretical framework that models client
         participation in FL as a Markov chain to study optimization convergence when
         clients have non-uniform and correlated participation across rounds. We apply
         this framework to analyze a more practical pattern: every client must wait a min-
         imum number of R rounds (minimum separation) before re-participating. We
         theoretically prove and empirically observe that increasing minimum separation
         reduces the bias induced by intrinsic non-uniformity of client availability in cross-
         device FL systems. Furthermore, we develop an effective debiasing algorithm for
         FedAvg that provably converges to the unbiased optimal solution under arbitrary
         minimum separation and unknown client availability distribution.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The massive amounts of data generated on edge devices such as cellphones or sensors offers an op-
portunity to train machine learning (ML) models for various applications. However, communication
and privacy constraints of edge devices preclude the transfer of raw data to the cloud. Federated
learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a; Yang et al., 2019) has
emerged as a powerful framework to operate within these constraints by keeping decentralized data
on the edge devices and instead moving model training to the edge. Federated model training oper-
ates in communication rounds. In each round, the current model is sent by the central server to edge
clients, which perform model updates using their own local data, and the resulting models are then
averaged by the central server. A typical cross-device FL framework consists of millions of inter-
mittently connected edge clients, in each round only a small subset of them participate in training
(Bonawitz et al., 2019). The subset of participating clients is affected by devices’ intrinsic properties
such as battery status and network connectivity, and also system induced constraints for efficiency
and privacy. In this paper, we seek understand the effect of such client participation patterns on
convergence of federated training.
The federated averaging (FedAvg) algorithm and its variants are widely used in practice (Kairouz
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Hard et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2023), and the convergence has been ex-
tensively analyzed in literature (Li et al., 2020b; Woodworth et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Karim-
ireddy et al., 2019; Wang & Joshi, 2021; Wang et al., 2020). However, most works assume uniform
client participation which ensures that the model update applied to the global model is an unbiased
estimate of the model update in the full client participation setting. This enables convergence results
for the full-participation setting to be extended to the partial participation setting resulting in an ad-
ditional variance term appearing in the convergence bound (Jhunjhunwala et al., 2022; Karimireddy
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020). A generalization of the uniform client participation model is to
consider that each client has an intrinsic availability probability pi that is either known or unknown


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to the central server. The set of participating clients is chosen according to this probability. Such
non-uniform client participation introduces a bias in the model updates received by the server, with
more frequently participating clients dominating the average update. To counter the bias, the central
server can normalize the updates by the corresponding availability probabilities (Wang & Ji, 2022;
Cho et al., 2022) or their estimates (Wang & Ji, 2023; Ribero et al., 2022). We consider the setting
of unknown client availability and analyze the convergence.
Both the uniform and non-uniform client participation models described above assume that client
participation follows a Bernoulli process that is independent across clients and rounds. This assump-
tion fails to capture practical settings where the client participation are correlated across rounds due
to memory or time-dependence constraints. In cross-device FL systems, a device can only be avail-
able for training when it is plugged in for charging, connected to unmetered network and not being
actively used by the owner (Hard et al., 2018; Paulik et al., 2021; Huba et al., 2022). These criterion,
which typically occurs during the night of the devices’ local time, not only results in the client avail-
ability probability for non-uniform client participation, but also correlated client participation of a
periodic pattern due to user preference and time zone (Kairouz et al., 2019; Eichner et al., 2019; Zhu
et al., 2021). More recently, a new criteria is introduced on devices in a FL system to impose a min-
imum separation constraint on successive participation instances of a client (McMahan & Thakurta,
2022; Xu et al., 2023). Specifically, once a client participates in training, it cannot become avail-
able to participate for at least R more rounds (R specified by the central aggregating server). The
minimum separation is introduced to effectively combine differential privacy (DP) and FL (Kairouz
et al., 2021; Choquette-Choo et al., 2023; McMahan et al., 2024) as advanced privacy-preserving
methods, and quickly becomes the default criterion in many FL applications (Xu et al., 2023; Xu &
Zhang, 2024). The client participation across rounds are correlated under the minimum separation
criterion, and the extreme case of very large R will force cyclic client participation as studied in (Cho
et al., 2023; Malinovsky et al., 2023). However, setting R to be the exact value for cyclic client par-
ticipation can be challenging and may cause system slowdown, and these recent work did not study
non-uniform client participation or the large spectrum of minimum separation R in practice. Other
existing convergence analyses of federated training with generalized client participation (Wang &
Ji, 2022; Rodio et al., 2023) do not fully explain the effect of such correlated client participation
patterns, calling for new theoretical advances. See Appendix A for more related work discussions.
In this paper we bridge the gap of algorithms in practical FL system and the theoretical guarantees
on their convergence with correlated client participation and unknown client availability. Our paper
makes the following key contributions: (1) To the best of our knowledge we are the first to ana-
lyze the convergence of FedAvg with a minimum separation constraint on successive participation
instances of each client, which is a general setting widely used in practical FL systems. We show
that such correlated participation patterns can be captured by a Markov chain model. (2) We show
that as the minimum separation R increases, the effective client participation probabilities become
more uniform and reduces the asymptotic bias in the solution attained by the FedAvg algorithm. (3)
We propose a debiased FedAvg algorithm that estimates the unknown client participation probabil-
ities and incorporates them in the local updates. We prove that this algorithm achieves an unbiased
solution that is consistent with the global FL objective under arbitrary minimum separation R.
Notations: For any positive integer N , we denote [N ] = {1, . . . , N }. Let k · k, k · k1 and k · k∞
denote l2 -norm, l1 -norm and l∞ -norm, respectively. For an ordered sequence {i1 , . . . , ik }, it is
represented by (i1 , . . . , ik ) and we use the same notation for a vector when the context causes no
confusion. Unless otherwise specified, E(·) means the total expectation taken on all randomness.
We use c to denote the vector where all entries are c. The d-dimensional Euclidean space is denoted
by Rd , and Rd+ is the space formed vectors where every entry is strictly positive.

2   P ROBLEM FORMULATION
We consider the federated learning setting where N clients cooperate to minimize the following
global objective:
                                                    N
                                                 1 X
                                  min F (x) :=         fi (x)                              (1)
                                    x            N i=1
where fi is the local objective function of client i. We aim to solve problem equation 1 in the fed-
erated learning setting, i.e., the system implements the some federated learning algorithm which


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


operates in rounds. In each round, a subset of the clients participate in training, and each of the
clients in the subset performs multiple local updates based on the local gradients and then commu-
nicates with the server.

Non-uniform and correlated client participation. In this paper, we consider the scenario where
each client requires some resting periods between participation and hence the participation pattern
is correlated over time. Specifically, once participating in the system, an client has to wait as least
R rounds until its next participation, where R is called the minimum separation. In other words,
suppose client i’s last participation is in round ti . It may join again at any round t with t ≥ ti +1+R
and not before then. Moreover, when a client is available to be sampled, instead of assuming uniform
sampling, we consider that each client is associated with some unknown strictly positive scalar
pi > 0 to characterize its intrinsic willingness to be sampled at every round. Without loss of
                         PN
generality, we assume i=1 pi = 1 and hence refer to pi as the availability probability of client
i. Therefore, the client participation pattern is as follows: at each communication round, client i is
sampled to participate in the training process with probability proportional to pi if it has waited for
R rounds after its last participation; otherwise client i cannot be sampled.
The above setting encompasses many of those in existing literature as special cases. For instance,
note that R = 0 means each client is sampled at every round with probability pi independently,
which is consistent with (Wang & Ji, 2023). And the cyclic participation corresponds to the case
R= N   B − 1 where B number of clients are sampled in each round (Cho et al., 2023), assuming the
total number of clients in the FL population N is divisible by B. We investigate the potential bias in-
troduced by the non-uniform and correlated client participation on federated algorithm performance
and propose debiasing scheme to mitigate it.

3    M ARKOV CHAIN MODEL AND ITS PROPERTIES
In this section, we propose a Markov chain model to capture the correlated participation scenario
described above. Intuitively, the fact that every client cannot be sampled again within R rounds
motivates us to maintain a memory window with length R to track which clients have not waited for
R rounds. In other words, clients that are possible to be sampled in the current round only depend
on which clients appearing in the memory window. This calls for a Markov chain with R-memory,
also known as R-order Markov chain, defined as below.
Definition 1. Let {Xt }∞t=0 be a stochastic process where Xt ∈ X , ∀t ≥ 0. It is said to be an
R-order Markov chain if
                P (Xt | Xt−1 , Xt−2 , . . . , X0 ) = P (Xt | Xt−1 , . . . , Xt−R ), ∀t ≥ R.
X is called the state space.

If R = 1 it reduces to conventional Markov chain; if R = 0, then the clients can be sampled at each
round with probability pi , independent of the history. In a conventional Markov chain (with R = 1)
with finite state space X , we can use the transition probability matrix P to represent the Markov
chain, where the (i, j)-th entry of P is [P ]i,j = P (Xt = j | Xt−1 = i), i.e., the probability of
transitioning from state i to state j.
Recall that each client i is associated with a strictly positive availability probability pi > 0, ∀i ∈
[N ]. At each round t, the server samples a size-B subset of clients St , where |St | = B, with
probability for each client proportional to pi to join the training system. Note that only clients
that have waitedPfor R rounds are available. In other words, set St is sampled with probability
proportional to i∈St pi from all subsets of size B formed by the available clients. We assume
N = M B for some M > 0 and note that the minimum separation R ranges from 0 to M − 1,
where R = M − 1 corresponds to a cyclic participation pattern where subsets of clients participate
in training in a fixed order.1
Denote X as the collection of all possible ordered subsets of [N ] with exactly B elements. Then,
|X | = σ(N, B) where σ(N, B) = (NN      !
                                      −B)! represents the total number of B-permutations of [N ].

   1
     Any R > M − 1 would resulting in periods with insufficient available clients. We do not consider those
cases here.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Considering the stochastic process {Xt }∞
                                        t=0 where Xt ∈ X , the participation pattern in Section 2
can be precisely described by an R-order Markov chain defined in Definition 1. Formally,
P (Xt = I0 | Xt−1 = I1 , Xt−2 = I2 , . . . , X0 = It ) = P (Xt = I0 | Xt−1 = I1 , . . . , Xt−R = IR )
                                                                                                     (2)
where each state Ik ∈ X represents which ordered subset of size B has been sampled at round
k. For example, suppose clients 1 to B are sampled during the current round. (1, 2, . . . , B) and
(2, 1, 3, . . . , B) are two different states, although the probability of these two states to appear is
the same. The reason we consider this ordered case is that it allows us to cleanly define the
probability of client i to be sampled P (which is the marginal distribution of P (Xt )) by noting that
P (i to be sampled at round t) = i2 ,...,iB P (Xt = (i, i2 , . . . , iB )). Here we calculate the prob-
ability of client i appearing as the first element in the ordered set Xt . The probability of i being
sampled in any position would need an additional scaling factor of B. Since the scaling factor B
is the same for all clients and only the relative frequency across clients contribute towards any bias
effect, ignoring this factor of B would not affect the debiasing calculation.
The above high-order Markov chain equation 2 has some nice properties as summarized below (see
Appendix C for proofs). The insights are important for deriving Theorem 2, which is the reason we
formally present them here.
Proposition 1. The R-th order Markov chain equation 2 maintains the following properties:
(1). The ordered sequence (I0 , I1 , . . . , IR ) is non-repeated, meaning Il ∩ Ik = ∅, ∀l 6= k.
(2). For any non-repeated (I0 , . . . , IR ),
                                                                     p I0
         P (Xt = I0 | Xt−1 = I1 , . . . , Xt−R = IR ) = P                            =: p(I1 ,...,IR )→I0 .   (3)
                                                                      c
                                                                  J ∈SI         pJ
                                                                          1:R


Otherwise P (Xt = I0 | X  Qt−1 = I1 , . . . , Xt−R = IR ) = 0. Since Ik is a set with B unique
elements, we define pIk := e∈Ik pe , ∀Ik . SIc 1:R is the collection containing all B-permutations of
      SR
[N ] \ k=1 Ik .
(3). For t ≥ R − 1, define Yt = (Xt , . . . , Xt−R+1 ) ∈ RR . Then {Yt }∞             t=R−1 is a conven-
tional Markov chain with its cardinality of the state space being d(M, R), where d(M, R) =
QR−1
   k=0 σ(B(M − k), B). Moreover its transition probability is

                                                                 p(I1 ,...,IR )→I0 , Jk = Ik , k ∈ [R − 1]
P (Yt = (I0 , J1 , . . . , JR−1 )|Yt−1 = (I1 , . . . , IR )) =
                                                                          0        ,      otherwise
                                                                                                      (4)
for any non-repeated (I0 , . . . , IR ).
(4).   Define vector u(I1 ,...,IR ) ∈ Rd(M,R) with (I0 , I1 , . . . , IR−1 )-th entry as P (Yt =
                                                                                σ(B(M −R),B)
(I0 , I1 , . . . , IR−1 ) | Yt−1 = (I1 , . . . , IR )). Then, u(I1 ,...,IR ) ∈ R+                 ⊂ Rd(M,R) and
u(I1 ,...,IR ) [(I0 , . . . , IR−1 )] = pI0 ( J ∈S c pJ )−1 > 0, ∀I0 ∈ SIc 1:R .
                                             P
                                                I1:R


(5). Denote v(J0 ,...,JR−1 ) ∈ Rd(M,R) with (J1 , J2 , . . . , JR )-th entry as P (Yt = (J0 , . . . , JR−1 ) |
                                                       σ(B(M −R),B)
Yt−1 = (J1 , J2 , . . . , JR )) Then, v(J1 ,...,JR ) ∈ R+              and v(J0 ,...,JR−1 ) [(J1 , . . . , JR )] =
pJ0 ( J ∈S c pJ )−1 > 0 for any JR ∈ SJc 0:R−1 .
     P
             J1:R


Properties (1),(2) essentially state that clients to be sampled in the current round cannot be those
who have not waited for R rounds, which establish the equivalence of our Markov-chain modeling
equation 2 and the participation pattern in Section 2. Property (3) means that we can augment
our state space by considering R-length history to formulate an equivalent Markov chain {Yt }∞   t=R
with order 1. The last two properties explicitly shows what entries are for each row and column
of the transition probability matrix of the new Markov chain {Yt }∞   t=R . Also since there are only
σ(B(M − R), B)   d(M, R) non-zero entries in every row and column, the transition matrix is
sparse.
A main benefit of this Markov-chain modeling is allowing us to look into the probability of each
client to be sampled as t goes on. Specifically, given any R, denote PR ∈ Rd(M,R)×d(M,R) as the


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


transition probability matrix of the Markov chain {Yt }∞  t=R where its entry is given by equation 4.
Let φR (t) ∈ R d(M,R)
                       be the state distribution at round t of the Markov chain {Yt }∞
                                                                                     t=R and ηR (t) ∈
  N
R be the distribution of clients to be sampled at round t. We have the following evolution of
distributions with respect to t:

                               ηR (t) = QTR φR (t), φR (t + 1) = PRT φR (t)                                  (5)

for any initial distribution ηR (0) and corresponding φR (0) such that ηR (0) = QTR φR (0), where
QR = QR,1 QR,2 and QR,1 ∈ Rd(M,R)×σ(N,B) is defined by

                                       p(I1 ,...,IR )→J , {J , I1 , . . . , IR } non-repeated
            [QR,1 ](I1 ,...,IR ),J =
                                                0       ,              otherwise.

and QR,2 ∈ Rσ(N,B)×N is defined by

                                                       1   , J = (j, ∗)
                                   [QR,2 ]J ,j =
                                                       0   , otherwise,

where J = (j, ∗) denotes that the first entry of I is j. We are particularly interested in the distribu-
tion of ηR (t) as t → ∞ because it helps us characterize the asymptotic performance of existing FL
algorithms. From classical Markov chain literature, we know that if a Markov chain is irreducible
and aperiodic (see formal definitions in Appendix B), it has a stationary distribution which is unique
and strictly positive. We denote ζR = limt→∞ φR (t) as the stationary distribution of Markov chain
PR and we have
                                      T     T         T    T
                                    ζR  = ζR  PR , πR   = ζR QR .                                    (6)
where πR ∈ RN is marginal stationary distribution of clients to be sampled, i.e., the i-th entry of πR
              i              i
is given by πR  = limt→∞ ηR    (t). On the other hand, if the Markov chain is irreducible and peroidic,
we let ζR be the Perron vector2 , which is also strictly positive. We now show our Markov chain
is irreducibile and (a)periodic to justify the definitions of ζR and πR in Lemma 1. The proof is in
Appendix C.
Lemma 1. The Markov chain {Yt }∞  t=R with transition matrix PR defined by equation 4 is irre-
ducible for all M ≥ 1 and 0 ≤ R ≤ M − 1. Further, when R ≤ M − 2, it is also aperiodic.

We provide an example to illustrate the intuition of our Markov-chain model above, considering the
case of N = 4, B = 1, R = 2, i.e., every round one client is sampled, then it has to wait for two
rounds. For instance, if client 1 and client 2 are consecutively selected in the first two rounds, in the
third round only client 3 or 4 can be selected with probabilities of p3 /(p3 + p4 ) or p4 /(p3 + p4 )
respectively. Then, the state (2, 1) can only transition to (3, 2) or (4, 2), where the second index
is sampled before the first one as is in equation 2. Similarly, if we are currently at state (1, 4), the
previous state has to be (4, 3) or (4, 2). One can easily check that Proposition 1 holds. To see how
π is calculated, we take the first entry of πR as an example:
 1
πR = ζ (2,3) p(2,3)→1 +ζ (2,4) p(2,4)→1 +ζ (3,2) p(3,2)→1 +ζ (3,4) p(3,4)→1 +ζ (4,2) p(4,2)→1 +ζ (4,3) p(4,3)→1

by noting that the remaining p(i,j)→1 = 0, if i or j = 1.
The vectors in equation 6 characterize the final distribution according to which clients will be sam-
pled when the communication round t becomes infinitely large. In other words, each client i is
                            i
sampled with probability πR   given some fixed R. Although πM −1 is the uniform distribution no
matter what pi ’s are (by observing that all clients follow a cyclic participation), we note that πR
for R < M − 1 does not necessarily follow the uniform distribution, because {p1 , . . . , pN } are
arbitrary. This will be problematic in the sense that existing federated learning algorithms may no
longer guarantee convergence to the correct and optimal solution of equation 1 no matter how many
rounds of training are implemented. We call this phenomenon the asymptotic bias induced by πR .
We will characterize both empirically and theoretically this phenomenon in the next section.
   2
     We say v is the Perron vector of the transition matrix P if v T = v T P , i.e., v is right eigenvector of P
corresponding to eigenvalue 1 and v T 1 = 1.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4       A SYMPTOTIC BIAS UNDER NON - UNIFORM CORRELATED PARTICIPATION

In this section, we utilize the Markov chain model in the previous section to analyze asymptotic bias
of existing federated learning algorithms caused by R < M − 2 and arbitrary pi ’s. In particular,
we consider FedAvg with local gradient descent updates, i.e., at each round, a set St with |St | = B
clients are sampled and after being selected client i updates its model as

                         xit,0 = xt , xit,k+1 = xit,k − α∇fi (xit,k ), k = 0, . . . , K − 1        (7)

where xt denotes the server’s model at round t and xit,k is the local model maintained by client i at
k-th iteration. The server then updates xt+1 = B1 i∈St xit,K . We next show in the following that
                                                   P
FedAvg may not converge to the desired optimal solutions of equation 1. Instead there may exist
some error neighborhood, i.e., the asymptotic bias, that is related to πR , even as t goes to infinity.
Before we formally deliver the result, two standard assumptions are needed.
Assumption 1. There exists G > 0 such that k∇fi (x) − ∇F (x)k2 ≤ G2 , ∀x and ∀i ∈ [N ].
Assumption 2. Each fi is L-smooth, i.e., k∇fi (x) − ∇fi (y)k ≤ Lkx − yk, ∀x, y and ∀i ∈ [N ].

Then we are ready to state the convergence of FedAvg under correlated client participation (see
Appendix F for the proof).
Theorem 1. Suppose Assumptions 1,2 hold and assume k∇F (x)k√≤ D, ∀x with some finite D > 0.
Then for any T > 2τmix log τmix choosing α = Õ(1/(τmix K T )), FedAvg with local updates
                                           −1
equation 7 generates the trajectory {xt }Tt=0  satisfying

                             2        τmix              1         1    2
               Ek∇F (x̃T )k ≤ Õ √              +O        + O πR − 1N 1 ,               (8)
                                          T            T          N

for any 0 ≤ R < M − 1, where x̃T is drawn uniformly from x0 , . . . , xT −1 , Õ(·) hides logrithmic
factors, and τmix denotes the mixing time3 of Markov chain equation 5. Moreover, the bias term
                 2
O πR − N1 1N 1 shown in equation 8 is unavoidable.

Theorem 1 implies that without any debiasing technique, FedAvg can only converge to a solution
with unavoidable asymptotic bias which is measured by the distance between πR (defined in equa-
tion 6) and the uniform distribution. Except for R = M −1, where πM −1 is the uniform distribution,
for R ≤ M − 2, there is generally some gap between πR and (1/N )1N , which shows that FedAvg
may fail to perform under correlated client participation. However, if πR is not too far away from the
uniform distribution, we expect FedAvg to converge to a solution reasonably close to the optimal so-
lution of equation 1. We next investigate what factors influence the distance from πR to the uniform
distribution. We find that one factor is the spread among pi ’s. Stated by the following proposition,
if all pi ’s are equal, no gap between πR and (1/N )1N exists (see Appendix D for the proof).
Proposition 2. Suppose p1 = p2 = · · · = pN = N1 . Then for any 0 ≤ R ≤ M − 1, πR = N1 1N .

When pi ’s are not equal to each other, we turn to understand how R affect πR . In fact, we em-
pirically observe that πR approaches the uniform distribution as R increases. This key observation
is illustrated in Figure 1. We consider the case where N = 500, B = 1 and assign each client
a random pi > 0. We then calculate πR for each R ranging from 0 to N − 1 and measure its
distance from the uniform distribution. As shown in the figure, increasing R causes πR moving to-
wards the uniform distribution. One explanation for this observation is that when R becomes larger,
fewer clients are ready to be sampled in the current round, because many clients have not waited
for enough rounds and hence are not available. Rather than dictated by the availability probabil-
ity pi ’s, which is the case for a small R and many available clients, here the sampling process is
mostly determined by the waiting requirement. In the extreme case, when R = M − 1, at each
round, only B clients are available, hence all clients are sampled with equal frequency. Another
point suggested by this observation is that we can choose a large minimum separation R in the
practical scenario to reduce the asymptotic bias for existing FL algorithms, even with unknown pi ’s.
    3
        Please refer to Appendix B for the formal definition of the mixing time.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Debiasing FedAvg for correlated client participation
 1: Input: initial point x0 , stepsizes {α}, some τ > 0, λ0 = 0N , ti = 0, ∀i ∈ [N ] for each client
 2: for t = 0, 1, . . . , T do
 3:   A batch of clients St with size |St | = B is selected. The server sends current t and model xt
       to clients in St .
 4:    for i ∈ St in parallel do
                                                               ti
 5:       Each client sets ti ← ti + 1 and calculates λit = (t+1)B and νti = λi1N .
                                                                              t
 6:       for k = 0, 1, . . . , K − 1 do
 7:          Client i updates its local model by
                                           xit,k+1 = xit,k − ανti ∇fi (xit,k ).                         (9)
 8:      end for
 9:   end for
      The server updates its model xt+1 = B1 i∈St xit,K .
                                            P
10:
11: end for
                                              −1
12: Output: x̃T sampled uniformly from {xt }T
                                            t=0


                                                                  10                  −2
The above empirical observation verifies the formal the-


                                                                 norm(πR - unif(N))
orem that characterizes the debiasing effect of increasing
minimum separation R in Theorem 2. (see Appendix D
for the proof).
Theorem 2. Given a set of pi ’s, with at least one ele-           10−3
ment pi 6= N1 . Without loss of generality, let p1 , . . . , pB
be the B smallest values among all pi ’s. Define qB :=
PB
   j=1 pj , then qB < 1/M . There exists a δ̄ > 0,                     0    100      200   300       400 500
such that if any size-B batch of clients Bj picking from                        minimum separation R

[N ] \ [B], δj := | l∈Bj pl − 1−q
                      P
                                   M −1 | ≤ δ̄, then πR
                                      B
                                                                Figure 1: kπR −1N /N k1 as R increases
converges to a neighborhood of N1 1N characterized by (N = 500, B = 1)
{π | kπ − N1 1N k1 = O(N −1 )} as R ranging from 0 to
M − 1. When R = M − 1, πM −1 is the uniform distri-
bution supported on [N ].

Theorem 2 states that when the availability probabilities pi ’s of clients are not too far away from
each other or when B is relatively large (i.e., δj ’s are small for all j), and when the total number
of clients N is large, πR approaches the uniform distribution as R increases. It is worth noting that
practically when the requirements in Theorem 2 are not strictly satisfied, the effect of increasing R
on πR can be still observed as shown in Figure 1.

5     D EBIASING F EDAVG AND ITS CONVERGENCE
As we discuss in the previous section, existing federated learning algorithms like FedAvg cannot
guarantee convergence to the correct optimal solution if R ≤ M − 2 and pi ’s are arbitrary. Although
we can reduce the asymptotic bias caused by πR by increasing R, it may still be problematic under
some particular circumstances. Clients have intermittent and non-uniform availability, and forcing
a large minimum separation R in practice may cause significant slowdown of the training in the FL
system due to the small number of available clients. The minimum separation R can be relatively
small and the pi ’s can be very different from each other, which then suggests by Figure 1 and The-
orem 2, πR can be far from the uniform distribution, making the asymptotic bias non-negligible.
We next design a debiasing process that can be easily integrated into the existing federated learn-
ing algorithms to address asymptotic bias. Our proposed algorithm based on FedAvg is given by
Algorithm 1.
The main difference between our algorithm and vanilla FedAvg lies in the stage of local updates
(Lines 5 and 7). Specifically, we require each client to maintain an estimator of its corresponding


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


component of πR , which is only updated when the client is sampled. This estimator is later used to
scale the gradient step during the local update. The estimator is designed by counting the times the
client has been sampled and then used to compute the running empirical frequency of the client’s
                            i
participation. Recall that πR  represents the frequency of client i to be selected when t is large enough
(i.e., when the Markov chain equation 5 becomes steady, meaning φR (∞) = ζR ). If we reweigh the
local objective function fi by π1i (corresponding to νti = πi1N in equation 9), this weighting cancels
                                  R                           R
the asymptotic bias introduced by unbalanced sampling, which drives the trajectory of the server’s
                                                                         i
models towards the correct solution of equation 1. If we know πR            for every client in prior, the
above-mentioned reweighting method provides us with unbiased solutions. Then, λit serves as a role
                              i
to iteratively approximate πR    round by round, which yields Algorithm 1. Also note that Algorithm
1 reduces to FedAvg if fixing λit = 1/N, ∀i ∈ [N ]. This shows the advantage of our algorithm:
it is computationally cheap in the sense that each client only maintains two additional scalars (λit
and νti ) and can be easily embedded with existing algorithms by just multiplying the learning rates
by νti . We note that other federated algorithms suffering from asymptotic bias due to non-uniform
sampling could also benefit from our debiasing technique based on simple counting.
However, formally characterizing the convergence of νti to πi1N remains challenging due to the
                                                                  R
samples of clients are not independent across different rounds. In particular, the clients sampled
in the current round may affect those in the future, which makes the conventional concentration
tools and law of large numbers not applicable. To address this challenge, we carefully analyze the
transition of the Markov chain equation 5 and its influences on the marginal distribution of clients
to be sampled to conclude that λit is an unbiased estimate of πR   i
                                                                     asymptotically. Then, we further
leverage the fact that the Markov chain is irreducible as stated in Lemma 1 to show that λit is almost
surely strictly positive even t is infinite, concluding the convergence of νti to πi1N , as summarized
                                                                                   R
in Lemma 2 (see Corollary 2 in Appendix G for the proof).
Lemma 2. Given λ0 = 0N , then νti , ∀i ∈ [N ] in Algorithm 1 satisfies
                                                     τ
                                                       mix
                                     Ekν̃t k2∞ ≤ O
                                                        t
for any t > 0, where ν̃ti = νti − πi1N and ν̃t = (ν̃t1 , . . . , ν̃tN ); τmix is the mixing time of Markov
chain equation 5.

Based on the above, we can achieve the following convergence result of Algorithm 1 (see Appendix
G for the proof).
Theorem 3. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. For any 0 √≤ R < M − 1 and T > c† τmix log τmix
       †
(with c being some constant), choosing α = Õ(1/(τmix K T )), the output of Algorithm 1 satisfies

                                                 τmix          1
                            Ek∇F (x̃T )k2 = Õ √        +O
                                                   T          T
where x̃T is defined as that in Theorem 1; τmix is the mixing time of Markov chain equation 5.

Comparing to Theorem 1, no bounded gradient assumption is needed to reach the convergence
of our algorithm. Unlike the result in (Cho et al., 2023) where clients are forced to participate
in the system cyclically, our bound shown in Theorem 3 does not grow as the number of clients
increases. Particularly, for the bounds in (Cho et al., 2023) to be non-vacuous, the total number of
communication round T should be proportional to the number of clients, which could be hard to
satisfy in practice especially when client number is super large. To prove Theorem 3 we critically
rely on the fact that the Markov chain equation 5 is aperiodic to make analysis go through. That is
to say our bound does not suit for R = M − 1, which is the limitation of our analysis. However,
since R = M − 1 is the cyclic case, where the Markov chain follows much nicer structure, one may
be able to get a better bound (Cho et al., 2023).
We remark that our convergence result achieves nearly the same order of rate as Markov-sampling
                                                                                    √
                                                                            √
SGD literature (Beznosikov et al., 2024; Even, 2023) (where rates of O( τmix / T + τmix /T )
are obtained). However, their analysis only suits for the first-order Markov chain and no debiasing
results are presented, while our results generalize to high-order Markov chain and guarantee ap-
proaching unbiased solutions. We note that utilizing variance-reduced techiques may accelerate the


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


convergence rate for Markov-sampling SGD (Even, 2023). Then whether variance reduction can be
used in our problem to design faster algorithms would be an interesting future direction.
It is worth noting that although a uniform minimum separation R for all clients is placed throughout
the paper, we also allow each client maintains its own specific Ri , ∀i ∈ [N ]. In this more general
case, we could still use the same modeling technique as in Section 3 where the order of the Markov
chain is chosen to be an upper bound of all Ri ’s (e.g. maxi Ri ). Then Theorems 1 and 3 can
be obtained without any modification as the analysis stays valid for any irreducible and aperiodic
Markov chain. However, Theorem 2 becomes tricky in this case as our proof highly relies on nice
properities of the Markov chain summarized by Proposition 1 which now cease to hold. Therefore,
more advanced mathematical tools might be needed in order to obtain similar statements as Theorem
2 when clients have various Ri ’s.

6    N UMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we provide numerical experiments to illustrate our theoretical results. In particular,
we compare vanilla FedAvg with our proposed algorithm (Algorithm 1) under non-uniform and
correlated client participation described in Section 2. For simplicity, we partition the N clients into
M groups and exactly one group of clients are selected at each round to fully participate in the
system. Here we choose N = 100, M = 20. Since all clients in the same group participate in
the system together once being sampled, we only need to associate availability probabilities to each
group, where pi ∝ i−1.5 , i ∈ [M ] is a long-tailed distribution.

Synthetic dataset. We test Vanilla FedAvg and Debiasing FedAvg (Algorithm 1) under a synthetic
dataset constructed following (Sun & Wei, 2022): for each client i, Ai ∈ Rni ×d is the feature
matrix, where ni is the number of local samples and d is the feature dimension. Every entry of Ai
is generated by a Gaussian distribution N (0, (0.5i)−2 ). We then generate bi ∈ Rni , the labels of
client i, by first generating a reference point θi ∈ Rd , where θi ∼ N (µi , Id ). And µi is drawn
from N (α, 1) with α ∼ N (0, 100). Then bi = Ai θi +P i with  i ∼ N (0, 0.25Ini ). We set
                                                               ni
d = 20, ni = 100, ∀i ∈ [N ]. And we define fi (x) = n1i j=1        log( 12 (hAi [j, :], xi + bi [j])2 + 1)
where Ai [j, :] represents the j-th row of Ai and bi [j] is the j-th entry of bi . The outcomes are
shown in Figures 2a,2b, where Figure 2a shows that Vanilla FedAvg suffers from bias which can be
mitigated by increasing R, and Figure 2b shows that Debiasing FedAvg effectively reduces bias no
matter what value of R is set.

MNIST dataset. We also test our proposed algorithm under the MNIST dataset. Each client
maintains a three-layer fully-connected neural network for training. All learning rates are chosen to
be with the order of O(10−3 ). In Figure 3c, we compare Debiasing FedAvg with Vanilla FedAvg
and FedVARP (Jhunjhunwala et al., 2022), and Debiasing FedAvg can effectively mitigate the bias
effect. Another interesting empirical observation is that increasing R can possible fasten the speed
of both Debiasing and Vanilla FedAvg (as shown by Figures 3a,3b). This is yet not characterized by
our theoretical demonstration. Here we conjecture that larger R corresponds to smaller mixing time
τmix and hence faster rate as the bounds in Theorems 1,3 scale with respect to τmix . We provide
more detailed and intuitive discussions in Appendix I.

7    L IMITATIONS
Our Markov-chain framework works for that all clients share the same static minimum separation
R and in the last paragraph of Section 5 we further allow static client-specific Ri ’s. However,
more practical scenarios call for even time-varying R, which lies outside the scope this paper. In
Theorem 2, we force the availability probabilities pi ’s not too far away from each other to make the
theory hold, while this assumption is not required in practice. Moreover, Theorems 1,3 do not enjoy
speedup in the number of clients as FL literature when clients are uniformly sampled. We believe
it is mainly due to the non-uniformity and time-correlation of the client sampling process and more
advanced mathematical tools are needed to show speedup in the Markov setting.
Many of the challenges in cross-device federated learning can also be addressed by system design in
addition to algorithm design. For example, incorporating trusted execution environment (TEEs) in


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                             8.5 × 100
                             8.22 × 100                                                                                                                                     FedAvg (uniform sampling)
                                                                                                R=0
                                                                                                                                                                            R=0
                                                                                                R=5                                                                         R=2
                                                                                                                             8.4 × 100
                              8.2 × 100                                                         R=10                                                                        R=5
                                                                                                R=15                                                                        R=10
                             8.18 × 100                                                         R=19                                                                        R=15
                                                                                                                             8.3 × 100
                                                                                                                                                                            R=19

                      loss


                                                                                                                      loss
                                                                                                                                                                          8.1 × 100
                             8.16 × 100                                                                                                                                  8.08 × 100
                                                                                                                             8.2 × 100
                                                                                                                                                                         8.06 × 100
                                                                                                                                                                         8.04 × 100
                             8.14 × 100
                                                                                                                                                                         8.02 × 100
                                                                                                                             8.1 × 100                                      8 × 100
                                                                                                                                                                                  2000 3000 4000 5000
                             8.12 × 100

                                     6000 6250 6500 6750 7000 7250 7500 7750 8000                                             8 × 100
                                                                                                                                         0     250   500      750       1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
                                                               number of rounds                                                                            number of rounds

                      (a) FedAvg under different R after conver-                                                       (b) Debiasing FedAvg under different R
                      gence (synthetic data)                                                                           (synthetic data)

Figure 2: Experiments on synthetic dataset. (a) The training loss of Vanilla FedAvg (after conver-
gence) with different R is shown. Larger R leads to smaller bias. (b) Debiasing FedAvg is tested
under different values of R, where the red line represents Vanilla FedAvg when clients are sampled
under an oracle uniform distribution. The subfigure on the right shows that all curves reach unbiased
objective after convergence, indicating that the asymptotic bias is effectively canceled.


                                                                                                                                                                                               Vanilla FedAvg
                                 R=5                                                                                                         R=0                                               FedVARP
                                 R=10                                                 100                                                    R=5
                                 R=15                                                                                                                                                          Debiasing FedAvg
                                 FedAvg with niform sampling (convergence)
                                                                                                                                             R=10             100
            100
                                                                                                                                             R=15


                                                                                                                                                       loss
                                                                              loss
    loss


                                                                                     10−1
           10−1


                                                                                                                                                                    0      100      200      300        400       500
                  0     200        400     600    800   1000    1200   1400                 0   200    400    600    800   1000     1200      1400                                number of rounds
                                          number of ro nds                                                   number of rounds
                                                                                                                                                       (c) FedAvg, FedVARP, Debias-
    (a) Debiasing FedAvg under dif-                                           (b) FedAvg under different R                                             ing FedAvg when R = 8
    ferent R (MNIST)                                                          (MNIST)                                                                  (MNIST)

Figure 3: Experiments on MNIST. (a) The convergence of our Debiasing FedAvg under different
client minimum separation R configurations. The red horizontal line is the convergence value of the
objective function by vanilla FedAvg when clients are sampled under an oracle uniform distribution.
Our Debiasing FedAvg converges to the unbiased objective with larger R converges faster. (b) For
Vanilla FedAvg, increasing R causes smaller bias. (c) When R = 8, Vanilla FedAvg, FedVARP and
Debiasing FedAvg are compared. Note that both Vanilla FedAvg and FedVARP are designed only
for uniform client sampling and hence are significantly affected by bias from client participation.



the FL system (Huba et al., 2022; Daly et al., 2024) can potentially provide more control on client
sampling.



8            C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we consider FL with non-uniform and correlated client participation, where every
client must wait as least R rounds (minimum separation) before participating again, and each client
has their own availability probability. A high-order Markov chain is introduced to model this prac-
tical scenario. Based on this Markov-chain modeling, we are able to study the convergence per-
formances of existing FL algorithms. Due to the effect of non-uniformity and time correlation, FL
algorithms can only converge with asymptotic bias, which can be reduced by increasing minimum
separation R as shown by our empirical and theoretical results. Finally, we propose a debiasing algo-
rithm for FedAvg that guarantee convergence to unbiased solutions given arbitrary non-uniformity
and minimum separation R.


                                                                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by NSF grants CCF-2045694, ECCS-2216970, CMMI-2024774,
CNS-2112471, CPS-2111751, ONR N00014-23-1-2149, and a Google Research Scholar Award to
GJ.

R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu. Katyusha: The first direct acceleration of stochastic gradient methods. In Pro-
  ceedings of Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pp. 1200–1205, 2017.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Elad Hazan. Variance reduction for faster non-convex optimization. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 699–707. PMLR, 2016.

Aleksandr Beznosikov, Sergey Samsonov, Marina Sheshukova, Alexander Gasnikov, Alexey Nau-
  mov, and Eric Moulines. First order methods with markovian noise: from acceleration to varia-
  tional inequalities. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Shalabh Bhatnagar, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Mark Lee, and Richard S Sutton. Incremental nat-
  ural actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.

Jieming Bian, Lei Wang, Kun Yang, Cong Shen, and Jie Xu. Accelerating hybrid federated learning
   convergence under partial participation. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2024.

Keith Bonawitz, Hubert Eichner, Wolfgang Grieskamp, Dzmitry Huba, Alex Ingerman, Vladimir
  Ivanov, Chloe Kiddon, Jakub Konecny, Stefano Mazzocchi, H. Brendan McMahan, Timon Van
  Overveldt, David Petrou, Daniel Ramage, and Jason Roselander. Towards Federated Learning at
  Scale: System Design. SysML, April 2019. URL https://www.sysml.cc/doc/2019/
  193.pdf.

Wenlin Chen, Samuel Horvath, and Peter Richtarik. Optimal client sampling for federated learning.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.13723, 2020.

Yae Jee Cho, Jianyu Wang, and Gauri Joshi. Client selection in federated learning: Convergence
  analysis and power-of-choice selection strategies. In Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2022. URL "https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2010.01243".

Yae Jee Cho, Pranay Sharma, Gauri Joshi, Zheng Xu, Satyen Kale, and Tong Zhang. On the con-
  vergence of federated averaging with cyclic client participation. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 5677–5721. PMLR, 2023.

Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Arun Ganesh, Ryan McKenna, H Brendan McMahan, John Rush,
  Abhradeep Guha Thakurta, and Zheng Xu. (amplified) banded matrix factorization: A unified
  approach to private training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

Katharine Daly, Hubert Eichner, Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, and Zheng
  Xu. Federated learning in practice: reflections and projections. In 2024 IEEE 6th International
  Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security in Intelligent Systems, and Applications (TPS-ISA),
  pp. 148–156. IEEE, 2024.

Aaron Defazio, Francis Bach, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. SAGA: A fast incremental gradient
  method with support for non-strongly convex composite objectives. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems 27, pp. 1646–1654, 2014.

Hubert Eichner, Tomer Koren, Brendan McMahan, Nathan Srebro, and Kunal Talwar. Semi-cyclic
  stochastic gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1764–1773.
  PMLR, 2019.

Mathieu Even. Stochastic gradient descent under markovian sampling schemes. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9412–9439. PMLR, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yann Fraboni, Richard Vidal, Laetitia Kameni, and Marco Lorenzi. Clustered sampling: Low-
  variance and improved representativity for clients selection in federated learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3407–3416. PMLR, 2021.
Andrew Hard, Kanishka Rao, Rajiv Mathews, Swaroop Ramaswamy, Françoise Beaufays, Sean
  Augenstein, Hubert Eichner, Chloé Kiddon, and Daniel Ramage. Federated learning for mobile
  keyboard prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03604, 2018.
Dzmitry Huba, John Nguyen, Kshitiz Malik, Ruiyu Zhu, Mike Rabbat, Ashkan Yousefpour, Carole-
  Jean Wu, Hongyuan Zhan, Pavel Ustinov, Harish Srinivas, et al. Papaya: Practical, private, and
  scalable federated learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 4:814–832, 2022.
Divyansh Jhunjhunwala, Pranay Sharma, Aushim Nagarkatti, and Gauri Joshi. FedVARP: Tackling
  the variance due to partial client participation in federated learning. In Proceedings of the Confer-
  ence on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), aug 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  pdf/2207.14130.pdf.
Rie Johnson and Tong Zhang. Accelerating stochastic gradient descent using predictive variance
  reduction. Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Peter Kairouz, H. Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurelien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Keith Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, Rafael G. L.
  D’Oliveira, Salim El Rouayheb, David Evans, Josh Gardner, Zachary Garrett, Adria Gascon,
  Badih Ghazi, Phillip B. Gibbons, Marco Gruteser, Zaid Harchaoui, Chaoyang He, Lie He,
  Zhouyuan Huo, Ben Hutchinson, Justin Hsu, Martin Jaggi, Tara Javidi, Gauri Joshi, Mikhail
  Khodak, Jakub Konecny, Aleksandra Korolova, Farinaz Koushanfar, Sanmi Koyejo, Tancrede
  Lepoint, Yang Liu, Prateek Mittal, Mehryar Mohri, Richard Nock, Ayfer Ozgur, Rasmus Pagh,
  Mariana Raykova, Hang Qi, Daniel Ramage, Ramesh Raskar, Dawn Song, Weikang Song, Se-
  bastian U. Stich, Ziteng Sun, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Florian Tramer, Praneeth Vepakomma,
  Jianyu Wang, Li Xiong, Zheng Xu, Qiang Yang, Felix X. Yu, Han Yu, and Sen Zhao. Advances
  and open problems in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04977, 2019.
Peter Kairouz, Brendan McMahan, Shuang Song, Om Thakkar, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Zheng Xu.
  Practical and private (deep) learning without sampling or shuffling. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 5213–5225. PMLR, 2021.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J Reddi, Sebastian U Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for on-device federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06378, 2019.
David A Levin and Yuval Peres. Markov chains and mixing times, volume 107. American Mathe-
  matical Soc., 2017.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020a.
Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence
  of fedavg on non-iid data. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), July
  2020b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02189.
Grigory Malinovsky, Samuel Horváth, Konstantin Burlachenko, and Peter Richtárik. Federated
  learning with regularized client participation, 2023.
Brendan McMahan and Abhradeep Thakurta. Federated learning with formal differential privacy
  guarantees. Google AI Blog, 2022.
H. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agøura y Arcas.
  Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligenece and Statistics (AISTATS), April 2017. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/1602.05629.
H Brendan McMahan, Zheng Xu, and Yanxiang Zhang. A hassle-free algorithm for private learning
  in practice: Don’t use tree aggregation, use blts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08868, 2024.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kumar Kshitij Patel, Lingxiao Wang, Blake E Woodworth, Brian Bullins, and Nati Srebro. Towards
  optimal communication complexity in distributed non-convex optimization. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:13316–13328, 2022.
Matthias Paulik, Matt Seigel, Henry Mason, Dominic Telaar, Joris Kluivers, Rogier van Dalen,
 Chi Wai Lau, Luke Carlson, Filip Granqvist, Chris Vandevelde, et al. Federated evalua-
 tion and tuning for on-device personalization: System design & applications. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2102.08503, 2021.
S Sundhar Ram, A Nedić, and Venugopal V Veeravalli. Asynchronous gossip algorithms for stochas-
  tic optimization. In Proceedings of the 48h IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) held
  jointly with 2009 28th Chinese Control Conference, pp. 3581–3586. IEEE, 2009.
Mónica Ribero, Haris Vikalo, and Gustavo De Veciana. Federated learning under intermittent client
 availability and time-varying communication constraints. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
 Signal Processing, 17(1):98–111, 2022.
Angelo Rodio, Francescomaria Faticanti, Othmane Marfoq, Giovanni Neglia, and Emilio Leonardi.
  Federated learning under heterogeneous and correlated client availability. In IEEE INFO-
  COM 2023 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, pp. 1–10, 2023. doi: 10.1109/
  INFOCOM53939.2023.10228876.
Zhenyu Sun and Ermin Wei. A communication-efficient algorithm with linear convergence for
  federated minimax learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:6060–6073,
  2022.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient meth-
  ods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 12, 1999.
John Tsitsiklis and Benjamin Van Roy. Analysis of temporal-diffference learning with function
  approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 9, 1996.
John N Tsitsiklis and Benjamin Van Roy. Average cost temporal-difference learning. Automatica,
  35(11):1799–1808, 1999.
Jianyu Wang and Gauri Joshi. Cooperative SGD: A unified framework for the design and analysis of
   communication-efficient SGD algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 2021.
   URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.07576.
Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H. Vincent Poor. Tackling the Objective
   Inconsistency Problem in Heterogeneous Federated Optimization. preprint, May 2020. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.07481.
Jianyu Wang, Zachary Charles, Zheng Xu, Gauri Joshi, H Brendan McMahan, Maruan Al-Shedivat,
   Galen Andrew, Salman Avestimehr, Katharine Daly, Deepesh Data, et al. A field guide to feder-
   ated optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06917, 2021.
Jianyu Wang, Rudrajit Das, Gauri Joshi, Satyen Kale, Zheng Xu, and Tong Zhang. On the
   unreasonable effectiveness of federated averaging with heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2206.04723, 2022.
Shiqiang Wang and Mingyue Ji. A unified analysis of federated learning with arbitrary client par-
  ticipation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Shiqiang Wang and Mingyue Ji. A lightweight method for tackling unknown participation probabil-
  ities in federated averaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03401, 2023.
Blake E Woodworth, Kumar Kshitij Patel, and Nati Srebro. Minibatch vs local sgd for heterogeneous
  distributed learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6281–6292, 2020.
Ming Xiang, Stratis Ioannidis, Edmund Yeh, Carlee Joe-Wong, and Lili Su. Efficient feder-
 ated learning against heterogeneous and non-stationary client unavailability. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2409.17446, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zheng Xu and Yanxiang Zhang. Advances in private training for production on-device language
  models. Goolge Research Blog, 2024.
Zheng Xu, Yanxiang Zhang, Galen Andrew, Christopher Choquette, Peter Kairouz, Brendan McMa-
  han, Jesse Rosenstock, and Yuanbo Zhang. Federated learning of gboard language models with
  differential privacy. ACL Industry, 2023.
Haibo Yang, Minghong Fang, and Jia Liu. Achieving linear speedup with partial worker participa-
  tion in non-iid federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11203, 2021.
Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Yongxin Tong. Federated machine learning: Concept
  and applications. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 10(2):1–19,
  2019.
Chen Zhu, Zheng Xu, Mingqing Chen, Jakub Konečnỳ, Andrew Hard, and Tom Goldstein. Diurnal
  or nocturnal? federated learning of multi-branch networks from periodically shifting distributions.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED WORK
Non-uniform & correlated client participation. There is a recent surge of efforts to investigate
FL with non-uniform client participation both from theoretical and empirical perspectives. Earlier
work presumes that clients are sampled by the server uniformly, which guarantees the global model
held by the server is an unbiased estimate as that in the full participation setting and hence allows
extension of convergence results for the full-participation setting to the partial-participation setting
(Jhunjhunwala et al., 2022; Karimireddy et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021; Bian et al., 2024). The
above-mentioned uniform participation is, however, far from the reality as clients may have their in-
trinsic sampling probabilities pi ’s that are non-uniform due to, for example, intermittent availability
resulting from practical constraints. Recent works analyzed the convergence behaviors of FL algo-
rithms when such pi ’s are known as a prior or controllable (Wang & Ji, 2022; Karimireddy et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2020; Fraboni et al., 2021). However, pointed out by (Bonawitz et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2021), client participation pattern can highly depend on the underlying system characteristics,
which is thus hard to know or control. As characterized by (Wang & Ji, 2022; Xiang et al., 2024),
such unknown and non-uniform participation statistics causes a bias in the model updates as more
frequently participating clients dominate the average update. In order to mitigate the effect of bias,
(Patel et al., 2022; Ribero et al., 2022; Wang & Ji, 2023) introduced reweighting mechanisms com-
bined with dynamically estimating client participation distributions. Such idea is also introduced
in asynchronous distributed learning literature (Ram et al., 2009). Most works aiming at analyzing
non-uniform participation, however, rely on the unrealistic assumption that every client participates
in the system independently, which fails to capture practical scenarios where each client’s partici-
pation is influenced by others across rounds(Kairouz et al., 2019; Eichner et al., 2019; Zhu et al.,
2021). One interesting time-correlated participation pattern is that clients have to wait for at least
R (called minimum separation) rounds between consecutive participation (McMahan & Thakurta,
2022; Xu et al., 2023). In particular, imposing a minimum separation constraint has been empiri-
cally shown to benefit privacy preservation in FL applications (Kairouz et al., 2021; Choquette-Choo
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Xu & Zhang, 2024). Instead, such time-correlated participation has not
been fully investigated theoretically. The only work that partially captures the above case is (Cho
et al., 2023) where the clients are forced to follow a cyclic participation, which is an extreme case of
very large R. Therefore, in this paper we study convergence performances of FL algorithms under
non-uniform and correlated client participation, which provides theoretical explanations for their
empirical counterparts in practice.

Stochastic optimization with Markov-sampling. Another line of related works is stochastic
gradient-based optimization under Markov-sampling. Unlike classical stochastic optimization lit-
erature where i.i.d. samples are drawn during the training process (Allen-Zhu & Hazan, 2016;
Allen-Zhu, 2017; Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014), many contexts, including TD-
learning and reinforcement learning (RL), require to optimize the objective function by utilizing
samples generated by a Markov chain (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996; 1999; Bhatnagar et al., 2007;
Sutton et al., 1999). Recently, the work (Even, 2023) provided convergence guarantees for SGD
under Markov-sampling when the objectives are convex, strongly convex and non-convex. Then
(Beznosikov et al., 2024) further proposed an accelerated method and generalized the analysis to
variational inequalities. Both of them restrict on the first-order Markov chains. It has been shown
by literature that gradient-based methods converge to the optimal solution of the objective induced
by the stationary distribution of the underlying Markov chain (Even, 2023; Beznosikov et al., 2024).
This indicates that the final solution is biased if the stationary distribution is non-uniform and ex-
isting literature cannot deal with such bias problem. In contrast, in this paper our analysis suits
for higher-order Markov chains and the proposed algorithm enables the convergence to an unbiased
solution without any information and constraint on the Markov chain and stationary distribution.

B    P RELIMINARIES OF M ARKOV CHAINS
In this section, we summarize several notions and properties of the conventional Markov chain (i.e.,
first-order Markov chain). We only focus on finite Markov chains, meaning the state space is finite.
Note that for a finite Markov chain, we can use its transition matrix to uniquely represent it.
Definition 2. Given a finite Markov chain with transition matrix P , we say it is irreducible if its
induced graph is strongly connected, i.e., every state can be reached from every other state.


                                                  15
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Note that [P k ]i,j is the probability transiting from state i to state j with exactly k steps, based on
 which we introduce the definition of aperiodic and periodic Markov chains.
 Definition 3. The period of state i is the greatest common divisor (g.c.d.) of the set {k ∈ N |
 [P k ]i,i > 0}. If every state has period 1 then the Markov chain is aperiodic, otherwise it is periodic.

 In order words, the period of state i can be achieved by calculating the g.c.d. of the number of steps
 starting from i and returning back. If the Markov chain is also irreducible, we have the following.
 Lemma 3. If the Markov chain is irreducible, every state has the same period.

 Next important result states the convergence of the Markov chain.
 Lemma 4. Suppose a finite Markov chain with transition matrix P is irreducible and aperiodic.
 Then, there exist some ρ ∈ (0, 1) and C > 0 such that
                                        max kP k (x, ·) − πkT V ≤ Cρk
                                            x

 where π is the unique, strictly positive stationary distribution; k · kT V denotes the total variation.

 Lemma 4 implies that starting from any initial distribution, the Markov chain converges to
 the stationary distribution at linear rate. Without confusion, we denote dT V (P k , 1π T ) =
 maxx kP k (x, ·) − πkT V . Note that dT V (P k , 1π T ) = 21 kP k − 1π T k∞ . Then, we define the
 mixing time of the chain.
 Definition 4. Given any   > 0, the mixing time tmix ( ) is defined as tmix ( ) := inf{l ≥ 1 |
 dT V (P l , 1π T ) ≤  }. Conventionally, we denote τmix = tmix (1/4).
 Lemma 5. We have the following statements:
(1). dT V (P t+1 , 1π T ) ≤ dT V (P t , 1π T ), ∀t ≥ 0.
(2). For k ≥ 2, tmix (2−k ) ≤ (k − 1)τmix .
(3). Moreover,
                                  T
                                  X
                                        dT V (P k , 1π T ) ≤ c0 τmix , ∀T ≥ 0
                                  k=0
 for some constant c0 > 0.

 Proof. The first two claims are shown in (Levin & Peres, 2017). To see the third claim, we note that
          T
          X                          ∞
                                     X
                       k     T
                dT V (P , 1π ) ≤           dT V (P k , 1π T )
          k=0                        k=0
                                                                            −(k+1)
                                     τX
                                      mix                       ∞ tmix (2
                                                                X       X            )
                                                    l     T
                                 ≤          dT V (P , 1π ) +                             dT V (P l , 1π T )
                                     l=0                        k=2 l=tmix (2−k )+1
                                                                ∞
                                                                X
                                 ≤ dT V (P, 1π T )τmix +            (tmix (2−(k+1) ) − tmix (2−k ))2−k
                                                                k=2
                                                                X∞
                                 ≤ dT V (P, 1π T )τmix +              k2−k τmix
                                                                k=2
                                                   T
                                 ≤ dT V (P, 1π )τmix + 2τmix
 which completes the proof with c0 = dT V (P, 1π T ) + 2.

 C     P ROOFS OF P ROPOSITION 1 AND L EMMA 1
 C.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

 Property (1) follows from equation 2, where by definition within R + 1 rounds, the clients cannot
 participate in the system twice or more. Property (2) follows from the fact that every client is


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sampled with probability proportional to its availability probability pi if it has waited for R rounds.
Property (3) then directly follows from the definition of the first-order Markov chain and Properties
(1), (2). Properties (4) and (5) are due to the observation that every row and column has exactly
σ(B(M − R), B) non-zero entries due to Property (3).

C.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

It is obvious that the Markov chain is irreducible in the sense that all ordered sequences (I1 , . . . , IR )
can be observed due to every client has strictly positive probability to be selected. To see that it is
aperiodic for R ≤ M − 2, we only need to show that starting from the state (I1 , . . . , IR ) where
Ik = ((k − 1)B + 1, . . . , kB), k = 1, . . . , R, both R + 1 steps and R + 2 steps can be possibly taken
such that the first return happens, which implies aperiodicity. This is because if a Markov chain is
irreducible, all the states have the same period by Lemma 3.
Then, we consider the following two constructed sequence.                                         Let h1        =
(I1 , . . . , IR , IR+1 , I1 , . . . , IR ) for state IR+1 = (RB + 1, . . . , (R + 1)B), where the length
of h1 is 2R + 1. Denote h1 [k] as the entry at the k-th position. We construct the sequence
{Yt , Yt+1 , . . . , Yt+R } as Yt+k−1 = (h1 [k mod (2R + 1)], . . . , h1 [(k + R − 1) mod (2R + 1)]), k =
1, . . . , 2R + 1, i.e., starting from (I1 , . . . , IR ) exactly R + 1 steps are taken to firstly return. Similar
to the definition of h1 , let h2 = (I1 , . . . , IR , IR+1 , IR+2 , I1 , . . . , IR ) with its length 2R + 2 and
state IR+2 = ((R + 1)B + 1, (R + 2)B). We then construct the sequence {Yt , . . . , Yt+R+1 } as
Yt+k−1 = (h2 [k mod (2R + 2)], . . . , h2 [(k + R − 1) mod (2R + 2)]), k = 1, . . . , 2R + 2, which
then suggests exactly R + 2 steps are required to return back to (I1 , . . . , IR ). Combining these two
cases leads to the Markov chain is aperiodic for any R ≤ M − 2.

D     P ROOFS OF P ROPOSITION 2 AND T HEOREM 2
D.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Let us first consider the case when B = 1 and given p1 > 0, pi = 1−p           N −1 , ∀i = 2, . . . , N . Then,
                                                                                   1


for any 0 < R ≤ N − 1 and any (j0 , . . . , jR−1 ), pick an arbitrary jR ∈ {j0 , . . . , jR−1 }c . By
denoting bR = b(PR [·, (j0 , . . . , jR−1 )]), bR+1 = b(PR+1 [·, (j0 , . . . , jR )]) (which are the column
sums for each column of PR and PR+1 , respectively) and letting SR := {j0 , . . . , jR−1 }, SR+1 :=
{j0 , . . . , jR } for notation simplicity. By observing that when πR is exactly the uniform distribution,
the sum of PR for each column is exactly one, we then tend to prove that the column sum of PR
asymptotically approaches one as R increases. We have four cases.
Case I: j0 = {1}. Then, for any 0 ≤ R ≤ N − 2, utilizing last two properties in Proposition 1,
                  X             X                     X           X
bR+1 − bR = p1          (p1 +        pi − pk )−1 − p1     (p1 +       pi − pk )−1
                       c
                    k∈SR+1            c
                                   i∈SR+1                          c
                                                                k∈SR           c
                                                                            i∈SR
                     X              1 − p1              −1             X             1 − p1             −1
             = p1            p1 +          (N − R − 2)     − p1               p1 +          (N − R − 1)
                       c
                                    N −1                                  c
                                                                                     N −1
                    k∈SR+1                                             k∈SR

                                          1 − p1             −1                   1 − p1              −1
             = p1 (N − R − 1) p1 +               (N − R − 2)    − p1 (N − R) p1 +        (N − R − 1)
                                          N −1                                    N −1
Let r = N − R − 1. We simply bR as
                                                                      (N −1)
                                p1 r           p1 (N − 1)   p1 1 − p11−p 1
                     bR =                    =            +
                          p1 + 1−p
                               N −1
                                   1
                                     (r − 1)     1 − p1     p1 + 1−p1
                                                                 N −1 (r − 1)
Then,
                                                                                        !
                         p1 (N − 1)                         1                   1
      bR+1 − bR = p1 1 −                                      −
                           1 − p1           p1 + 1−p
                                                 N −1 (r − 1)
                                                     1
                                                                 p1 + 1−p
                                                                       N −1 r
                                                                          1


                      p1 (1 − p1 )    p1 (N − 1)         1 − p1          −1      1 − p1  −1
                    =              1−              p1 +         (r − 1)     p1 +       r
                        N −1            1 − p1           N −1                    N −1


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which is strictly positive for p1 < 1/N for all 0 ≤ R ≤ N − 2.
                c
Case II: {1} ∈ SR+1 . Then, we obtain pj0 = 1−p 1
                                            N −1 and hence

                      1 − p1                                    1 − p1
     bR /pj0 = (pj0 +        (N − R − 1))−1 + (N − R − 1)(p1 +         (N − R − 1))−1
                      N −1                                      N −1
                   N −1                  1 − p1 −1
             =                  + r(p1 +       r)
               (1 − p1 )(r + 1)          N −1
                   N −1           N − 1 p1 (N − 1)      1
             =                  +        −
               (1 − p1 )(r + 1) 1 − p1       1 − p1 p1 + 1−p
                                                         N −1 r
                                                             1



where we let r = N − R − 1. Then, denoting p̄ = 1−p
                                                N −1 and α = p1 /p̄ yields
                                                    1



                                           1       1                p1
                     (bR+1 − bR )/pj0 =                 − 2
                                           p̄ r(r + 1) p̄ (r + α − 1)(r + α)
                                           (r + α)(r + α − 1) − αr(r + 1)
                                         =
                                              p̄r(r + 1)(r + α)(r + α − 1)
                                           (1 − α)r2 + (α − 1)r + α(α − 1)
                                         =
                                               p̄r(r + 1)(r + α)(r + α − 1)
                                                  (1 − α)(r2 − r − α)
                                         =                               .
                                           p̄r(r + 1)(r + α)(r + α − 1)
Note that when p1 < 1/N , α < 1, which indicates bR+1 − bR > 0, ∀0 ≤ R ≤ N − 3 by observing
r2 − r − α ≥ 0. Moreover, note that bR > 1, ∀R ≤ N − 2 in this case by
                                1       α       (1 − α)r
                        bR =       +1−     =                +1>1
                               r+1     r+α   (r + 1)(r + α)
for α < 1. And a straightforward calculation gives bN −2 < 32 , which then indicates |bR − 1| <
1
2 , ∀R ≤ N − 1.
                 c
Case III: {1} ∈ SR and {1} ∈  c
                           / SR+1 . In this case, pj0 = 1−p
                                                          N −1 = p̄. Then, a simple calculation
                                                             1


gives
                                              1 (α − 1)r
                         (bR+1 − bR )/pj0 =                     <0
                                              p̄ (r + 1)(r + α)
when p1 < 1/N .
                    c                                                 c      c
Case IV: {1} ∈   / SR  . Then, all the clients are available in both SR and SR+1 have availability
probability p̄. Then, it is obvious that bR = 1, ∀0 ≤ R ≤ N − 1.
For Cases I, III and IV, we conclude that when p1 < 1/N and pi = 1−pN −1 , i = 2, . . . , N , |bR+1 −1| <
                                                                        1


|bR − 1|, ∀0 ≤ R ≤ N − 2 by further noting that bN −1 = 1. By Case II, we then have all
|bR − 1| converges to [0, 0.5] as R increases. Observe bN −1 = 1 corresponds to the case that
ζN −1 is exactly the uniform distribution and so is πN −1 . This indicates that πR converges to some
neighborhood of the uniform distribution N1 1N . In order to characterize this neighborhood, we
turn to carefully analyze Case II, i.e., |bR − 1| < 0.5. Noting that Case II corresponds to at most
1 − R/N portion of columns in PR and so does πR , therefore the neighborhood is characterized by
{π | kπ − N1 1N k1 = O(1/N )}.
Next, in order to prove the statement, we perturb each pi = 1−p   N −1 , i = 2, . . . , N by some scalar
                                                                     1

              PN
 i such that i=2  i = 0. Note that bR+1 − bR is continuous in ( 2 , . . . ,  N ) and so is πR , which
then implies that there exists some positive ∆ > 0 such that bR+1 − bR preserves the original
properties as before the perturbation is added for all | i | ≤ ∆. Therefore, we achieve the statement
that πR converges to the neighborhood {π | kπ − N1 1N k1 = O(1/N )} when B = 1. Obtaining
the statement for B > 1 follows the same technique by noting that we can always calculate the
equivalent
Q           p̃i for each batch with size B. Specifically, given a batch of clients, say Bi , then p̃i =
   j∈Bi pj /C  with suitable normalization constant C and we can then obtain the convergence of πR
to a neighborhood of the uniform distribution by similar development.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

The proof of Proposition 2 is straightforward by observing that bR = 1, ∀R when pi = 1/N, ∀i ∈
[N ]. Then 1T PR = 1T , ∀R which indicates πR is always the uniform distribution.

E     I NTERMEDIATE L EMMAS
In this section, we present some useful intermediate results under the following generalized set-
                                                                             PN
ting: we consider a general global objective function defined as Fw (x) :=      i=1 wi fi (x) where
PN
       w
   i=1 i  =  1 and wi ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ [N ]. And we consider the following local update
                                    xit,k+1 = xit,k − αqti ∇fi (xit,k )                          (10)

where qti = w  i
             yti
                 for some positive sequence yti . Note that the above update equation 10 is a general-
ized version of equation 9 in Algorithm 1. Then we have the following useful lemmas when forcing
the update equation 10.
Lemma 6. Under Assumption 1, we have for any x
                               k∇Fw (x) − ∇F (x)k ≤ G
                               k∇fi (x) − ∇Fw (x)k ≤ 2G, ∀i ∈ [N ].

Proof. Note that Assumption 1 implies
                                                    N
                                                    X
                         k∇Fw (x) − ∇F (x)k = k            wi (∇fi (x) − ∇F (x))k
                                                     i=1
                                                   N
                                                   X
                                               ≤         wi k∇fi (x) − ∇F (x)k
                                                   i=1
                                                     N
                                                     X
                                               ≤G          wi = G.
                                                     i=1

Then, for any i ∈ [N ]
           k∇fi (x) − ∇Fw (x)k ≤ k∇fi (x) − ∇F (x)k + k∇Fw (x) − ∇F (x)k ≤ 2G.


Lemma 7. Given any t and i, we have kxit,k − xt k2 ≤ γ 2 L−2 k∇Fw (xt )k2 + 4γ 2 L−2 G2 , ∀k =
                          n             o
                            γ      γ
0, . . . , K, when α ≤ min 8KL , 8KLq t   and γ ≤ 1/3.
                                        i



Proof. During the t-th communication round, St and qti are fixed. Then, for any β > 0 and α ≤
      γ    γ
min{ βL , βLq i }, using Lemma 6 gives
             t


kxik+1 − xt k2 ≤ (1 + β −1 )kxik − xt k2 + (1 + β)(α)2 (qti )2 k∇fi (xik )k2
               ≤ (1 + β −1 )kxik − xt k2 + 3(1 + β)(α)2 (qti )2 k∇fi (xik ) − ∇fi (xt )k2
               + k∇fi (xt ) − ∇Fw (xt )k2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2


               ≤ (1 + β −1 )kxik − xt k2 + 3(1 + β)(αqtst )2 L2 kxik − xt k2 + 4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2


                                           3(1 + β)γ 2 2 i
               ≤ (1 + β −1 )kxik − xt k2 +              L kxk − xt k2 + 4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2

                                              β 2 L2
                                                                    3(1 + β)γ 2
                 = (1 + (1 + 3γ 2 )β −1 + 3γ 2 β −2 )kxik − xt k2 +             4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2

                                                                       β 2 L2
                         1 + 6γ 2                    3(1 + β)γ 2

                                    kxik − xt k2 +                4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2

                 ≤ exp                                    2 2
                            β                           β L

                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for any β ≥ 1. Unrolling the above gives for any k = 0, . . . , K − 1
                            K−1
                                       1 + 6γ 2     3(1 + β)γ 2 2
                             X
             kxik − xt k2 ≤                                        G + k∇Fw (xt )k2

                                 exp            k       2    2
                                           β           β L
                                  k=0
which further indicates by choosing γ ≤ 1/3
                                 K−1                   2
                                 X        −1 3(1 + β)γ
                  kxik − xt k2 ≤     e2kβ                4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2

                                                 2
                                                β L 2
                                        k=0
                                     1 − e2K/β 3(1 + β)γ 2
                                                             4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2

                                   =           ·
                                      1 − e2/β      β 2 L2
                                     (e2K/β − 1)3γ 2
                                                      4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2

                                   ≤
                                           L2
                                     γ2
                                   ≤ 2 4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2

                                     L
when choosing β = 8K.

                                                                                   Pt−1
Lemma 8. For any t ≥ τ , we have kxt − xt−τ k2 ≤ 4γ 2 L−2 τ 2 G2 + γ 2 L−2 τ         l=t−τ k∇Fw (xl )k
                                                                                                         2
                γ      γ
when α ≤ min{ 8KLq , 8KLq i } and γ ≤ 1/3.
                              t



Proof. Note that
                                                       1 X i
                           kxt+1 − xt k2 = k                     xt,K − xt k2
                                                      |St |
                                                            i∈St
                                                      1 X i
                                                   ≤           kxt,K − xt k2
                                                     |St |
                                                              i∈St
                                                         2
                                                       γ
                                                   ≤      (4G2 + k∇Fw (xt )k2 ).
                                                       L2
Then,
                                                   t−1
                                                   X
                     kxt − xt−τ k2 = k                   xl+1 − xl k2
                                                l=t−τ
                                                   t−1
                                                   X
                                           ≤τ            kxl+1 − xl k2
                                                l=t−τ
                                                                      t−1
                                               4γ 2 2 2 γ 2 X
                                           ≤       τ G + 2τ   k∇Fw (xl )k2 .
                                               L2       L
                                                                     l=t−τ


                                                            γ      γ                     1 1
Lemma 9. For any l ∈ [t−τ, t] with t ≥ τ ≥ 1 and α ≤ min{ 8KLq , 8KLq i } with γ ≤ min{ 2τ , 3 }
                                                                      t
we have
                   max Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 ≤ 4Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 16τ 2 γ 2 G2 .
                   t−τ ≤l≤t


Proof. For any t − τ ≤ l ≤ t, we have
        Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 ≤ 2Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 2Ek∇Fw (xl ) − ∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
                                        t−1
                                        X
                       ≤ 2τ γ 2               Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 + 8τ 2 γ 2 G2 + 2Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
                                    l=t−τ

                       ≤ 2τ 2 γ 2 max Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 + 8τ 2 γ 2 G2 + 2Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
                                        t−τ ≤l≤t
                         1
                       ≤     max Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 + 8τ 2 γ 2 G2 + 2Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
                         2 t−τ ≤l≤t


                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the second inequality follows Lemma 8 and we use γ ≤ 1/(2τ ) in the last inequality. Finally,
taking the maximum over l on the left-hand side completes the proof.
                               PN            PN
Lemma 10. Define Fw := i=1 wi fi for i=1 wi = 1, wi ≥ 0. Suppose Assumptions 1,2 hold.
                                              PN
Considering any sequence yti that satisfies i=1 yti = 1, yti ≥ a−1 > 0, ∀i ∈ [N ], t ≥ 0 and
                                                                                         γ
letting qti = w
              yi
                i
                  , ∀i ∈ [N ], then, given τ ≥ τmix log(1/δ) with 0 < δ < 1, for α ≤ 8āKL    with
                t
           1       L     1
γ ≤ min{ 384τ L , 384τ , 3 }, we have ∀T > τ ,

              T −1                                   T −1
          1 X                        32āL∆τ      8 X
                   Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 ≤                      E kq̃t k2∞ k∇Fw (xt−τ )k2

                                              +
        T − τ t=τ                    γ(T − τ ) T − τ t=τ
                                                                             γ2

                                                            2γ       3γ
                                     + 32āLG2 3γ + 6γτ 2 +     +        +
                                                            L       16L2   16aL
                                                        T −1
                                                32G2 X
                                            +             Ekq̃t k2∞ + 8c21 δ 2 G2
                                                T − τ t=τ

where ā = a maxi {wi }, q˜t = (q̃t1 , . . . , q̃tN ) with q̃ti = qti − w
                                                                        πi , and c1 is some constant. Moreover,
                                                                         i



                                                               γτ 2
                    ∆τ := E[Fw (xτ ) − min Fw (x)] ≤               G + E[Fw (x0 ) − Fw∗ ].
                                            x                 2āL

Proof. For notation simplicity, we drop subscript t for xit,k . Define qti = wi
                                                                             yi
                                                                                . Note that
                                                                                            t

                                                 K−1
                                                 X
                                    xiK = xt −          αqti ∇fi (xik )
                                                  k=0
                                                             K−1
                                              1 X X i
                                  xt+1 = xt −      αqt ∇fi (xik )
                                              B
                                                     i∈St k=0

where St denotes the subset of clients drawn in the t-th round. Due to the smoothness of every fi ,
we have
                                                                   L
            E[Fw (xt+1 ) − Fw (xt )] ≤ Eh∇Fw (xt ), xt+1 − xt i + Ekxt+1 − xt k2 .
                                                                   2
Considering t ≥ τ for any τ ≥ 0,
                                                                 K−1
                                                     1 X X i
    Eh∇Fw (xt ), xt+1 − xt i = −Eh∇Fw (xt ),              αqt ∇fi (xik )i
                                                     B
                                                          i∈St k=0
                                                                                      K−1
                                                                       1 X X i
                                 = Eh∇Fw (xt−τ ) − ∇Fw (xt ),                     αqt ∇fi (xik )i
                                                                       B
                                                                         i∈St k=0
                                    |                               {z                          }
                                                                        e1
                                                                         K−1
                                                             1 X X i
                                    + Eh−∇Fw (xt−τ ),                   αqt ∇fi (xt−τ )i
                                                             B
                                                               i∈St k=0
                                        |                       {z                     }
                                                                   e2
                                                                         K−1
                                                             1 X X i
                                    + Eh−∇Fw (xt−τ ),                   αqt (∇fi (xik ) − ∇fi (xt ))i
                                                             B
                                                               i∈St k=0
                                        |                            {z                             }
                                                                             e3
                                                                 K−1
                                                             1 X X
                                    + Eh−∇Fw (xt−τ ),                             αqti (∇fi (xt ) − ∇fi (xt−τ ))i .
                                                             B
                                                                 i∈St k=0
                                        |                                     {z                                }
                                                                              e4



                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We first note that according to the conditions on yti , wi ≤ qti ≤ awi with some positive constant
                                                                  γ            γ          γ
a < ∞ for every i ∈ [N ] and ∀t ≥ 0. Then by choosing α ≤ 8aKLw     m
                                                                       ≤ min{ 8KL , 8KL max     i }
                                                                                            i {qt }
with γ ≤ 1/3 and wm = maxi wi .
                                                                             K−1                    2
         1                            1  1 X X i
     e1 ≤ Ek∇Fw (xt ) − ∇F (xt−τ )k2 + E      αqt ∇fi (xik )
         2                            2  B
                                                                     i∈St k=0
                                                                                                    2
          L2                    1               X K−1
                                                  X
        ≤    Ekxt − xt−τ k2 + E                                αqti (∇fi (xik ) − ∇fi (xt ))
          2                     B
                                                i∈St k=0
                             K−1                      2
               1 X X i
          +E              αqt ∇fi (xt )
               B
                 i∈St k=0
                                   "                                      #
          L2                         1  X K−1
                                          X
        ≤    Ekxt − xt−τ k2 + KE             (α)2 L2 (qti )2 kxik − xt k2
           2                         B
                                                     i∈St k=0
                                                      2
               1      X K−1
                        X
            +E                      αqti ∇fi (xt )
               B
                      i∈St k=0
                   t−1
            τ γ2   X                                                  γ2                   γ 2 G2
        ≤                  Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 + 2τ 2 γ 2 G2 +                 2
                                                                           Ek∇Fw (xt )k2 +
              2                                                      64L                   16L2
                   l=t−τ
                                                2
                 γ2     1 X
            +       2
                      E     ∇fi (xt )
                64L     B
                              i∈St
                   t−1
            τ γ2                                                           3γ 2

                   X                                             1      1
        ≤                  Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 + 2τ 2 +                   +           Ek∇F (xt )k2
                                                                                         γ 2 G2 +
              2                                                16L2   8BL264L2
              l=t−τ

where we use Lemmas 7 and 8 in the fourth inequality; we use the fact Ek B1 i∈St ∇fi (xt )k2 ≤
                                                                              P

2Ek∇Fw (xt )k2 + 8G2 /B in the last inequality. Next we turn to bound e2 . Note that
                  "                                                  #
                                     1 X i
     e2 = −αKE E h∇Fw (xt−τ ),              qt ∇fi (xt−τ )i | Ft−τ
                                     B
                                                     i∈St
            αK                                1 X                                             αK
        =      Ek∇Fw (xt−τ ) − E(                          qti ∇fi (xt−τ ) | Ft−τ )k2 −          Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
             2                    B                                                            2
                                                i∈St
                αK           1 X
            −      EkE(                qti ∇fi (xt−τ ) | Ft−τ )k2
                 2      B
                                i∈St
          αK                    1 X i                          αK
        ≤    Ek∇Fw (xt−τ ) − E(    qt ∇fi (xt−τ ) | Ft−τ )k2 −    Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
           2                    B                               2
                                                i∈St
                               1 X i                          αK
        ≤ αKEk∇Fw (xt−τ ) − E(    q∗ ∇fi (xt−τ ) | Ft−τ )k2 −    Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
                               B                               2
                                                i∈St
                                                                 2
                           1 X i
            + αKE             (qt − q∗i )∇fi (xt−τ )
                           B
                             i∈St

where q∗i = w
            πi and Ft−τ is the filtration up to t−τ . Next, we provide the bound for Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )−
             i

   1
E( B i∈St q∗ ∇fi (xt−τ ) | Ft−τ )k2 . Since we are focusing on the case for a particular R, without
             i
     P
causing confusion, we drop R for notation simplicity in the following analysis.
Denoting ψS := limt→∞ P (St = S), we have
                                    P                                        P
                                         i                Ŝi ψŜi             Ŝi ψŜi
                                        π = PN P                         =
                                                                                 B
                                                     i=1      Ŝi ψŜi


                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Ŝi denotes any set with size B containing i. Then, for any vectors {vi }N
                                                                               i=1 , we have

                                                  N X                    N
                              X X ψS              X   ψŜ        i
                                                                         X
                                            v =
                                           i i
                                                                  v =B
                                                                 i i
                                                                               vi .
                                       π          i=1 Ŝi
                                                             π           i=1
                             S∈S i∈S


where S is the collection of all sets with size B. Thus, by letting vi = wi ∇fi (xt−τ ) in the above,
we obtain

                                    1 X i
                 Ek∇Fw (xt−τ ) − E(        q∗ ∇fi (xt−τ )|Ft−τ )k2
                                    B
                                      i∈St
                                     1 XX
                  = Ek∇Fw (xt−τ ) −            P (St = S|Ft−τ )q∗i ∇fi (xt−τ )k2
                                    B
                                             S∈S i∈S
                                                                                      2
                     1 XX
                  =E      (P (St = S|Ft−τ ) − ψS ) q∗i ∇fi (xt−τ )
                     B
                             S∈S i∈S


by noting q∗i = wi /π i . Moreover, P (St = ·) can be uniquely induced by φR (t) defined by equa-
                                                                            = · | Ft−τ ) = P (St =
tion 6 under proper linear transformations, which also indicates that P (St q
· | St−τ ). Thus, Lemma 4 implies |P (St = S | Ft−τ ) − ψS | ≤ c1 δπmin /                  B for some c > 0,
                                                                                          CN           1

                                   B       N
∀S when τ ≥ τmix log(1/δ) with CN =             . Then,
                                           B

                                                                               2
                                      1 X i
                   E ∇Fw (xt−τ ) − E(    q∗ ∇fi (xt−τ )|Ft−τ )
                                      B
                                                 i∈St
                                                                                          2
                           1 XX
                    =E                 (P (St = S|Ft−τ ) − ψS ) q∗i ∇fi (xt−τ )
                           B
                              S∈S i∈S
                                                                                 
                                                                                2
                       1     X      X
                    ≤ E                (P (St = S|Ft−τ ) − φS )q∗i ∇fi (xt−τ ) 
                      B
                              i∈S S∈S
                                    "                           #
                                      1  X                    2
                    ≤ c21 πmin
                           2
                               δ2 E           q∗i ∇fi (xt−τ )
                                      B
                                           i∈S

                    ≤ c21 δ 2 (Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 4G2 )

where we use the fact that

                              k∇fi (xt−τ )k2 ≤ 2k∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 8G2 .

Utilizing the following

        1 X i                                1 X i
   Ek          (qt − q∗i )∇fi (xt−τ )k2 = Ek        q̃t (∇fi (xt−τ ) − ∇F (xt−τ ) + ∇F (xt−τ ))k2
        B                                    B
          i∈St                                 i∈St

                                        ≤ 8G Ekq̃t k2∞ + 2E kq̃t k2∞ k∇F (xt−τ )k2
                                             2



where we denote q̃ti = qti − q∗i . Then we bound e2 as

       αK
          (2c21 δ 2 − 1)Ek∇F (xt−τ )k2 + 2αKG2 (δ 2 + 4Ekq̃t k2∞ ) + 2αKE kq̃t k2∞ k∇F (xt−τ )k2 .

e2 ≤
        2

                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                γ      γ
In order to bound e3 , note that according to Lemma 7 for α ≤ 8KLa ≤ 8KLq i
                                                                            t


                "       K−1
                                                                    #
                 1 X X i
        e3 ≤ E              αqt k∇F (xt−τ )k ∇fi (xik ) − ∇fi (xt )
                 B
                   i∈St k=0
               "        K−1                                               #
                 1 X X (αqti )2 K                    2    L2 i         2
           ≤E                         k∇Fw (xt−τ )k +        kx − xt k
                 B                2                       2K k
                   i∈St k=0
               "        K−1                                                      #
                 1 X X           γ2                  2    γ2              2   2
           ≤E                         k∇Fw (xt−τ )k +        (k∇Fw (xt )k + 4G )
                 B            128L2 K                     2K
                    i∈St k=0

               γ2                  2   γ2
           ≤       Ek∇F w (x t−τ )k  +    Ek∇Fw (xt )k2 + 2γ 2 G2 .
             128L2                     2


Finally, based on Lemma 8, similarly we obtain



                    "        K−1
                                                                           #
                      1 X X i
             e4 ≤ E              αqt k∇F (xt−τ )kk∇fi (xt ) − ∇fi (xt−τ )k
                      B
                        i∈St k=0
                    "        K−1                                                #
                      1 X X (αqti )2 K                        L2
                ≤E                         k∇F (xt−τ )k2 +       kxt − xt−τ k2
                      B                2                     2K
                            i∈St k=0
                        2                              t−1
                    γ                    γ4τ X
                ≤     2
                        Ek∇F (xt−τ )k2 +    (  Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 + 4τ G2 ).
                  128L                    2
                                                      l=t−τ


Thus, denoting ā = a maxi {wi }


                                                                         t−1
       γ                                                  τ γ 2 (1 + γ 2 ) X
           Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 ≤ E[Fw (xt ) − Fw (xt+1 )] +                         Ek∇Fw (xl )k2
     16āL                                                        2
                                                                          l=t−τ
                                 2
                                        γ2      3γ 2

                                 γ                                            γ 2
                             +      +       +       2
                                                        Ek∇Fw (xt )k2 +         G Ekq̃t k2∞
                                  2     2L 64L                               aL
                                γ                                   γc2 δ 2
                                    E kq̃t k2∞ k∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 1 G2

                             +
                               4āL                                    4āL
                                2 2            2       2 2      2       3
                             + γ G 2 + 2τ + 2γ τ + +
                                                                L 16L2
                                 2
                                           γ2

                                 γδ
                             +         +          Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
                                 8āL 64L2


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which implies that
                                                                                        t−1
                                                                  16āLτ γ 2 (1 + γ 2 ) X
 γEk∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 ≤ 16āLE[Fw (xt ) − Fw (xt+1 )] +                                       Ek∇Fw (xl )k2
                                                                           2
                                                                                       l=t−τ

                                                 3āγ
                         + γ 16āLγ + 8āγ +            Ek∇Fw (xt )k2 + 4γc21 δ 2 G2
                                                  4L
                         + 4γE kq̃t k2∞ k∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 16γG2 Ekq̃t k2∞


                                  2 2           2       2 2   2        3
                         + 16āLγ G 2 + 2τ + 2γ τ + +
                                                              L 16L2
                                        āγ
                         + γ 2c21 δ 2 +       Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
                                        4L
                                                                                  3āγ
                       ≤ 16āLE[Fw (xt ) − Fw (xt+1 )] + γ 16āLγ + 8āγ +               Ek∇Fw (xt )k2
                                                                                  4L
                                        āγ
                         + γ 2c21 δ 2 +     + 32āLτ γ(1 + γ 2 ) Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2
                                        4L
                         + 4γE kq̃t k2∞ k∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 16γG2 Ekq̃t k2∞ + 4γc21 δ 2 G2


                                                                                   2      3
                         + 16āLγ 2 G2 2 + 2τ 2 + 2γ 2 τ 2 + 8τ 4 γ 2 (1 + γ 2 ) + +
                                                                                   L 16L2
where we make use of
                        t−1
                        X
                               Ek∇Fw (xl )k2 ≤ 4τ Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 16τ 3 γ 2 G2
                       l=t−τ

by Lemma 9. Under the following conditions
                                       1 āγ      1            1   1
                              2c21 δ 2 ≤,      ≤    , γ ≤ min{ ,       },
                                       6 4L      36           2τ 384ā
                                           1
                              64āLτ γ ≤     ,
                                          12
                                                          āγ
which implies 32aLτ γ(1 + γ 2 ) ≤ 16 and hence 2c21 δ 2 + 4L  + 32āLτ γ(1 + γ 2 ) ≤ 12 , then we obtain

                 2                                                              3āγ
γEk∇Fw (xt−τ )k ≤ 32āLE[Fw (xt ) − Fw (xt+1 )] + 2γ 16āLγ + 8āγ +                     Ek∇Fw (xt )k2
                                                                                 4L
                     + 8γE kq̃t k2∞ k∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 32γG2 Ekq̃t k2∞ + 8γc21 δ 2 G2


                                2 2          2        2 2       4 2       2      2        3
                     + 32āLγ G 2 + 2τ + 2γ τ + 8τ γ (1 + γ ) + +                               .
                                                                                L 16L2
Summing over τ ≤ t ≤ T − 1 gives
    T −1                                                     T −1
    X                                                  3āγ X
γ       Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 ≤ 32āL∆τ + 2γ 16āLγ + 8āγ +            Ek∇Fw (xt )k2
    t=τ
                                                       4L    t=τ
                                       T
                                       X −1                                     T
                                                                                X −1
                                              E kq̃t k2∞ k∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 32γG2      Ekq̃t k2∞

                                + 8γ
                                       t=τ                                             t=τ

                                                                2   3
                                + 32āLγ 2 G2         3 + 6τ 2 + +              (T − τ ) + 8γc21 δ 2 G2 (T − τ ).
                                                                L 16L2
where ∆τ = E[Fw (xτ ) − F ∗ ] and we use γ 2 τ 2 ≤ 1/4. Again leveraging Lemma 9, we observe
                T
                X −1                            T
                                                X −1
                       Ek∇Fw (xt )k2 ≤ 4               Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 + 16τ 2 γ 2 G2 (T − τ )
                t=τ                             t=τ



                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which thus renders
          T −1                                   T −1
      1 X                        32āL∆τ      8 X
               Ek∇Fw (xt−τ )k2 ≤                      E kq̃t k2∞ k∇Fw (xt−τ )k2

                                            +
    T − τ t=τ                    γ(T − τ ) T − τ t=τ
                                                                         γ2

                                          2         2   2γ       3γ
                                 + 32āLG 3γ + 6γτ +        +        +          + 8c21 δ 2 G2
                                                        L       16L2   16aL
                                             T −1
                                       32G2 X
                                   +             Ekq̃t k2∞
                                       T − τ t=τ

by noting that 16āLγ + 8aγ + 3āγ  1
                              4L ≤ 16 .
In the following, we turn to bound ∆τ . Noting that
                                             K−1                      K−1                              2
                                         1 X X                 α2 L X X
 Fw (xt+1 ) − Fw (xt ) ≤ −αKh∇Fw (xt ),          ∇fi (xik )i +            ∇fi (xik )
                                        BK                     2B 2
                                                    i∈St k=0                          i∈St k=0
                                                                             2
                           αK     1    X K−1
                                         X                                           αK
                       ≤                          (∇fi (xik ) − ∇Fw (xt ))       −      k∇Fw (xt )k2
                            2    BK                                                   2
                                       i∈St k=0
         γ     1
by α ≤ 8aLK ≤ 2LK . Moreover, since
                     K−1                             2                 K
            1 X X                                             2 XX 2 i
                  (∇fi (xik ) − ∇Fw (xt ))               ≤        (L kxk − xt k2 + 4G2 )
           BK                                                BK
                i∈St k=0                                          i∈St k=0

                                                         ≤ 2γ k∇Fw (xt )k2 + 8G2
                                                              2

we conclude that
                                        αK                                    γ
            Fw (xt+1 ) − Fw (xt ) ≤ −      (1 − 2γ 2 )k∇Fw (xt )k2 + 4αKG2 ≤      G2
                                         2                                   2āL
which implies
                                                          γτ 2
                        ∆τ = E[Fw (xτ ) − F ∗ ] ≤             G + Fw (x0 ) − Fw∗ .
                                                         2āL



F     C ONVERGENCE ANALYSIS OF F EDAVG UNDER CORRELATED CLIENT
      PARTICIPATION

In this section, we provide the convergence analysis of Vanilla FedAvg for correlated client partici-
pation. We first show FedAvg suffers from unavoidable bias (stated in Theorem 1), summarized by
the following proposition.
Proposition 3. There exists a problem case such that FedAvg converges with unavoidable asymptotic
bias.

Proof. We consider a problem case with N = 3, B = 1, R = 1. We set p1 = 0.25, p2 = 0.25, p3 =
0.5 and fi (x) = 21 (x − i)2 , i = 1, 2, 3 and x ∈ R. In this case, we have the Markov chain induced
by the problem denoted by P ∈ R3×3 . Letting π ∈ R3 be the stationary distribution of P , a
straightforward calculation gives π1 = π2 = 0.3, π3 = 0.4. Then we obtain the server’s update of
FedAvg given by
                                         xt+1 = βxt + (1 − β)it
                     K
where β = (1 − α) < 1 with α being the stepsize of local updates; it is the index of the sampled
client at round t which is a random variable. Taking the expectation on both sides yields
                     E[xt+1 ] = βE[xt ] + (1 − β)µT P t I
                             = βE[xt ] + (1 − β)(µT P t − π T )I + (1 − β)π T I


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where µ = (p1 , p2 , p3 ), and I = (1, 2, 3) is the vector formed by clients’ indices. Noting that the
third term vanishes as t → ∞ due to the convergence the Markov chain (shown by Lemma 4), we
                                  P3                                                 P3
conclude that limt→∞ E[xt ] = i=1 πi i which is the minimizer of Fπ (x) := i=1 πi fi (x) but
               P3
not F (x) = 31 i=1 fi (x). And |F 0 (π T I)| = |I T (π − 13 13 )|. Therefore, the bias in Theorem 1 is
unavoidable.

Then we show the convergence result of FedAvg.
Theorem 4. Suppose Assumptions 1,2 hold and assume k∇F (x)k ≤ D, ∀x. Then, by choosing
       γ
α = O( K ) and T ≥ 2τmix log τmix , the output x̃T generated by FedAvg satisfies
                                          τmix log T G2

                            ∆0
       Ek∇F (x̃T )k2 = O                                           2
                                                                       log2 T + γ 2 )G2

                                   +O                      + O (γτmix
                            γT                   T

                                 2      2         1    2
                        + O (G + D )kπ − 1N k1
                                                 N
where ∆0 := E[F (x0 ) − minx F (x)] and τmix is the mixing time.

Proof. For FedAvg, we have yti = 1/N . Utilizing Lemma 10 and setting wi = N1 , it yields
        T −τ
          X−1                                 T −1                    T −1
  1                         2  32L∆0     8D2 X            2     36G2 X                   16τ G2
                Ek∇F (xt )k ≤          +           Ekq̃t k∞ +              Ekq̃t k2∞ +
T −τ     t=0
                              γ(T − τ ) T − τ t=τ               T − τ t=τ                T −τ
                                                                     γ2

                                                    2γ       3γ
                              + 32LG2 3γ + 6γτ 2 +      +       2
                                                                  +        + 8c21 δ 2 G2 .
                                                    L       16L     16L
                             −2
Then noting that kq̃t k2∞ ≤ πmin kπ − N1 1N k21 , we conclude
                                    2
              2         ∆0           τG               2    2  2
                                                                            2   2        1      2
Ek∇F (x̃T )k = O             +O            + O (γτ + γ )G + O (G + D )kπ − 1N k1
                        γT            T                                                  N
                    √
by setting δ = 1/ T . For the above to be true, we need T ≥ τ = τmix log T , which is actually
                                                                                2
always satisfied for T ≥ 2τmix log τmix . To√ see this, we observe that if T ≤ τmix , τmix log T ≤
                          2
2τmix log τmix ; if T ≥ τmix , τmix log T ≤ T log T ≤ T . This completes the proof.

The following corollary restates the convergence result of Theorem 1.
                                                                                     √
Corollary 1. Suppose all conditions in Theorem 4 hold. Then, choosing α = Õ(1/(Kτmix T )),
the output x̃T of FedAvg satisfies

                              2        τmix             2     2       1   2
                 Ek∇F (x̃T )k ≤ Õ √          + O (D + G ) πR − 1N 1 .
                                         T                            N
                                                                    √
Proof. The proof is straightforward by simply plugging in γ = O(1/(τ T )) and τ = τmix log T
to Theorem 4.

G    C ONVERGENCE ANALYSIS OF A LGORITHM 1
We first provide the following theorem showing that yti serves as a reasonable estimation of π i .
Theorem 5. For any real-valued function f ∈ RN and any initial distribution µ ∈ RN , we have
the following:
                  T −1                       T −1
                                      !
               1 X                T       1 X T † t                T
          Eµ           f (Xt ) − πR f =           µ Qµ (PR − 1ζR     )QR f
               T t=0                      T t=0
                T −1
                                     !2
              1 X                T
     T EπR           f (Xt ) − πR  f    ≤ f T ΠR (I − 1N πR T
                                                              )f + c0 πmax kf k2∞ N τmix
              T t=0
                T −1
                                     !2               T −1
                                                                          !2
              1 X                T                  1 X                T
       T Eµ          f (Xt ) − πR f     ≤ T EπR            f (Xt ) − πR f    + 3c0 N 2 kgk2∞ τmix
              T t=0                                T t=0


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Eµ (·) means the initial state X0 follows µ; ΠR = diag(πR [i]) and Q†µ is defined such that
µT Q†µ = ζµ and ζµT QR = µ; g = f − πR   T
                                           f 1N ; τmix is the mixing time of PR .

Proof. We firstly show the first equality. Note that
                          T −1                         T −1
                                              !
                        1 X                T         1 X T k             T
                  Eµ           f (Xt ) − πR  f =           (µ PR QR f − ζR QR f )
                       T t=0                        T
                                                             k=0
                                                             T −1
                                                         1   X
                                                     =              µT (PRk − 1ζR
                                                                                T
                                                                                  )QR f
                                                         T
                                                             k=0

where we observe that µT 1 = 1.
Then we turn to show the second inequality. By the definition, we have
                 T −1
                                     !2                               T −1
            1 X              T                                      2 X
  T EπR           f (Xt ) − πR f          = VarπR (f (X0 )) +             (T − k)CovπR (f (X0 ), f (Xk )).
            T t=0                                                   T
                                                                      k=1
                                                                                                        (11)
For any k, let ζk and πk be the distributions after the Markov chain evolves k steps. Then, we have
  T
ζk+1    = ζkT PR and πkT = ζkT QR . Defining Q̂k ∈ RN ×d(M,R) as an inverse mapping from πk to
ζk , i.e., ζkT = πkT Q̂k , it is straightforward to verify that we can always pick a nonnegative Q̂k such
that Q̂k 1 = 1N in the sense that the freedom of Q̂k is (N − 1) × d(M, R) − N when forcing both
ζkT = πkT Q̂k and Q̂k 1 = 1N to hold. Moreover,
                                       X               X                         X
       CovπR (f (X0 ), f (Xk )) =          πR [i]f (i)  [Q̂k PRk QR ]i,j f (j) −   πR [i]πR [j]f (i)f (j)
                                      i             j                              i,j
                                      T
                                  = f ΠR Q̂k PRk QR f − f T ΠR 1N πR
                                                                   T
                                                                     f
                                     T          k      T
                                  = f ΠR Q̂k (PR − 1ζR )QR f

where we utilize Q̂k 1 = 1N . Further, kQ̂k k∞ = 1, ∀k ≥ 0 since Q̂k is nonnegative. Then,

                        CovπR (f (X0 ), f (Xk )) ≤ πmax kf k2∞ kQR k∞ kPRk − 1ζR
                                                                               T
                                                                                 k∞ .
Substituting it into equation 11 yields
                 T −1
                                     !2                             ∞
           1 X              T
                                                                    X
  T EπR          f (Xt ) − πR f           ≤ VarπR (f (X0 )) + 2           CovπR (f (X0 ), f (Xk ))
           T t=0
                                                                    k=1
                                                                                          T
                                                                                          X
                                          ≤ VarπR (f (X0 )) + 2πmax kf k2∞ kQR k∞               kPRk − 1ζR
                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                           k∞
                                                                                          k=0
                                          ≤ f T ΠR (I − 1N πR
                                                            T
                                                              )f + c0 πmax kf k2∞ kQR k∞ τmix
where we make use of Lemma 5. Finally noting that kQR k∞ ≤ kQR,1 k∞ kQR,2 k∞ ≤ N completes
the proof of the second inequality.
                                                         T
To obtain the third inequality, defining g(i) = f (i) − πR f we aim to bound

            T −1
                       !2                   T −1
                                                       !2
          1 X                             1 X
T Eµ             g(Xk ) − EπR                    g(Xk )
          T                               T
            k=0                             k=0
          T −1                                      T −1 T −1
     1    X
                        2             2     2 X X
   ≤             Eµ g (Xk ) − EπR g (Xk ) +       Eµ (g(Xk )g(Xl )) − EπR (g(Xk )g(Xl )) .
     T                                      T
          k=0                                       k=0 l=k+1



                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For notation simplicity, we drop the subscript R without confusion to get
                   Eµ (g(Xk )g(Xl )) − EπR (g(Xk )g(Xl ))
                       X                                      X
                  =           µi g(j)((Q̂k P k Q)i,j − πj )    ((Q̂l P l−k Q)j,r − πr )g(r)
                        i,j                                      r

                       X                                         X
                  =           µi g(j)(Q̂k (P k − 1ζ T )Q)i,j             (Q̂l (P l−k − 1ζ T )Q)j,r g(r)
                        i,j                                          r

                  ≤ kgk2∞ N 2 kP l − 1ζ T k∞ .
Thus, by Lemma 5,
                                     T −1
                                                !2                     T −1
                                                                                  !2
                                   1 X                               1 X
                      T Eµ                g(Xk ) − EπR                      g(Xk )
                                   T                                 T
                                      k=0                                  k=0
                                   T −1                                                      T −1
                               1 X T † k                2             X
                          ≤       µ Qµ (P − 1ζ T )Qg 2 + c0 N 2 kgk2∞   τmix
                               T                        T
                                   k=0                                                       k=0
                                   T −1
                               1   X
                          ≤               µT Q†µ (P k − 1ζ T )Qg 2 + 2c0 N 2 kgk2∞ τmix
                               T
                                   k=0
                            1
                          ≤ c0 kgk2∞ N τmix + 2c0 N 2 kgk2∞ τmix
                            T
                          ≤ 3c0 N 2 kgk2∞ τmix
where g 2 denotes the elementwise square of g. Combining all the above completes the proof.

Then, the following corollary induced by Theorem 5 is exactly Lemma 2.
Corollary 2. Given initial λ0 = 0N and let νti = λi1N as in Algorithm 1, we have
                                                  t
                                                     τ
                                                       mix
                                    Ekν̃t k2∞ ≤ O
                                                       t
where ν̃ti = νti − πi1N and ν̃t = (ν̃t1 , . . . , ν̃tN ).

Proof. By Theorem 5, setting f = ei for any i, we have
                                                     2
                                    i       2        N τmix
                                E(λt − πi ) = O                                                                      (12)
                                                       t
Note that
                                                      2          "                   2             #
                                          λit − πi                       λit − πi

                              1                             1
               E(ν̃ti )2 =       E                        = 2E                           λit ≥ a       P (λit ≥ a)
                              N2            λit πi         N               λit πi
                                                                 "                   2         #
                                                            1            λit − πi
                                                          + 2E                           λit < a       P (λit < a)   (13)
                                                           N               λit πi

for any positive a. Moreover, due to the Markov chain in Section 3 is irreducible by Lemma 1, every
client will be visited infinitely as t goes to infinite, which then implies there always exists some
strictly positive constant a0 independent of t such that λit ≥ a0 > 0 almost surely for any i ∈ [N ].
Combining equation 12,equation 13 we conclude
                                                        τ
                                                          mix
                                        Ekν̃ti k2∞ = O          .
                                                          t



                                                            29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.1   C ONVERGENCE PROOF OF A LGORITHM 1

The following lemma is useful to derive the convergence proof of Algorithm 1.
Lemma 11. Supposing that the stochastic scalar sequence E[U1 (t)2 ] ≤ u(t) with u being a mono-
tonically decreasing positive function w.r.t. t and assuming that U1 (t) ≤ ū < ∞ almost surely, then
given any δ,   > 0, for all t ≥ inf{t0 | u(t0 )/δ 2 ≤  /ū2 } and stochastic scalar sequence U2 (t),
                                 E U1 (t)2 U2 (t) ≤ (  + δ 2 )E[U2 (t)].



Proof. For any δ > 0, we have for all t ≥ inf{t0 | u(t0 )/δ 2 ≤  /ū2 }
E[U1 (t)2 U2 (t)] = P (U1 (t) > δ)E[U1 (t)2 U2 (t) | U1 (t) > δ] + P (U1 (t) ≤ δ)E[U1 (t)2 U2 (t) | U1 (t) ≤ δ]
                 ≤ P (U1 (t) > δ)ū2 E[U2 (t)] + δ 2 E[U2 (t)]
                 ≤ (  + δ 2 )E[U2 (t)]
where we use the Markov inequality in the last step, i.e.,
                                                                     u(t)
                             P (U1 (t) > δ) ≤ P (U1 (t)2 > δ 2 ) ≤        .
                                                                      δ2



Then we are ready to provide the proof for Theorem 3.


Proof of Theorem 3: As discussed in the proof of Corollary 2, we know that there exists a positive
                                                                                       −1
a−1 which lower bounds each λit for all t almost surely, implying that ν̃ti ≤ N1 (a + πmin ). Then for
             0            0
any t > τ > c τmix (with c being some constant), we have
                                                     1
                          E kν̃t k2∞ k∇F (xt−τ )k2 ≤    Ek∇F (xt−τ )k2

                                                     16
by Lemmas 2 and 11. Further Utilizing Lemma 10 with setting wi = N1 , we obtain
             T −1                                         T −1
        1 X                    2    64āL∆0        64G2 X                  32τ G2
                  Ek∇F (xt−τ )k ≤               +              Ekν̃t k2∞ +        + 16c21 δ 2 G2
      T − τ t=τ                     γ(T − τ ) T − τ t=τ                     T −τ
                                                                                  γ2

                                                                 2γ       3γ
                                   + 64āLG2 3γ + 6γτ 2 +             +       +
                                                                 L       16L2   16aL
                                                                                           √
for τ ≥ τmix max{c0 , log(1/δ)}. Similar to the proofs of Theorem 4, setting δ = 1/ T , with
T ≥ c† τmix log τmix for some constant c† , we finally conclude that

                                                    τmix            1
                            Ek∇F (x̃T )k2 = Õ √            +O
                                                       T           T
                            √
by choosing γ = O(1/(τ T )) with τ = Ω(τmix log T ) and by leveraging the fact that
PT −1         2
   t=τ Ekν̃t k∞ = O(τmix log T ) implied by Lemma 2. This completes the proof.


H     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we compare Vanilla FedAvg, Debiasing FedAvg (ours) and FedVARP under the
CIFAR10 dataset given the same participation pattern as in Section 6. Each client maintains a CNN
with three convolution layers. Learning rates for three algorithms are selected to be with the order of
O(10−3 ). In Figure 4, Debiasing FedAvg achieves the highest training accuracy due to its debiasing
nature as shown in Theorem 3, while Vanilla FedAvg and FedVARP suffer from bias. Moreover,
in Table 1, the training and test accuracies for different R are presented, where one can see that
Debiasing FedAvg achieves the best performance.


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) FedAvg, FedVARP, Debias-    (b) FedAvg, FedVARP, Debias-      (c) FedAvg, FedVARP, Debias-
    ing FedAvg when R = 5 (CI-      ing FedAvg when R = 10 (CI-       ing FedAvg when R = 15 (CI-
    FAR10)                          FAR10)                            FAR10)

Figure 4: Experiments on CIFAR10. The training accuracies of Vanilla FedAvg, Debiasing FedAvg
(ours) and FedVARP are compared given different values of R. The results show that Debiasing
FedAvg achieves the highest accuracy and outperforms the other two, since FedAvg and FedVARP
suffer from bias.

                              R=5                       R = 10                     R = 15
      Algorithms
                      Train acc Test acc        Train acc Test acc         Train acc Test acc
      FedAvg          74.9%     67.6%           75.3%       68.8%          75.6%       70.1%
      FedVARP         76.7%     68.0%           77.5%       69.4%          79.5%       72.5%
      Debiasing       79.3%     73.8%           81.5%       74.9%          82.9%       74.1%
      FedAvg

                  Table 1: Training and test accuracies for different R under CIFAR10


I     T HE INFLUENCE OF R ON CONVERGENCE RATES
In this section, we discuss the effect of different values of R on the convergence rates of Debiasing
FedAvg and Vanilla FedAvg as observed empirically in Figure 3. We simulate the ”effective” client
sampling distribution (i.e., ηR (t)) as time evolves for different minimum separation R, where we set
N = 100, B = 1. The code for all experiments can be found through https://github.com/
Starrskyy/debias_fl. Figure 5 shows the total variation distance of the evolution of client
sampling distributions to their corresponding stationary πR ’s. Clearly increasing R, the convergence
rate of ”effective” client sampling distribution to the stationary distribution also increases, implying
the decrease of mixing time τmix (see Appendix B for details). Combining this observation together
with Theorems 1 and 3 leads to that larger R implies faster convergence rate, which then consistently
explains the observation in Figure 3. However, the above explanation is only from an empirical
perspective. More rigorous explanations need theoretical advance in the convergence results to
reveal explicitly the relation between the rates and values of R.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      100
                                                                                                            R=0
                                                                                                            R=20
                                                                                                            R=50
                                                     10−1                                                   R=88
                    gap to stationary distribution


                                                     10−2


                                                     10−3


                                                     10−4
                                                            0   2000        4000          6000       8000   10000
                                                                    Steps of e olution of Marko chain

 Figure 5: Convergence of client sampling distribution to πR for different R (N = 100, B = 1).


                                                                                 32
