Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ATTRI B OT: A B AG OF T RICKS FOR E FFICIENTLY
A PPROXIMATING L EAVE -O NE -O UT C ONTEXT
ATTRIBUTION
 Fengyuan Liu ∗, Nikhil Kandpal, Colin Raffel
 University of Toronto, Vector Institute
 Toronto, Ontario, Canada
 fy.liu@mail.utoronto.ca



                                            A BSTRACT

           The influence of contextual input on the behavior of large language models
           (LLMs) has prompted the development of context attribution methods that aim to
           quantify each context span’s effect on an LLM’s generations. The leave-one-out
           (LOO) error, which measures the change in the likelihood of the LLM’s response
           when a given span of the context is removed, provides a principled way to per-
           form context attribution, but can be prohibitively expensive to compute for large
           models. In this work, we introduce AttriBoT, a series of novel techniques for
           efficiently computing an approximation of the LOO error for context attribution.
           Specifically, AttriBoT uses cached activations to avoid redundant operations, per-
           forms hierarchical attribution to reduce computation, and emulates the behavior
           of large target models with smaller proxy models. Taken together, AttriBoT can
           provide a >300× speedup while remaining more faithful to a target model’s LOO
           error than prior context attribution methods. This stark increase in performance
           makes computing context attributions for a given response 30× faster than gener-
           ating the response itself, empowering real-world applications that require comput-
           ing attributions at scale. We release a user-friendly and efficient implementation
           of AttriBoT to enable efficient LLM interpretability as well as encourage future
           development of efficient context attribution methods 1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION

The use of large language models (LLMs) has proliferated in recent years including the integration of
OpenAI’s GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024) and Google’s Gemini (Team, 2024) into Apple and Android-based
products with billions of users. As LLMs become more widely used, their influence on information
access, decision-making, and social interactions will grow, as will with the consequences of incorrect
or problematic outputs. The risks and impact of this widespread adoption spur the need for a deeper
understanding of how and why LLMs generate their outputs. Indeed, a great deal of recent work on
LLM interpretability aims to uncover and elucidate their inner workings, including determining the
influence of pre-training data (Koh & Liang, 2020; Grosse et al., 2023; Kandpal et al., 2023) and
mechanistically understanding their underlying architecture (Cammarata et al., 2020).
A common usage pattern for LLMs involves providing relevant contextual information alongside a
query. For example, in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2021), documents from
an external datastore that are relevant to a given query are retrieved and are provided as part of the
LLM’s input. This allows LLMs to process data or make decisions based on information that is
not available in their pre-training dataset, which has proven critical to making LLMs applicable to a
wide range of use cases. While inspecting the documents retrieved by a RAG system can provide a
form of interpretability, LLMs generally provide no direct insight into which part of the augmented
context influenced the model’s generation. To address this shortcoming, context attribution methods
    ∗
        Work done at Vector Institute
    1
        https://github.com/r-three/AttriBoT


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Proxy Correlation with Llama 70B                                   Paragraph Attribution vs. Sum of Sentence Attributions                           Outlier Recall Achieved by Proxy Model Pruning
                                     1.0     0.944           0.923                                                140                                                                        1.0
                                                                             0.882



Pearson Correlation with Llama 70B
                                                                                                                  120
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.9


                                                                                      Paragraph LOO Attribution
                                     0.8
                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.8


                                                                                                                                                                            Outlier Recall
                                     0.6                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.7
                                                                                                                   60
                                     0.4                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                   40

                                                                                                                                              Pearson Correlation = 0.971                    0.5                                    Llama 8B Proxy
                                     0.2                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama 3B Proxy
                                                                                                                    0                                                                        0.4                                    Llama 1B Proxy
                                     0.0
                                           Llama 8B        Llama 3B        Llama 1B                                     0    20    40    60     80    100   120    140                             0      10     20       30      40     50      60
                                                                                                                              Sum of Sentence LOO Attributions                                                  Number of Sources Kept


Figure 1: We empirically test the assumptions underlying the AttriBoT’s underlying methods on ex-
amples from Hotpot QA. Left: The attribution scores of small proxy models ranging from 1B to 8B
parameters have high correlation with the attribution scores of a 70B-parameter target model, imply-
ing that the attributions from smaller models can be a reliable proxy for those from a target model.
Middle: Paragraph-level attribution scores correlate extremely well (R = 0.97) with the sum of the
sentence-level attribution scores in a given paragraph, suggesting that hierarchical attribution can
provide an effective means of pruning a large amount of irrelevant context. Right: Proxy models
can effectively prune contexts of unnecessary sources, achieving recall of 90% when keeping only
half of the sources in a context.


(Cohen-Wang et al., 2024; Yin & Neubig, 2022; Gao et al., 2023b) aim to quantify the influence of
each span of text in an LLM’s context on its generated output.
A natural approach for context attribution is to remove a span of text from the context and measure
the ensuing change in the likelihood of the model’s original response. This notion of importance,
known as the Leave-One-Out (LOO) error, is a common idea used in training data attribution (Koh
& Liang, 2020), data valuation (Choe et al., 2024), feature attribution (Li et al., 2017), and recently
for context attribution (Cohen-Wang et al., 2024). While the LOO error produces meaningful and
interpretable context attribution scores, it is often viewed as impractical due to the need to perform
an independent forward pass to score each text span in the context. This is particularly problematic
for modern LLMs whose forward passes are computationally expensive and realistic use cases often
involve long contexts with many text spans (e.g., sentences or paragraphs) to score.
In this work, we aim to show that LOO context attributions can be efficiently approximated at LLM
scale. To do so, we leverage the following observations:

1. Approximately half of the FLOPs needed to naı̈vely compute LOO attributions are redundant and
   can be avoided by caching the attention key and value tensors at each layer (Pope et al., 2022).
2. The sum of the LOO attributions for k contiguous text spans (e.g., sentences in a paragraph or
   paragraphs in a section) are well-approximated by a single Leave-k-Out attribution score (Fig-
   ure 1, middle).
3. The LOO attribution scores for a large model (e.g., 70B parameters) are well-approximated by
   smaller models (e.g., 8B parameters) in the same model family (Figure 1, left and right).

These findings naturally lend themselves to efficient key-value caching schemes, novel hierarchical
approaches that prune low-information context chunks before performing attribution, and methods
that leverage small proxy LMs to approximate the LOO attributions of a larger target model. We
develop and explore the practical application of these schemes to develop an aggregate system called
AttriBoT (a Bag of Tricks for efficient context attribution). When evaluating AttriBoT in the open-
book question answering setting, where a model is presented a question with one or more related
documents provided in its context, we find that our methods significantly reduce the cost of comput-
ing LOO attributions – at times by >300× – while remaining more faithful to the original model’s
LOO error than a wide range of baselines. In addition, the cascade of approaches underlying Attri-
BoT can be naturally composed to attain a Pareto-optimal trade-off between efficiency and accuracy
over efficiencies ranging multiple orders of magnitude.
In the following section, we formalize the problem of context attribution, define the LOO error in
detail, and discuss the metrics we use to evaluate a given approximate attribution method’s faithful-
ness. Then, in Section 3, we detail our novel techniques for efficiently approximating LOO error,


                                                                                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ultimately producing AttriBoT. Experimental results across multiple model families and datasets are
provided in Section 4.1, with related work in Section 5 and a conclusion in section 6.

2     P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
In this section, we introduce the problem of context attribution (Section 2.1), define the simple and
principled Leave-One-Out (LOO) error method for context attribution (Section 2.2), and define how
we evaluate approximate LOO attribution methods (Section 2.3).

Notation Suppose that an autoregressive Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2023) language model (e.g.
Llama (Dubey et al., 2024), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024), etc.) generates a response R conditioned on a
query Q and a context C. For the purposes of this paper, we view a language model with parameters
θ as a function pθ (R|Q, C) that returns the probability of generating a response given a particular
query and context. Furthermore, we assume the context can be partitioned into a sequence of sources
with a partitioning function Π(C) = [si ]Ni=1 , where each source si is a contiguous chunk of text in
the context, like a sentence, paragraph, or document. For notational convenience, we define |C| to
be the number of sources in Π(C).

2.1   C ONTEXT ATTRIBUTION

A large body of work on feature attribution has studied the relationship between a model’s predic-
tions and input features (Li et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2021). More recently, the problem of context
attribution, coined by Cohen-Wang et al. (2024), has been introduced as a special case of feature at-
tribution, where a response generated by an LLM is attributed back to parts of the LLM’s contextual
information.
Formally, we follow Cohen-Wang et al. (2024) and define a context attribution method as a function
τ (θ, R, s1 , ..., s|C| ) ∈ R|C| that maps a language model’s parameters θ, response R, and sources
si ∈ Π(C) to a vector of real-valued scores indicating each source’s importance to the model’s
response. While Cohen-Wang et al. (2024) leave the dependence of τ on θ and R implicit, we make
this dependence explicit because we will later explore algorithms where multiple models are used
and may be fed other models’ responses.

2.2   L EAVE -O NE -O UT ATTRIBUTION

There are many notions of what makes a source important that each lead to different choices of τ .
Perhaps the simplest and most interpretable notion of importance is that important sources lead to
large changes in the likelihood of the model’s response when they are removed from the original
context. This quantity, often referred to as the Leave-One-Out (LOO) error, leads to the following
choice of context attribution function, which we refer to as the “LOO attribution” in the remainder
of the paper:
               τLOO (θ, R, s1 , ..., s|C| )i = log pθ (R|Q, C) − log pθ (R|Q, C \ {si })          (1)
In practice, LOO attributions can be impractical to compute for particularly large language models
since scoring all |C| sources in the context requires |C| + 1 forward passes of the language model –
one pass to compute the likelihood of the response given the full context and |C| passes to compute
the likelihood with each of the |C| sources individually removed from the context. In realistic
settings where models are provided with a large amount of contextual information (i.e. |C| is very
large), computing LOO attributions for all sources in a context can be orders of magnitude more
expensive than generating the response itself. Thus, the remainder of this paper explores a variety
of methods for efficiently approximating τLOO .

2.3   E VALUATING A PPROXIMATE L EAVE -O NE -O UT ATTRIBUTIONS

Much past work on intrepretability and attribution measures performance in terms of how well a
given method matches human annotations of source importance. Our focus is instead on efficiently
approximating the attributions of a “target” LLM whose LOO attributions are prohibitively expen-
sive to compute. We therefore introduce a straightforward evaluation procedure for measuring effi-


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Method         Method Parameters         Theoretical FLOPs                     Speedup over LOO
    LOO            N/A                       2P T |C|(|C| − 1)                               1
    KV Caching     N/A                       P T |C|(|C| − 1)                                2
                     ′                          ′                                            P
    Proxy          P : Proxy model size      2P T |C|(|C| − 1)                               P′
                     ′
                   P : Proxy model size                         ′              ′          P (|C|−1)
    Pruning                                  2P T |C|((α2 + PP )|C| − α − PP )     (α2 P +P ′ )|C|−αP −P ′
                   α : Fraction of sources
                   H : Sources per group                                                 H(|C|−1)
    Hierarchical                             2P T |C|((β 2 + H
                                                             1
                                                               )|C| − β − 1)
                   β : Fraction of groups                                          (β 2 H+1)|C|−βH−H



Table 1: The theoretical number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) needed by different methods
to compute LOO attributions expressed in terms of P , the number of target model parameters, T ,
the number of tokens per source, and C, the number of context sources.


ciency and determining how faithful an approximate method’s attributions are to those produced by
the original target model.

Approximation Error Past work has found that for many real-world tasks like summarization and
question answering, attributions tend to be sparse, meaning that only a small number of sources in
the context significantly influence a model’s response (Liu et al., 2024; Kuratov et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2018). Thus, when evaluating how well an algorithm approximates LOO attributions, we are
primarily interested in how well the algorithm recovers these few highly contributive sources.
To evaluate approximate LOO attribution methods we first compute the LOO attributions of the tar-
get model and identify the most contributive sources. We consider a source to be highly contributive
if it has an outlyingly large score. To find outlier scores, we apply the Generalized Extreme Studen-
tized Deviate (ESD) test (Rosner, 1983), a statistical test that returns the outlier values in a collection
of data (for more details, see Appendix B.2). We denote the number of detected outlier sources for
a given example as nout .
We then test the extent to which approximate LOO attribution methods recover these nout out-
lier sources using evaluation metrics from information retrieval. In particular, we rank the sources
according to their approximate LOO attribution scores and measure the mean Average Precision
(mAP) over examples in a dataset (Manning et al., 2008).

Efficiency For each approximate LOO algorithm, we report its practical and theoretical efficiency.
To measure practical efficiency, we report the average GPU-seconds needed to compute attribution
scores for all sources in a context. For theoretical efficiency, we estimate the number of floating-
point operations (FLOPs) needed to compute attributions as a function of the number of model
parameters P , the number of sources in the context |C|, the number of tokens in each source T ,
and any other method-specific parameters. To estimate FLOPs, we use the simplifying assumptions
from Kaplan et al. (2020) and Hoffmann et al. (2022), i.e. that performing a forward pass for a
P -parameter language model on T tokens requires approximately 2P T FLOPs.

3     ACCELERATING L EAVE -O NE -O UT ATTRIBUTION WITH ATTRI B OT
In this section, we describe the Bag of Tricks that AttriBoT uses to efficiently compute approx-
imate LOO attributions. For each method, we provide intuition for why it serves as an effective
approximation to the LOO error as well as discussion on its theoretical speedup over standard LOO
attribution using the target model. Full details on the efficiency gains for each method can be found
in Table 1 with derivations available in Appendix A.

3.1   K EY-VALUE C ACHING

For a context containing |C| sources, computing τLOO requires |C| + 1 forward passes (including
the first forward pass to generate the response). However, much of this computation is redundant
when the underlying language model is an autoregressive Transformer. At each self-attention layer


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in an autoregressive Transformer, the key and value tensors for a given position in the sequence are
only a function of previous tokens due to autoregressivity or causal masking (Vaswani et al., 2023).
Thus, if two inputs share a prefix, the key and value tensors at each position in the prefix will be
identical. This redundant computation can be avoided by caching the key and value tensors at each
layer and reusing the cached values for inputs that have a previously computed prefix (Pope et al.,
2022).
Specifically, when computing LOO attributions, the keys and values can be cached for the full se-
quence of tokens while computing pθ (R|Q, C). Then, for each subsequent forward pass computing
pθ (R|Q, C \ {si }), the cached keys and values for Q and the first i − 1 sources in C can be reused.
In aggregate over all sources, this avoids computation for a total of (|C| − 1)/2 sources, ultimately
saving approximately half of the FLOPs used to compute τLOO . Notably, ignoring differences due
to numerical error of floating point operations, we should expect KV caching to be lossless – i.e.,
LOO attributions should be the same regardless of whether KV caching is used.

3.2   H IERARCHICAL ATTRIBUTION

In many settings, we expect that the context has a hierarchical nature – for example, the context
might comprise a sequence of paragraphs that can each be broken down into a sequence of sentences.
This structure can be leveraged to efficiently identify sources that are likely to have high LOO
attributions, allowing us to avoid computing τLOO for every source in the context.
Imagine we want to compute LOO attributions at the sentence level. The key assumption underlying
our hierarchical attribution algorithm is that the sum of the LOO attributions for k sentences in
a paragraph can be closely approximated by a single Leave-k-out attribution score computed by
removing the paragraph as a whole. In cases where this holds, paragraphs whose removal incurs a
large drop in the response’s likelihood are also likely to contain highly contributive sentences.
Specifically, to perform hierarchical attribution we assume the context can be partitioned into a
sequence of “source groups” (e.g., paragraphs) Πg (C) = [Gi ]M         i=1 and each of these groups can
be further decomposed into its constituent sources (e.g., sentences) Πs (Gi ) = [sj ]M   j=1 , where Mi
                                                                                           i

is the number of sentences in group Gi . We first compute the LOO error for each source group,
τLOO (θ, R, Gi , . . . , GM ), and keep only a fraction, β, of the groups with the highest scores. From
these high-attribution groups, we construct a shortened context Ĉ comprising only the retained
groups and compute τLOO (θ, R, s1 , . . . , s|Ĉ| ) for the sources si ∈ Πs (Ĉ).
For example, when processing a document with 10 paragraphs and using β = 0.2, we would first
compute the LOO error corresponding to the removal each of the paragraphs and retain the two
paragraphs with the highest LOO score. Finally, to compute attributions for the sentences in these
two paragraphs, we concatenate the paragraphs into a truncated context and compute the LOO error
incurred by removing each sentence from the truncated context.
This hierarchical approach achieves a speedup over LOO by (1) first doing fewer forward passes
over the full context when computing attributions at the source group level and (2) doing fewer for-
ward passes on a shortened context after the low-attribution source groups are removed. With the
simplifying assumption that each source group contains H sources, if we keep only a constant num-
ber source groups irrespective of the total number of sources (i.e. β ∼ 1/|C|), then this method’s
speedup over LOO is approximately H for long contexts.

3.3   P ROXY M ODELING

The high cost of computing the LOO error stems from having to compute |C| forward passes through
a large and computationally expensive language model. The cost of each of these forward passes
is naturally cheaper for smaller models. If a smaller “proxy” model’s attributions are faithful to
a larger target model whose attributions we hope to obtain, this raises the possibility of reducing
the cost of computing LOO attributions by using the proxy model instead. In particular, we might
hope that a smaller model from the same model family (i.e. sharing a model architecture, training
dataset, and training objective but differing in its parameter count) produces similar attributions to
a target model. Specifically, we take the response R generated by the target model, and use the
approximation τLOO (θproxy , R, s1 , . . . , s|C| ) ≈ τLOO (θ, R, s1 , . . . , s|C| ). The proxy model does


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


not need to produce the response, but rather emulate the conditional likelihood of the target model’s
response given a context. In practice, as further discussed in section 4.2.1, we find that when using
the target model’s response to compute attribution scores, the LOO errors from a target model are
highly correlated with those from a small proxy model from the target model.

3.4     P ROXY M ODEL P RUNING

While small proxy models can approximate the context attributions of larger target models rea-
sonably well, one way to improve the fidelity of this approximation is to use the proxy model
to prune away low-attribution sources and then re-score the remaining sources with the target
model. Specifically, we take the response generated by the target model, use it to compute
τLOO (θproxy , R, s1 , . . . , s|C| ), and keep only a fraction, α, of the highest scoring sources. Then
we reconstitute the context keeping only these top sources and recompute their LOO attributions
using the target model.
Compared to simply using a proxy model, this method is more expensive since it requires forward
passes of the target model for each of the non-pruned spans. However, this extra compute is spent
improving the approximation error for the high-attribution sources whose LOO attributions are most
important to recover accurately. If the number of sources kept after pruning is constant (i.e. α ∼
1/|C|), then this method provides a speedup of roughly P/P ′ for long contexts, the same speedup
achieved by proxy modeling alone.

3.5     C OMPOSING M ETHODS IN THE ATTRI B OT BAG OF T RICKS

The methods described above improve the efficiency of computing LOO attributions by avoiding
redundant calculations during forward passes, reducing the size of the model used to perform the
forward passes, and/or reducing the total number of forward passes. As different methods target
different factors that make exact LOO computation expensive, these methods can often be com-
posed together to achieve even greater efficiency. Concretely, in addition to the individual methods
described previously, we test the following composite methods in our experiments: KV Caching +
Hierarchical Attribution, KV Caching + Proxy Modeling, KV Caching + Proxy Model Pruning, and
KV Caching + Proxy Modeling + Hierarchical Attribution.


4     E XPERIMENTS

To validate AttriBoT, we compare its efficiency and faithfulness to a range of baseline context at-
tribution methods. Our focus is on confirming that our approximations provide a Pareto-optimal
trade-off between speed and faithfulness to the target model.

4.1     S ETUP

In this section, we describe the models, datasets, and baseline methods used to evaluate AttriBoT,
as well as the computational resources used to run our experiments.

4.1.1    M ODELS

To ensure that AttriBoT is valuable in state-of-the-art settings, we focus on recent performant open
LLMs. We therefore experiment with two target models whose LOO context attributions we aim to
efficiently approximate: the 70B-parameter instruction-tuned LLM from the Llama 3.1 model family
(Dubey et al., 2024) and the 72B-parameter instruction-tuned LLM from the Qwen 2.5 model family
(Yang et al., 2024). As proxy models, we use smaller instruction-tuned models from each of these
model families. For Llama 70B, this includes the 8B-parameter model from the Llama 3.1 family
and the 1B and 3B-parameter models from the Llama 3.2 family. For Qwen 72B, we use the 0.5B,
1.5B, 3B, 7B, and 32B-parameter models from the Qwen 2.5 model family as proxies. Each model
within a given family shares an architecture, pre-training objective, and pre-training dataset. We
report results for the Llama models in the main text and replicate select experiments with the Qwen
models in Appendix C.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1.2   DATASETS

There are a number of applications of context attribution that range from verifying faithfulness of
model summaries to detecting malicious prompts. In this study, we focus on the well-studied and
widespread setting of open-book question answering (OBQA), which involves prompting a model
to answer a question that is supported by a provided context. Since many tasks can be formulated
as answering a question about contextual information (McCann et al., 2018), we expect results
on OBQA to be a reliable indicator of performance in other settings. Given that each method’s
efficiency depends on the context length, we consider datasets covering a range of context lengths.
To this end, we focus on three open-book QA datasets:

1. SQuAD 2.0 (Rajpurkar et al., 2018): A reading comprehension benchmark where a model is
   presented a question along with a Wikipedia article containing the answer. For this dataset, we
   consider sources to be individual sentences in the context and source groups for hierarchical
   attribution to be paragraphs.
2. HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018): A multi-hop question answering benchmark that requires reason-
   ing across paragraphs from multiple Wikipedia pages, as well as ignoring distractor paragraphs,
   in order to answer a question. For this dataset, we consider sources to be individual sentences in
   the context and source groups for hierarchical methods to be paragraphs.
3. QASPER (Dasigi et al., 2021): A document-grounded, information-seeking question answering
   dataset where each context is a natural language processing paper. Answering questions in the
   QASPER dataset requires complex reasoning about claims made in multiple parts of a paper. For
   this dataset, we consider sources to be paragraphs and source groups for hierarchical methods to
   be sections of the paper provided in the context.

For more details on these datasets, see Appendix B.1.

4.1.3   BASELINES

We compare AttriBoT’s performance to a diverse set of context attribution methods:

1. Attention Weights: The self-attention operation in the Transformer architecture provides an im-
   plicit way of determining which input entries are influential (Jain & Wallace, 2019; Wiegreffe &
   Pinter, 2019). Concretely, we compute the total attention weight for each source by summing the
   attention weights of a source’s tokens across all attention heads and layers.
2. Gradient Norm: The gradient of the model’s response likelihood with respect to its input provides
   a first-order approximation of the model’s sensitivity input perturbations, and thus is a useful in-
   terpretation technique (Yin & Neubig, 2022; Mohebbi et al., 2021). Specifically, we calculate the
   Frobenius norm of the gradient of the response’s likelihood with respect to the token embeddings
   of each source.
3. Sentence embedding similarity: As a simple model-agnostic baseline, we compute the similar-
   ity between sentence embeddings for the generated response and each one of the sources. We
   generate sentence embeddings using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 SentenceBERT model (Reimers &
   Gurevych, 2019) and compute similarity via cosine similarity.
4. ContextCite: This method estimates the importance of each context source by training a linear
   surrogate model to estimate the likelihood of a response given a set of context sources. The
   trained linear model’s weights for each source in the context act as an attribution score (Cohen-
   Wang et al., 2024). More background on ContextCite is provided in in Appendix B.3.

For more details on baseline methods, see Appendix B.3.

4.1.4   C OMPUTATIONAL R ESOURCES

All experiments were run on servers with 4 NVIDIA A100 SXM4 GPUs with 80GB of VRAM. For
experiments involving models with fewer than 15 billion parameters, we use only a single GPU. For
models with more parameters, we use model parallelism across multiple GPUs.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                             Exact LOO
                                                 SQuAD                                      Hotpot QA                               QASPER
                         1.0                                                                                                                                 AttriBoT

Mean Average Precision
                                                                                                                                                             Pareto Front
                         0.9                                                                                                                                 KV
                                                                                                                                                             HR + KV
                         0.8                                                                                                                                 Prune + KV
                                                                                                                                                             Proxy + KV
                         0.7                                                                                                                                 HR + Proxy + KV

                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                             Baselines
                                                                                                                                                             Sentence Similarity
                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                             Gradient Norm
                                     −2                  −1              0        −2                −1                0        −2            −1          0
                                10                  10              10       10                10                10       10            10          10       Attention Weights
                                          Examples per GPU-second                      Examples per GPU-second            Examples per GPU-second            ContextCite


Figure 2: We plot the mean average precision compared to attributions of the target model against
the GPU time for AttriBoT and a variety of baselines using Llama 3.1 70B Instruct as the target
model and smaller Llama instruct variants as proxy models. Across all three datasets, AttriBoT is
consistently Pareto-optimal over multiple orders of magnitude.


4.2                            R ESULTS

We now provide empirical results that motivate the approximations made in AttriBoT and demon-
strate its effectiveness in the OBQA setting.

4.2.1                           VALIDATING ATTRI B OT’ S A PPROXIMATIONS
Hierarchical Attribution The assumption underlying our hierarchical attribution method is that
the sum of the LOO scores for k sources in a source group (e.g., sentences in a paragraph) can be
estimated by computing the Leave-k-Out attribution of the source group as a whole. We empirically
test this assumption for Llama 70B by comparing LOO attributions for all paragraphs in HotpotQA
with the sum each paragraph’s sentence-level LOO attributions. Figure 1 (Middle) shows that the
these two quantities have a very high Pearson correlation (R = 0.97), meaning that the removal of
low-attribution source groups in our proposed hierarchical attribution method is likely to keep most
high-attribution sources.

Proxy Modeling Proxy modeling assumes that two models from the same model family will have
similar LOO attributions. Thus, if the target model is large, its LOO attributions for a particular
response can be efficiently approximated by attributing the same response with a smaller proxy
model. We test this claim by measuring the correlation between the HotpotQA sentence-level at-
tribution scores from Llama 70B and smaller proxy models from the Llama model family, ranging
from 1B to 8B parameters. We find that LOO attributions from each of the proxy models are very
well correlated with the Llama 70B’s LOO attributions. Shown in Figure 1 (Left) the Pearson corre-
lation is as high as 0.94 for the largest proxy model with 8B parameters and only decreases to 0.88
for the smallest 1B-parameter proxy model.

Proxy Model Pruning Like proxy modeling, proxy model pruning assumes that small models
can capably approximating a large model’s attributions. However, pruning additionally requires the
proxy model to rank outlier sources as one of the top-α|C| sources. In practice we find this to be the
case. Figure 1 (Right) plots the outlier recall of different proxy models as a function of the number
of sources kept when pruning a context. In practice, we find that Llama 8B achieves 85% recall of
sources with outlier Llama 70B attributions while only keeping the top-10 spans.

4.2.2                           ATTRI B OT’ S PARETO -O PTIMALITY
Our main results, comparing AttriBoT to the baselines listed in Section 4.1.3 on the datasets de-
scribed in Section 4.1.2 for the Llama model family, are provided in Figure 2. We find that the tech-
niques composed in AttriBoT produce a Pareto-optimal method across many orders of magnitude
of costs on all three of our evaluation datasets. Compared to ContextCite, the only other method we
are aware of that computes attributions via repeated forward passes on modified contexts, AttriBoT
can provide attributions that are equally faithful to a target model’s LOO attributions with orders
of magnitude lower cost. Compared to cheaper attribution baselines (sentence similarity, gradient
norm, and attention weights), AttriBoT remains Pareto-optimal and can even be more efficient than


                                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


using sentence embeddings (which are produced by a small model and do not require any forward
passes of a target or proxy model). These results hold true across all datasets, demonstrating that
AttriBoT scales well to datasets of varying context length.

KV Caching We find that, in practice, KV caching offers about a 1.6× speedup over computing
exact LOO attributions while, as expected, nearly perfectly recovering outlier sources (see Figure 3.
While in theory computing attributions with and without KV caching should be identical, in prac-
tice we observe a small difference in the attribution values due to accumulated numerical error of
floating-point operations.

Proxy Modeling Shown in Figure 3, proxy modeling can be an effective approach for greatly
speeding up LOO computation. We find that as the size of the proxy model decreases, its faithfulness
to the exact LOO attributions also decreases. However, the faithfulness of attributions from smaller
models still remains better than many baselines that use orders of magnitude more compute.

Hierarchical Attribution In Figure 4, we show the accuracy vs. efficiency trade-off of hierar-
chical attribution. We find that modulating the fraction of source groups retained, β, is an effective
method for trading off accuracy for efficiency. Additionally, we find that using the target model
yields the most accurate attributions, while substituting the target model for a smaller proxy model
achieves greater efficiency.

Proxy Model Pruning Like hierarchical attribution, we show in Figure 5 that modulating the frac-
tion of sources to retain, α, and the proxy model size effectively trades off accuracy for efficiency.

4.2.3   ATTRI B OT’ S I MPACT ON M ATCHING H UMAN A NNOTATIONS

Our main focus has been on efficiently approximating the attributions of a target model. However,
it can also be valuable to measure how closely an attribution method matches human-annotated
“important” spans. Such annotations are available for the HotpotQA dataset, so we additionally
evaluated the impact of using AttriBoT on agreement with human annotations. Full results are
in Appendix C.4; as a short summary, we find that the methods introduced in AttriBoT actually
remain more faithful to the human-annotated attributions than they do to those of the target model.
Concretely, we observe that AttriBoT can achieve a 300× speed up with only 10% drop in mAP.


5   R ELATED W ORK

Generating Citations Computing LOO context attributions involves repeated inference of the
target model. In contrast, past work has explored whether it is possible to train LLMs to directly
provide citations to sources or spans from their context (Weller et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2023b).
Some approaches leverage pipelines for retrieving external facts to ground and verify a generated
response while providing explicit attribution (Asai et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024b; Sun et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2024; Huo et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023a). Other models are explicitly
trained to produce citations, including GopherCite (Menick et al., 2022), which generates quotes
from supporting documents after generating a response; LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022), which
provides URLs from the information retrieval system used; and WebGPT (Nakano et al., 2022),
which provides extracted context from the source webpages. Such citation generation methods only
provide insight how each statement is possibly supported by the corresponding source instead of
measuring how each source contributes to a response via a causal intervention like source removal.
Therefore, while useful for providing evidence for supporting or verifying an LLM’s response, these
methods cannot necessarily provide insight into why an LLM produced a particular output.
While one goal of this line of work is to improve the factuality and reduce hallucinations of LLMs,
whether such citations can themselves be considered trustworthy is unclear (Peskoff & Stewart,
2023; Zuccon et al., 2023; Gravel et al., 2023). In fact, previous work has explored generative
search engines like Bing Chat, NeevaAI, perplexity.ai, and YouChat that provide inline citations,
and find that they frequently contain unsupported statements and inaccurate citations (Liu et al.,
2023).


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Feature Attribution-Based Explanations The field of neural network interpretability has put
forth a huge number of techniques that aim to measure the importance or relevance of each input
feature on a model’s prediction. Perturbation-based techniques including leave-one-out and masking
have been applied on features like words and phrases (Li et al., 2016), input word-vector dimensions,
intermediate hidden units (Li et al., 2017), and token spans (Wu et al., 2021). The gradient of a
model’s output with respect to an input feature indicates the sensitivity of output to input changes
and has therefore been used to compute attribution scores (Yin & Neubig, 2022; Mohebbi et al.,
2021; Sanyal & Ren, 2021; Sikdar et al., 2021; Enguehard, 2023). We adapted this simple gradient-
based attribution approach as one of our baselines. Since attention computes an adaptively weighted
average of activations, attention weights can be seen as capturing the correlation between inputs.
Attention weights have therefore also been a popular tool to identify important information to the
model (Pruthi et al., 2020a; Serrano & Smith, 2019; Wiegreffe & Pinter, 2019) and we therefore use
attention weight as one of our baselines. Local interpretable surrogate models are also developed to
interpret model outputs (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017).

Attributing Predictions to Training Data Apart from attributing an LLM’s predictions to input
features that correspond to elements in its context, it can be of practical interest to uncover the
training data that influenced a particular prediction. Such is the goal of influence functions (Koh &
Liang, 2020), which estimate the impact of removing a particular training example by computing the
alignment of gradients through a bilinear form with the inverse Hessian. The high cost of computing
and inverting the Hessian, as well as the cost of computing gradients for every in example within
a potentially gargantuan training dataset, has led to a great deal of work on computing influence
functions more efficiently, particularly for LLMs (Grosse et al., 2023; Choe et al., 2024; Pruthi
et al., 2020b). Apart from costs, the reliability of influence functions has been questioned (Basu
et al., 2021; Bae et al., 2022). As exact LOO for dataset attribution requires a full training run for
each data point, most training data attribution methods resort to evaluating with proxy metrics like
task accuracy as a function of the number of high-attribution training examples removed, instead of
ground truth LOO attributions as in our work. Beyond directly measuring influence, other works
have sought to understand the influence of pre-training data on factual knowledge internalized by
the model (Kandpal et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2024; Razeghi et al., 2022; Antoniades et al., 2024).
More broadly, the impact of pre-training data on LLM behavior and performance is an important
notion for the well-studied problem of data selection; see (Albalak et al., 2024).


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced AttriBoT, a Bag of Tricks for efficiently attributing an LLM’s predic-
tions to spans of text in its input context. AttiBoT leverages a series of novel techniques for approx-
imating the attributions of a large target model, including reusing computations through key-value
caching, performing hierarchical attributions to reduce the number of forward passes, and leverag-
ing a smaller proxy model whose attributions reliably approximate those of the target model. Taken
together, AttriBoT can provide a >300× speedup, making attributing a response 30× more efficient
than even generating a response in realistic settings, while remaining more faithful to the target
model’s attributions than prior methods for efficient context attribution. In addition, the components
of AttriBoT can be included, excluded, and tuned to produce a Pareto-optimal trade-off between
faithfulness and speed. While our experimental results primarily focus on the general setting of
open-book question answering, we anticipate AttriBoT will also be useful for detecting malicious
prompts and model hallucinations. We hope that our efficient and easy-to-use implementation of
AttriBoT1 ensures that it has real-world impact and also enables future work on efficient context
attribution.


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Haokun Liu, Brian Lester, Wanru Zhao, and the members of Vector Institute for their valu-
able feedback and support. Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in part, by the
Province of Ontario, the Government of Canada through CIFAR, and companies sponsoring the Vec-
tor Institute https://vectorinstitute.ai/partnerships/current-partners/.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Alon Albalak, Yanai Elazar, Sang Michael Xie, Shayne Longpre, Nathan Lambert, Xinyi Wang,
  Niklas Muennighoff, Bairu Hou, Liangming Pan, Haewon Jeong, Colin Raffel, Shiyu Chang,
  Tatsunori Hashimoto, and William Yang Wang. A survey on data selection for language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16827, 2024.
Antonis Antoniades, Xinyi Wang, Yanai Elazar, Alfonso Amayuelas, Alon Albalak, Kexun Zhang,
  and William Yang Wang. Generalization vs memorization: Tracing language models’ capabilities
  back to pretraining data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14985, 2024.
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to
  retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511, 2023.
Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger Grosse. If influence functions
  are the answer, then what is the question? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.
Samyadeep Basu, Phil Pope, and Soheil Feizi. Influence functions in deep learning are fragile. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Nick Cammarata, Shan Carter, Gabriel Goh, Chris Olah, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Chelsea
  Voss, Ben Egan, and Swee Kiat Lim. Thread: Circuits. Distill, 2020.
Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang, and
  Minjoon Seo. How do large language models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11813, 2024.
Jifan Chen, Grace Kim, Aniruddh Sriram, Greg Durrett, and Eunsol Choi. Complex claim verifi-
   cation with evidence retrieved in the wild. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard
   (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
   Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024.
Sang Keun Choe, Hwijeen Ahn, Juhan Bae, Kewen Zhao, Minsoo Kang, Youngseog Chung, Adithya
  Pratapa, Willie Neiswanger, Emma Strubell, Teruko Mitamura, Jeff Schneider, Eduard Hovy,
  Roger Grosse, and Eric Xing. What is your data worth to gpt? llm-scale data valuation with
  influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13954, 2024.
Benjamin Cohen-Wang, Harshay Shah, Kristian Georgiev, and Aleksander Madry. Contextcite:
  Attributing model generation to context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00729, 2024.
Pradeep Dasigi, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Arman Cohan, Noah A. Smith, and Matt Gardner. A dataset of
  information-seeking questions and answers anchored in research papers. In Kristina Toutanova,
  Anna Rumshisky, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Iz Beltagy, Steven Bethard, Ryan Cot-
  terell, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, 2021.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vı́tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Joseph Enguehard. Sequential integrated gradients: a simple but effective method for explaining
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15853, 2023.

Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan,
  Vincent Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, and Kelvin Guu. RARR: Researching
  and revising what language models say, using language models. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2023a.

Tianyu Gao, Howard Yen, Jiatong Yu, and Danqi Chen. Enabling large language models to generate
  text with citations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14627, 2023b.

Jocelyn Gravel, Madeleine D’Amours-Gravel, and Esli Osmanlliu. Learning to fake it: Limited
  responses and fabricated references provided by chatgpt for medical questions. Mayo Clinic
  Proceedings: Digital Health, 1(3):226–234, 2023. ISSN 2949-7612. doi: https://doi.org/10.
  1016/j.mcpdig.2023.05.004.

Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, Evan Hubinger, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen,
  Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, and Samuel R. Bowman. Studying large lan-
  guage model generalization with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03296, 2023.

Frank E. Grubbs. Procedures for detecting outlying observations in samples. Technometrics, 11(1):
  1–21, 1969. doi: 10.1080/00401706.1969.10490657.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hen-
  nigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

Siqing Huo, Negar Arabzadeh, and Charles Clarke. Retrieving supporting evidence for genera-
  tive question answering. In Proceedings of the Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
  Research and Development in Information Retrieval in the Asia Pacific Region, New York, NY,
  USA, 2023.

Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. Attention is not explanation. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT,
  2019.

Nikhil Kandpal, Haikang Deng, Adam Roberts, Eric Wallace, and Colin Raffel. Large language
  models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1703.04730, 2020.
Yuri Kuratov, Aydar Bulatov, Petr Anokhin, Ivan Rodkin, Dmitry Sorokin, Artyom Sorokin, and
  Mikhail Burtsev. Babilong: Testing the limits of llms with long context reasoning-in-a-haystack.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10149, 2024.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
  Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.11401, 2021.
Dongfang Li, Zetian Sun, Baotian Hu, Zhenyu Liu, Xinshuo Hu, Xuebo Liu, and Min Zhang. Im-
  proving attributed text generation of large language models via preference learning. In Lun-Wei
  Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics ACL 2024, 2024a.
Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky. Visualizing and understanding neural models
  in nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01066, 2016.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, and Dan Jurafsky. Understanding neural networks through representation
  erasure. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08220, 2017.
Xiaonan Li, Changtai Zhu, Linyang Li, Zhangyue Yin, Tianxiang Sun, and Xipeng Qiu. LLa-
  trieval: LLM-verified retrieval for verifiable generation. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and
  Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), 2024b.
Nelson F. Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. Evaluating verifiability in generative search engines.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09848, 2023.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
Scott Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1705.07874, 2017.
Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze. Introduction to Information
  Retrieval. 2008.
Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. The natural language
  decathlon: Multitask learning as question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08730, 2018.
Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chad-
  wick, Mia Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, and Nat
  McAleese. Teaching language models to support answers with verified quotes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.11147, 2022.
Hosein Mohebbi, Ali Modarressi, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar. Exploring the role of BERT token
  representations to explain sentence probing results. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang,
  Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2021.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. Webgpt:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332,
  2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2024.
Denis Peskoff and Brandon Stewart. Credible without credit: Domain experts assess generative
  language models. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
  Papers), 2023.
Reiner Pope, Sholto Douglas, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jacob Devlin, James Bradbury, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Jonathan Heek, Kefan Xiao, Shivani Agrawal, and Jeff Dean. Efficiently scaling trans-
  former inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05102, 2022.
Danish Pruthi, Mansi Gupta, Bhuwan Dhingra, Graham Neubig, and Zachary C. Lipton. Learning to
  deceive with attention-based explanations. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel
  Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2020a.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data in-
  fluence by tracing gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020b.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions
  for SQuAD. In Iryna Gurevych and Yusuke Miyao (eds.), Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), 2018.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining term
  frequencies on few-shot numerical reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, 2022.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, 2019.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should i trust you?”: Explaining
 the predictions of any classifier. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.04938, 2016.
Bernard Rosner. Percentage points for a generalized esd many-outlier procedure. Technometrics, 25
  (2):165–172, 1983. doi: 10.1080/00401706.1983.10487848.
Soumya Sanyal and Xiang Ren. Discretized integrated gradients for explaining language models. In
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2021.
Sofia Serrano and Noah A. Smith. Is attention interpretable? arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03731,
  2019.
Sandipan Sikdar, Parantapa Bhattacharya, and Kieran Heese. Integrated directional gradients: Fea-
  ture interaction attribution for neural NLP models. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and
  Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2021.
Hao Sun, Hengyi Cai, Bo Wang, Yingyan Hou, Xiaochi Wei, Shuaiqiang Wang, Yan Zhang, and
  Dawei Yin. Towards verifiable text generation with evolving memory and self-reflection. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.09075, 2023.
Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models.                  arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.11805, 2024.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam M. Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha,
  Heng-Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, Yaguang Li, Hongrae Lee,
  Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun,
  Dmitry Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts,
  Maarten Bosma, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, I. A. Krivokon, Willard James Rusch, Marc
  Pickett, Kathleen S. Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos San-
  tos, Toju Duke, Johnny Hartz Søraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Dı́az,


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora Aroyo,
  Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, V. O. Kuzmina, Joseph Fenton, Aaron Co-
  hen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Rogers Croak,
  Ed Huai hsin Chi, and Quoc Le. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762,
  2023.
Orion Weller, Marc Marone, Nathaniel Weir, Dawn Lawrie, Daniel Khashabi, and Benjamin
  Van Durme. “according to . . . ”: Prompting language models improves quoting from pre-training
  data. In Yvette Graham and Matthew Purver (eds.), Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the
  European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  2024.
Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. Attention is not not explanation. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang,
  Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
Zhiyong Wu, Yun Chen, Ben Kao, and Qun Liu. Perturbed masking: Parameter-free probing for
  analyzing and interpreting bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14786, 2021.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang,
  Jialin Wang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Ma, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, Jinze Bai,
  Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Chen, Kexin Yang, Mei Li, Mingfeng
  Xue, Na Ni, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Ru Peng, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Runji Lin, Shijie Wang, Shuai
  Bai, Sinan Tan, Tianhang Zhu, Tianhao Li, Tianyu Liu, Wenbin Ge, Xiaodong Deng, Xiaohuan
  Zhou, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Zhang, Xipin Wei, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Yao, Yichang
  Zhang, Yu Wan, Yunfei Chu, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zhihao Fan. Qwen2
  technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10671, 2024.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
  2018.
Kayo Yin and Graham Neubig. Interpreting language models with contrastive explanations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.10419, 2022.
Guido Zuccon, Bevan Koopman, and Razia Shaik. Chatgpt hallucinates when attributing answers.
  Association for Computing Machinery, 2023.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T HEORETICAL E FFICIENCY D ERIVATIONS

In this section, we provide derivations for the theoretical efficiencies reported in Table 1.


Preliminaries We assume a target model with P parameters, a context C containing |C| sources,
and that each source in the context contains exactly T tokens. Following Kaplan et al. (2020) and
Hoffmann et al. (2022), we approximate the number of FLOPs for a forward pass of a P -parameter
model on a sequence of T tokens to be 2P T FLOPs.
To simplify the analysis, we ignore the fact the query and response are also part of the model’s input,
as these are typically negligible compared to the length of the context. Accounting for the query and
response would simply add a small constant factor to each method’s theoretical runtime. Finally, we
assume that the likelihood of the full sequence under the target model, pθ (R|Q, C) can be computed
while generating R, and is thus not accounted for in the analysis of each attribution method.


A.1    E XACT LOO ATTRIBUTION

Exactly calculating LOO attributions under the target model requires computing pθ (R|Q, C \ {si }
for all in i ∈ 1, . . . , |C|. In total, this is |C| forward passes each on sequences containing T (C − 1)
tokens. Thus, the number of FLOPs needed to compute attributions is 2P T |C|(|C| − 1).


A.2    KV C ACHING

KV caching allows us to avoid FLOPs spent on prefixes for which keys and values have already
been computed. Since keys and values can be cached for the full sequence while computing
pθ (R|Q, C), we can avoid recomputing the keys and values for the first i − 1 sources while comput-
ing pθ (R|Q, C \ {si }). Thus the total number of FLOPs for computing all LOO attributions can be
written as:

                                |C|
                                X
                                      2P T (|C| − i) = P T |C|(|C| − 1)
                                i=1


This provides a speedup of a factor of 2 compared to computing LOO attributions with no caching.


A.3    P ROXY M ODELING

Proxy modeling is identical to computing exact LOO attributions, except with a model with fewer
parameters. If the number of proxy model parameters is P ′ , then the number of FLOPs needed to
compute attributions is 2P ′ T |C|(|C| − 1) and the speedup gained by using a proxy model is P/P ′ .


A.4    H IERARCHICAL ATTRIBUTION

Our analysis of hierarchical attribution makes the simplifying assumption that each source group in
the context contains exactly H sources.
We start by first considering the initial source group-scoring step in the hierarchical attribution
algorithm. This step requires performing |C|/H forward passes (one for each source group)
each on a sequence of T (|C| − H) tokens. Thus, the initial source group scoring step uses
2P T (|C|/H)(|C| − H) FLOPs.
The second step in hierarchical attribution computes scores at the source level on a shortened
context containing only β|C| sources. Thus, the second step of hierarchical attribution uses
2P T (β|C|)(β|C| − 1).


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Combining these steps together, we can compute the total number of FLOPs for hierarchical attri-
bution:

                                      |C|
               Total FLOPs =2P T            (|C| − H) + 2P T (β|C|)(β|C| − 1)
                                       H

                                        |C|         2
                            =2P T C          − 1 + β |C| − β
                                         H

                                           2    1
                            =2P T C       β +       |C| − β − 1
                                                H

By comparing to the number of FLOPs used for exact LOO attribution we get the following speedup
factor:


                             |C| − 1               H(|C| − 1)
                             1
                                             = 2
                        β2 + H   |C| − β − 1  (β H + 1)|C| − βH − H

Next, we consider the speedup as the number of contexts grows and the number of source groups
kept after the first group-level scoring pass is kept constant, i.e., β = k/|C| for some constant k.


                       H(|C| − 1)                          H(|C| − 1)
                                        =      2
                (β 2 H + 1)|C| − βH − H      k                         k
                                                   |C|    H + 1 |C| − |C| H −H

                                                      H(|C| − 1)
                                            = k2               k
                                                |C| H + |C| − |C| H −H
                                             H|C|
                                            ≈            for large |C|
                                              |C|
                                            =H

Thus, for contexts with many sources, hierarchical attribution’s speedup approaches H, the number
of sources per source group.

A.5   P ROXY M ODEL P RUNING

The first stage of proxy model pruning simply uses a proxy model to score each source. Using the
result from Appendix A.3, this operation uses 2P ′ T |C|(|C| − 1) FLOPs, where P ′ is the number
of parameters in the proxy model. The second stage of the proxy model pruning algorithm uses the
target model to score the remaining α|C| sources, requiring 2P T (β|C|)(β|C| − 1) FLOPs. Thus
the total number of FLOPs can be written as:
                   Total FLOPs =2P ′ T |C|(|C| − 1) + 2P T (β|C|)(α|C| − 1)
                                             ′
                                              P
                               =2P T |C|           (|C| − 1) + α(α|C| − 1)
                                              P
                                            ′
                                                      P′

                                            P
                               =2P T |C|       |C| −      + α2 |C| − α
                                            P          P
                                                      ′
                                                                    P′

                                                    P
                               =2P T |C|     α2 +         |C| − α −
                                                    P                P

When compared to exact LOO attribution with the target model, this method provides a speedup of:
                             |C| − 1                 P (|C| − 1)
                             ′            ′ =
                      α2 + PP |C| − α − PP    (α2 P + P ′ )|C| − αP − P ′


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we consider the speedup as the number of contexts grows and the number of sources kept after
proxy model pruning is kept constant, i.e. α = k/|C| for some constant k.
                        P (|C| − 1)                               P (|C| − 1)
                                              =
                (α2 P + P ′ )|C| − αP − P ′                 2
                                                      k               ′       k
                                                     |C|        P + P |C| − |C| P − P′

                                                          P (|C| − 1)
                                              = k2
                                                      P + P ′ |C| − k P − P ′
                                                  |C|               |C|
                                               P |C|
                                              ≈             for large |C|
                                                 P
                                              =P

Thus, as the number of sources in the context grows, the speedup of proxy model pruning approaches
P/P ′ .

B     F URTHER D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
In this section, we provide more details on the experimental setup we use to evaluate context attri-
bution methods.

B.1   DATASETS

Preprocessing Before evaluating context attribution methods on SQuAD 2.0, HotpotQA, and
QASPER, we first take the following preprocessing steps to make them suitable for running context
attribution.
SQuAD2.0:

      1. Filter dataset to only include examples that are labeled as possible to answer given the
         context (SQuAD 2.0 contains both questions where the answer is and is not present in the
         contextual information).
      2. Truncate each example’s supporting Wikipedia page context to 10 paragraphs and filter
         dataset to only examples where the answer lies in the first 10 paragraphs of the context. This
         is meant to filter out examples with a very large number of context sources, as computing
         exact LOO attributions on these examples is impractical.
      3. Randomly sample 1000 examples from the remaining set of examples.

Hotpot QA:

      1. Sample the first 1000 examples of the dataset.

QASPER:

      1. Filter dataset to only examples with contexts containing fewer than 60 paragraphs. This
         limits the context length to make exact LOO attribution tractable and also removes im-
         properly parsed contexts where every line in a LATEXmath environment is listed as its own
         paragraph.
      2. Randomly sample 1000 examples from the remaining set of examples. In our experiment,
         there are 2 empty examples and they are ignored, resulting in 998 examples.

We report summary statistics for each dataset after preprocessing in Table 2.

Prompting For each dataset, we use the following prompt templates to format a query and context
into a prompt suitable for instruction-tuned models.
SQuAD 2.0 and HotpotQA:
 Answer the question based on the provided context


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Source     Sources/        Source Groups/   Tokens/    Generation GPU-
   Dataset     Examples
                               Type      Example            Example       Example    seconds/Example
  HotpotQA        1000      Sentence        41.2               9.9         1,249            18
  SQuAD2.0        1000      Sentence        50.1              10.0         1,592           19.6
   QASPER          998      Paragraph       38.2              12.7         4,116           51.7

                   Table 2: Summary statistics for each of the evaluation datasets.


Context:
{context}
Question:         {question}
QASPER:
Answer the question based on the following scientific paper:
{context}
Question:         {question}


B.2   O UTLIER D ETECTION WITH E XTREME S TUDENTIZED D EVIATE T EST

The generalized Extreme Studentized Deviate (ESD) test (Rosner, 1983) is a statistical test for de-
tecting an unknown number of outliers in a univariate set of data. This test is an iterated form of
Grubbs’ test for detecting a single outlier in a set of data (Grubbs, 1969).
The ESD test is parameterized by the maximum possible number of outliers, k, and the significance
value α. It works by iteratively selecting the largest value in the dataset, computing that value’s
Grubbs’ statistic G, testing if G is larger than the critical value Gcrit , and removing the tested value
from the dataset. This process stops when the selected value no longer has a Grubbs’ statistic greater
than the critical value or k values are tested.
The Grubbs’ statistic and critical value are defined as is defined as follows for a collection of data
Y1 , . . . , YN :

                                         maxi=1,...,N Yi − Ȳ
                                    G=
                                                  s
                                               (N − 1) × t
                                    Gcrit = √       √
                                              N × N − 2 + t2

where Ȳ and s are the mean and standard deviation of Y1 , . . . , YN , and t is the upper critical value
                                                                                    α
of the t-distribution with N − 2 degrees of freedom and a significance level of 2n    .
For our experiments we set the significance level α = 0.05 and the maximum number of outliers
k = 50.


B.3   F URTHER D ETAILS ON C ONTEXT C ITE BASELINE

ContextCite works by training a linear surrogate model to approximate the LOO attributions of
a target model. Given context sources S = {s1 , . . . , s|C| }, ContextCite samples n ablation vec-
tors v⃗1 , . . . , v⃗n ∈ R|C| ∼ Bernoulli(p) that act as masks indicating which context sources to re-
move/keep for each forward pass. Based on these ablation vectors, ContextCite performs a single
forward pass on each ablated context and records the change in logit-scaled response probability,
τi , caused by the removal of the ablated sources. Next, a Lasso regression surrogate model is fit
to map each ablation vector v⃗i to the corresponding change in response probability τi . Finally, the
attribution scores for context source j is simply the weight that the trained Lasso model assigns to
the j’th source.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C                              A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

C.1                            E FFICIENCY VS . ACCURACY T RADEOFF FOR ATTRI B OT M ETHODS

We provide plots illustrating the efficiency vs. accuracy tradeoff for each AttriBoT acceleration
method in Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 5. Overall, we find that each method provides parameters
that effectively vary the accuracy-efficiency tradeoff and are Pareto optimal with respect to baseline
context attribution methods.

                                                SQuAD                                          Hotpot QA                                    QASPER                                    Exact LOO
                         1.0
Mean Average Precision


                                                                                                                                                                                      AttriBoT
                         0.9                                                                                                                                                          KV
                                                                                                                                                                                      8B Proxy + KV
                         0.8                                                                                                                                                          3B Proxy + KV
                                                                                                                                                                                      1B Proxy + KV
                         0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                      Baselines
                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                      Sentence Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                                      Gradient Norm
                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                      Attention Weights
                                 10−2                   10−1            100      10−2                 10−1              100          10−2          10−1               100             ContextCite
                                       Examples per GPU-second                           Examples per GPU-second                     Examples per GPU-second



Figure 3: Plot showing accuracy vs. efficiency tradeoff of proxy modeling. We find that smaller
proxy models produce attributions that are less faithful to the target model’s attributions.


                                              SQuAD                                         Hotpot QA                                QASPER                                 Exact LOO
                         1.0
Mean Average Precision


                                                                                                                                                                            AttriBoT
                         0.9                                                                                                                                                Hierarchical + KV
                                                                                                                                                                            Hierarchical + 8B Proxy + KV
                         0.8                                                                                                                                                Hierarchical + 3B Proxy + KV
                                                                                                                                                                            Hierarchical + 1B Proxy + KV
                         0.7
                                                                                                                                                                            Baselines
                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                            Sentence Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                            Gradient Norm
                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                            Attention Weights
                                10−2             10−1            100          10−2            10−1              100           10−2          10−1          100               ContextCite
                                       Examples per GPU-second                        Examples per GPU-second                 Examples per GPU-second



Figure 4: Plot showing accuracy vs. efficiency tradeoff of hierarchical attribution with and without
the use of a proxy model. Both varying the size of the proxy model and tuning the number of source
groups to retain, β effectively trades attribution faithfulness for speed.


                                               SQuAD                                         Hotpot QA                                  QASPER
                         1.0                                                                                                                                                     Exact LOO
Mean Average Precision


                         0.9                                                                                                                                                     AttriBoT
                                                                                                                                                                                 8B Proxy Pruning + KV
                         0.8                                                                                                                                                     3B Proxy Pruning + KV
                                                                                                                                                                                 1B Proxy Pruning + KV
                         0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                 Baselines
                         0.6                                                                                                                                                     Sentence Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                                 Gradient Norm
                         0.5                                                                                                                                                     Attention Weights
                                10−2                10−1               100     10−2                  10−1             100        10−2          10−1             100              ContextCite

                                       Examples per GPU-second                          Examples per GPU-second                 Examples per GPU-second



Figure 5: Plot showing the accuracy vs. efficiency tradeoff of proxy model pruning. We find that
varying the size of the proxy model and the fraction of sources to retain, α effectively trades attribu-
tion faithfulness for speed.


C.2                            ATTRI B OT’ S E FFECTIVENESS ACROSS D IFFERENT TARGET M ODELS

To demonstrate AttriBoT’s effectiveness for approximating LOO attributions for different target
models, we replicate the experiments on HotpotQA using Qwen 72B as the target model. Shown
in Figure 6, we observe a nearly identical Pareto front as seen in the Llama model family. Aside
from the attention weights baseline, AttriBoT is Pareto optimal at all points on the Pareto front.
We hypothesize that the lack of Pareto optimality compared to the attention weights baseline comes
from surprisingly good performance of the baseline method compared to its performance in other
experiments, achieving a mAP about 10 points higher than when used with Llama 70B.


                                                                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                   Exact LOO
                                             SQuAD                                           Hotpot QA                                    QASPER
                         1.0                                                                                                                                       AttriBoT

Mean Average Precision
                                                                                                                                                                   Pareto Front
                         0.9                                                                                                                                       KV
                                                                                                                                                                   HR + KV
                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                   Prune + KV
                                                                                                                                                                   Proxy + KV
                         0.7
                                                                                                                                                                   HR + Proxy + KV
                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                   Baselines
                         0.5                                                                                                                                       Sentence Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                   Gradient Norm
                                     −2               −1             0             −2                 −1               0             −2            −1          0
                                10               10             10            10                 10               10            10            10          10       Attention Weights
                                      Examples per GPU-second                           Examples per GPU-second                 Examples per GPU-second            ContextCite


Figure 6: We replicate the experiments on SQuAD, HotpotQA and QASPER using Qwen 72B as
the target model to demonstrate the AttriBoT’s effectiveness across different target models.


C.3                            A FFECT OF T RAINING DATA D ISTRIBUTION OF P ROXY M ODEL

To further investigate the potential impact of proxy model selection and their training data distri-
bution, we considered mismatched proxy models including Mistral 7B Instruct v0.3, as shown in
Figure 7, Figure 8, Figure 9, and Figure 10. While our bag of tricks are still effective, using a
mismatched proxy model can degrade performance somewhat compared with proxy models trained
with same data or distilled from the larger target models.

                                                                                                                                                                   Exact LOO
                                             SQuAD                                           Hotpot QA                                    QASPER
                         1.0                                                                                                                                       AttriBoT
Mean Average Precision


                                                                                                                                                                   Pareto Front
                         0.9                                                                                                                                       KV
                                                                                                                                                                   HR + KV
                         0.8                                                                                                                                       Prune + KV
                                                                                                                                                                   Proxy + KV
                         0.7                                                                                                                                       HR + Proxy + KV

                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                   Baselines
                                                                                                                                                                   Sentence Similarity
                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                   Gradient Norm
                                     −2                −1                 0        −2                  −1                   0        −2            −1          0
                                10                10                 10       10                  10                   10       10            10          10       Attention Weights
                                      Examples per GPU-second                           Examples per GPU-second                 Examples per GPU-second            ContextCite


Figure 7: Using Llama 3.1 70B Instruct as the target model and Mistral 7B Instruct v0.3 as the proxy
model.


                                                                                                                                                                   Exact LOO
                                             SQuAD                                           Hotpot QA                                    QASPER
                         1.0                                                                                                                                       AttriBoT
Mean Average Precision


                                                                                                                                                                   Pareto Front
                         0.9                                                                                                                                       KV
                                                                                                                                                                   HR + KV
                         0.8                                                                                                                                       Prune + KV
                                                                                                                                                                   Proxy + KV
                         0.7                                                                                                                                       HR + Proxy + KV

                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                   Baselines
                                                                                                                                                                   Sentence Similarity
                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                   Gradient Norm
                                     −2                −1                 0        −2                  −1                   0        −2            −1          0
                                10                10                 10       10                  10                   10       10            10          10       Attention Weights
                                      Examples per GPU-second                           Examples per GPU-second                 Examples per GPU-second            ContextCite


Figure 8: Using Llama 3.1 70B Instruct as the target model and Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct as the proxy
model.



C.4                            M EAN AVERAGE P RECISION C OMPARING WITH H UMAN A NNOTATIONS

The HotpotQA dataset comes with human-annotated “important” text spans in each example’s con-
text. While the primary purpose of AttriBoT is to approximate a target model’s LOO attributions,
here we evaluate the agreement between AttriBoT attributions and human-annotated gold sources.
We find that AttriBoT’s context attributions closely align with human annotations, achieving only a
10% drop in mAP compared to exact LOO attributions, while achieving a 300× speedup. Results
are shown for multiple target models in Figure 11.


                                                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                     Exact LOO
                                                SQuAD                                          Hotpot QA                                             QASPER
                           1.0                                                                                                                                                       AttriBoT

Mean Average Precision
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pareto Front
                           0.9                                                                                                                                                       KV
                                                                                                                                                                                     HR + KV
                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                     Prune + KV
                                                                                                                                                                                     Proxy + KV
                           0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                     HR + Proxy + KV
                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                     Baselines
                           0.5                                                                                                                                                       Sentence Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                                     Gradient Norm
                                         −2                −1               0        −2                   −1                0                   −2            −1              0
                                    10                10               10       10                   10                10                  10            10              10          Attention Weights
                                         Examples per GPU-second                          Examples per GPU-second                      Examples per GPU-second                       ContextCite


Figure 9: Using Qwen 2.5 72B Instruct as the target model and Mistral 7B Instruct v0.3 as the proxy
model.

                                                                                                                                                                                     Exact LOO
                                                SQuAD                                          Hotpot QA                                             QASPER
                           1.0                                                                                                                                                       AttriBoT
Mean Average Precision


                                                                                                                                                                                     Pareto Front
                           0.9                                                                                                                                                       KV
                                                                                                                                                                                     HR + KV
                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                     Prune + KV
                                                                                                                                                                                     Proxy + KV
                           0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                     HR + Proxy + KV
                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                     Baselines
                           0.5                                                                                                                                                       Sentence Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                                     Gradient Norm
                                    10−2              10−1             100      10−2                 10−1              100                 10−2          10−1            100         Attention Weights
                                         Examples per GPU-second                          Examples per GPU-second                      Examples per GPU-second                       ContextCite


Figure 10: Using Qwen 2.5 72B Instruct as the target model and Llama 3.1 8B Instruct as the proxy
model.

                                                                                                                                                                                  Exact LOO
                                                      Llama 3.1 70B                                                             Qwen 2.5 72B
                                                                                                                                                                                  AttriBoT
  Mean Average Precision


                                                                                                                                                                                  Pareto Front
                            0.7                                                                                                                                                   KV
                                                                                                                                                                                  HR + KV
                                                                                                                                                                                  Prune + KV
                            0.6                                                                                                                                                   Proxy + KV
                                                                                                                                                                                  HR + Proxy + KV


                            0.5                                                                                                                                                   Baselines
                                                                                                                                                                                  Sentence Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                                  Gradient Norm
                                    10−2                        10−1                  100                      10−2                 10−1                           100            Attention Weights
                                                 Examples per GPU-second                                              Examples per GPU-second                                     ContextCite



Figure 11: Mean average precision comparing with human annotation on HotpotQA dataset with
Llama 3 family and Qwen 2.5 family.


D                                 P RACTITIONER ’ S G UIDE TO USING ATTRI B OT
D.1                               M ETHOD AND H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION

KV caching should always be employed because is effectively lossless and can be combined with
other methods. Whenever feasible, float16 should be used to avoid possible floating point errors.
To further reduce LOO costs, we recommend starting with hierarchical attribution and pruning. For
tasks like open-domain QA where only a small subset of the context is relevant, retaining 3 to 5
paragraphs or sentences is generally sufficient to maintain faithfulness while achieving significant
acceleration. For further speedup, consider using smaller models within the same model family or
distilled versions of the target model. Models in the same family with sizes as small as 1B or 0.5B
parameters can remain faithful even for complex tasks. Additionally, combining proxy methods with
hierarchical attribution is advisable, as their performance degradation does not compound linearly.

D.2                               I NPUT PREPROCESSING

In settings such as RAG and in-context learning, input information may be duplicated due to the
retrieval process. Such duplication poses challenges for LOO context attribution or any attribution


                                                                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


method that aims to approximate the LOO error, as removing one instance of that information would
likely not change the model’s response likelihood. We strongly recommend deduplicating input
before performing LOO context attribution.
In scenarios where input information is unstructured, we suggest chunking the input by parsing sen-
tences and grouping a few (e.g., 10) sentences together to facilitate hierarchical context attribution.


                                                  24
