Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLMOPT: L EARNING TO D EFINE AND S OLVE G EN -
ERAL O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEMS FROM S CRATCH

  Caigao Jiang♥∗, Xiang Shu♣∗, Hong Qian♣†, Xingyu Lu♥†,
 Jun Zhou♥ , Aimin Zhou♣ , Yang Yu♦
 ♣
   East China Normal University, China ♥ Ant Group, China ♦ Nanjing University, China
 shux@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {hqian,amzhou}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
 {caigao.jcg,sing.lxy,jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com, yuy@nju.edu.cn



                                                   A BSTRACT
             Optimization problems are prevalent across various scenarios. Formulating and
             then solving optimization problems described by natural language often requires
             highly specialized human expertise, which could block the widespread applica-
             tion of optimization-based decision making. To automate problem formulation
             and solving, leveraging large language models (LLMs) has emerged as a potential
             way. However, this kind of approach suffers from the issue of optimization gener-
             alization. Namely, the accuracy of most current LLM-based methods and the gen-
             erality of optimization problem types that they can model are still limited. In this
             paper, we propose a unified learning-based framework called LLMOPT to boost
             optimization generalization. Starting from the natural language descriptions of op-
             timization problems and a pre-trained LLM, LLMOPT constructs the introduced
             five-element formulation as a universal model for learning to define diverse op-
             timization problem types. Then, LLMOPT employs the multi-instruction tuning
             to enhance both problem formalization and solver code generation accuracy and
             generality. After that, to prevent hallucinations in LLMs, such as sacrificing solv-
             ing accuracy to avoid execution errors, the model alignment and self-correction
             mechanism are adopted in LLMOPT. We evaluate the optimization generalization
             ability of LLMOPT and compared methods across six real-world datasets cov-
             ering roughly 20 fields such as health, environment, energy and manufacturing,
             etc. Extensive experiment results show that LLMOPT is able to model various
             optimization problem types such as linear/nonlinear programming, mixed integer
             programming, and combinatorial optimization, and achieves a notable 11.08% av-
             erage solving accuracy improvement compared with the state-of-the-art methods.
             The code is available at https://github.com/caigaojiang/LLMOPT.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Optimization problems are widespread in a variety of scenarios, such as job scheduling (Brandi-
marte, 1993), path planning (Hong et al., 2016; Li et al., 2023), matching problem (Wang et al.,
2020), reinforcement leaning (Qian & Yu, 2021), revenue management (Trimborn et al., 2018) and
security games (Brown et al., 2012; Qian et al., 2025), etc. Although powerful solvers are available,
formally defining domain-specific optimization problems from natural language descriptions and
then developing the solver code are highly complex tasks. It requires specialized domain knowl-
edge, expert participation, and significant time investment. For example, in finance, the portfolio
problems (Chen et al., 2021) often manage thousands of variables and complex constraints, such
as full investment constraints, cardinality constraints and pre-assignment constraints, where expert
intervention is crucial for achieving accurate (i.e., low simple regret) solutions due to the complexity
and specialization of optimization problems.
With the rapid development of large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT (Brown et al., 2020)
and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), using LLMs to automatically formulate and solve optimization prob-
    ∗
        Both authors contribute equally to this research.
    †
        Corresponding authors.


                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Problem Description                                                       Five-Element Formulation
  An accounting firm employs part time                                       Sets  Set of employee types: 𝒮 = {𝑓, 𝑝}
  workers and full time workers. Full time
                                                                                            Hours per shift: ℎ! = 8, ℎ" = 4
  workers work 8 hours per shift while part
  time workers work 4 hours per shift. In                                    Parameters
                                                                                            Wages per shift: 𝑤! = 300, 𝑤" = 100
  addition, full time workers are paid $300                                                 Total labor time required: 𝑇 = 450
  per shift while part time workers are paid                                                Budget: 𝐵 = 15000
  $100 per shift. Currently, the accounting                                  Variables Employees shifts: 𝑥! , 𝑥"
  firm has a project requiring 450 hours of                                  Objective Minimize employee number: min $ ,$" 𝑥! + 𝑥"
                                                                                                                      !
  labor. If the firm has a budget of $15000,
  how many of each type of worker should                                                           Labor time onstraint: ℎ! 𝑥! + ℎ" 𝑥" ≥ 𝑇
  be scheduled to minimize the total                                         Constraints           Budget constraint: 𝑤! 𝑥! + 𝑤" 𝑥" ≤ 𝐵
  number of workers.                                                                               Positive integer constraint: 𝑥! , 𝑥" ∈ ℤ#

 Problem Description                                                                                                 Five-Element Formulation

 Generate Solver Code                                                             Generate Solver Code
  from pyomo.environ import *                                                       from pyomo.environ import *
  model = ConcreteModel()                                                           model = ConcreteModel()

  model.x_f = Var(domain=NonNegativeReals)                                          model.x_f = Var(domain=NonNegativeIntegers)
  model.x_p = Var(domain=NonNegativeReals)                                          model.x_p = Var(domain=NonNegativeIntegers)

  model.objective = Objective(expr=model.x_f + model.x_p, sense=minimize)           model.objective = Objective(expr=model.x_f + model.x_p, sense=minimize)

  model.c1 = Constraint(expr=8 * model.x_f + 4 * model.x_p >>= 500)                 model.c1 = Constraint(expr=8 * model.x_f + 4 * model.x_p >>= 500)
  model.c2 = Constraint(expr=300 * model.x_f + 100 * model.x_p <<= 15000)           model.c2 = Constraint(expr=300 * model.x_f + 100 * model.x_p <<= 15000)
  .....                                                                             .....



                                                       Incorrect                                                                          Correct
  Optimal Solution Found:                                                           Optimal Solution Found:
  Number of Full-Time Shifts (x_f): 37.5                                            Number of Full-Time Shifts (x_f): 37
  Number of Part-Time Shifts (x_p): 37.5               Missing integer              Number of Part-Time Shifts (x_p): 39                 Correct definition
  Total Number of Employees: 75.0                      constraint                   Total Number of Employees: 76                        and solution

Figure 1: An example of the proposed five-element formulation, which provides a structured defini-
tion for general optimization problems. Using the five-element formulation as an intermediate step
can lead to more accurate solver code and solution.
lems described by natural language is becoming increasingly attractive. Existing work on it can be
roughly divided into prompt-based and learning-based methods. Pioneering studies like Chain-of-
Expert (Xiao et al., 2024) and OptiMUS (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024) explore prompt-based meth-
ods, using LLM interfaces to extract key information and solve optimization problems. Although
these methods show promise, recent advances in learning-based methods, such as LLaMoCo (Ma
et al., 2024) and ORLM (Tang et al., 2024), could show even greater potential. ORLM (Tang et al.,
2024) reveals that a fine-tuned 7B open-source model can outperform larger pre-trained models like
GPT-4, highlighting the value of learning-based methods for optimization tasks.
Although previous research has established the use of LLMs for formulating and solving optimiza-
tion problems described by natural language, their optimization generalization remains limited, re-
stricting broader applicability and deployment across diverse problems. Optimization generaliza-
tion, which involves both accuracy and generality in assessing whether LLMs can effectively solve
general optimization problems, remains a significant challenge. Specifically, accuracy refers to solv-
ing problems correctly, and generality refers to the ability to model and solve diverse optimization
problem types across different task scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a unified learning-based framework called LLMOPT to significantly boost
the optimization generalization. Through focusing on improving both accuracy and generality to
effectively define and solve a wide range of optimization problems, this work tries to narrow the gap
between methods and practical applications. Specifically, we propose the five-element formulation
to define optimization problems to improve the accuracy of solving, as illustrated in Figure 1. To
ensure the effectiveness of learning, we design a data augmentation process and perform data label-
ing, resulting in high-quality datasets. Leveraging these datasets, we implement multi-instruction
supervised fine-tuning to improve the LLM’s accuracy in both defining and solving optimization
problems. Additionally, we introduce model alignment to further enhance accuracy and reduce the
risk of hallucinations. We also develop an auto-testing process with a self-correction mechanism,
enabling the accurate and automated resolution of optimization problems. Finally, the optimiza-
tion generalization ability of LLMOPT is extensively evaluated on six real-world optimization and
operation problem datasets involving roughly 20 domains, including health, environment, energy
and manufacturing, etc. The results show that LLMOPT effectively handles various optimization


                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


problems, such as linear and nonlinear programming, mixed integer programming and combinato-
rial optimization, etc. Ablation studies validate the contributions of problem definition and model
alignment to improving accuracy. Notably, LLMOPT achieves an average accuracy improvement of
11.08% over state-of-the-art methods.
The consequent sections respectively introduce the related work, present the proposed LLMOPT,
show and analysis the empirical results, discuss important issues, and finally conclude the paper.

2     R ELATED W ORK
LLMs for Formulating and Solving Optimization Problems. The NL4Opt competition (Rama-
monjison et al., 2021) encourages researchers to explore how LLMs can be leveraged to solve opti-
mization problems efficiently (Huang et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024; Xiao et al., 2024; AhmadiTesh-
nizi et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2024). Related work can be divided into prompt-based and learning-based
methods. The prompt-based methods utilize existing LLM interfaces to automate the solving opti-
mization problems. Chain-of-Expert (CoE) (Xiao et al., 2024) introduces an agent-based workflow,
where specific tasks are assigned to LLM agents at each stage of reasoning, while OptiMUS (Ah-
madiTeshnizi et al., 2024) employs tailored prompts designed specifically for solving linear pro-
gramming and mixed-integer linear programming problems. The learning-based method remains
relatively underexplored. LLaMoCo (Ma et al., 2024) introduces an instruction tuning framework
in a code-to-code manner and demonstrates its efficacy through model fine-tuning. ORLM (Tang
et al., 2024) proposed a semi-automated approach to generating synthetic training data during the
instruction tuning phase, addressing the data-hungry nature of optimization modeling. Besides,
Mamo (Huang et al., 2024) offers a benchmark for mathematical modeling with two optimization
datasets, and introduces a standardized process to generate solver code using LLMs.
LLMs as Components of Optimizers. Yang et al. (2024b) propose to use LLMs as optimizers,
inspired by Bayesian optimization (Garnett, 2023). One LLM iteratively optimizes prompts, which
are then used to guide another LLM in performing specific optimization tasks. LLMs can also
serve as components within an optimizer (Guo et al., 2024; Yang & Li, 2023; Liu et al., 2024a;
2023; 2024b). Guo et al. (2024) uses LLMs to as the crossover and mutation operators in genetic
algorithms, thereby finding high-quality prompts. When solving the traveling salesman problem, Liu
et al. (2024a) uses LLMs to generate new trajectories based on existing ones, iteratively optimizing
them to produce higher-quality solutions. Liu et al. (2023) and Yang & Li (2023) apply LLMs to
specific multi-objective optimization tasks. Liu et al. (2024b) employs LLMs to simulate both the
acquisition function and the surrogate model in the Bayesian optimization process.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
3.1     A N OVERVIEW OF THE P ROPOSED LLMOPT F RAMEWORK

This work aims to achieve a better optimization generalization of defining and solving the optimiza-
tion problems through a learning-based approach. To this end, this paper proposes the LLMOPT
framework, as illustrated in Figure 2, which comprises three key components: data, learning, and
auto-testing. The following sections provide a detailed introduction: First, in Section 3.2, we in-
troduce the five-element formulation to define general optimization problems well, and discuss the
augmentation and labeling of training data. Next, in Section 3.3, we detail the multi-instruction
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) process and model alignment to enhance solving accuracy. Finally, in
Section 3.4, we present the auto-testing process with self-correction.

3.2     DATA : D EFINING AND L ABELING G ENERAL O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEMS

3.2.1    U NIVERSAL F ORMULATION TO D EFINE G ENERAL O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEMS
To enable LLMs to formulate more general optimization problems described in natural language,
we propose the five-element, a universal formulation to define optimization problems. Firstly, in
mathematics, an optimization problem can be formally represented as the following expression:
                                   min     f (x) , s.t. G(x) ≤ c ,                                (1)
                                 x∈X ⊆RD


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (a) Data                               Natural Language
                                        Description
                                                                                  (b) Learning                         Pre-trained LLM

                                                                                  Data for Formulation                                     Data for Solving
                    Optimization
                     Problems                                                                                                                              ( p, s )
      Expert                                  GPT-4        Expert                                    ( p, f )               SFT                           ( f, s )
 Label 5-Element                 Generate 5-Element by GPT-4                        Problem with 5-Element
                                                                                    Labeled by Expert                                       Problem/5-Element with Code
                                   & Label by Expert
     by Expert
                                                                                                                          LLMSFT            Labeled by Expert



                                               5-Element (Generated by GPT-4)                                                                               ( p, s', d )
        5-Element f                            Desirability (Labeled by Expert)
        for Problem p
                                 5-Element f ' with Desirability Label d                ( p, f ' , d )                                                    ( f, s', d )
                                                                                    Problem with
                                                                                    5-Element Generated by GPT-4
                                                                                                                            KTO            Problem/5-Element with
                                                                                                                                           Solver Code Generated by GPT-4
          Label Code                    Generate Code by GPT-4                      & Desirability Labeled by Expert       Alignment       & Desirability Labeled by Expert
          by Expert                     & Label by Expert
                                                                                   Formulation:                                           Solving:
                                                                                       Learning to
                                                                                                                          LLMFINAL
        Solver Code s
                                            Solver Code (Generated by GPT-4)                                                                Learning to
                                                                                         Define
                                            Desirability (Labeled by Expert)
        for Problem p          Solver Code s' with Desirability Label d                                                                    Generate Code


 (c) Auto-Testing                                                                                                        Self-correction
                                                                                                                                                         Errors



        Problem                            5-Element                                 Code                                  Logs                               Results
                        LLMFINAL                                    LLMFINAL                          Solver                           LLMFINAL
                                                                                                                                                   Optimal Solution
                        (Defining)                                  (Solving)

Figure 2: The framework of LLMOPT. Sub-figure (a) shows the data labeling process, where experts
and GPT-4 work together to label both the five-element formulation and solver code. Sub-figure (b)
shows the learning process, in which multi-instruction supervised fine-tuning and model alignment
are employed to learn-to-define and generate code. Sub-figure (c) shows the auto-testing process
with self-correction mechanism, which can define and solve optimization problems automatically.
where x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xD )⊤ is the D-dimensional decision variable, X ⊆ RD is the feasible
domain of x, and the goal is to minimize the objective function f : X → R. The constraints are
represented by the vector-valued function G(x) : RD → Rm , where G(x) ≤ c denotes a series of
inequality constraints, and c = (c1 , c2 , . . . , cm )⊤ is the vector of upper bounds for these constraints.
In practice, a vast majority of optimization problems can be formulated as shown in Formula 1.
Based on it, the five-element formulation provides a structured and intuitive way to define optimiza-
tion problems, retaining essential descriptions and making them more accessible and understand-
able, even for LLMs. As the name suggests, the five-element consist of the five key components
of an optimization problem: Sets, Parameters, Variables, Objective and Constraints. As shown in
Figure 1, the element Variables, Objective, and Constraints describe the decision variables x, the
objective function f (x), and the constraints G(x) in Formula 1, along with concise descriptions
for each. Meanwhile, Sets and Parameters provide detailed information of indices and descriptions,
as well as the specific numerical values of the parameters involved in the objective function and
constraints. Importantly, the five-element provides a more accurate formulation of the problem by
mining and preserving key descriptions of the problem. For example, in Figure 1, the positive integer
constraint is implicit in the problem but is effectively captured by the five-element formulation.
As a universal formulation, five-element can define various types of optimization problems, thereby
enhancing the optimization generalization ability. For instance, integer programming can be mod-
eled by adjusting the feasible region X , while linear and non-linear programming constraints are
captured by different forms of G(x). More complex problems, such as multi-objective optimiza-
tion, extend the objective function to a vector-valued form F (x). Additional examples illustrating
the formulation of various optimization problems are provided in Appendix J.

3.2.2     DATA AUGMENTATION AND L ABELING
The five-element formulation enables the mapping of optimization problems described in natural
language to a universal structure, which can then be used to generate solver code. However, the ef-
fectiveness of learning is significantly influenced by the quality, quantity, and distribution of training
data. Current available datasets are limited in these aspects and lack proper labels of formulations
and solver code. Therefore, data augmentation and labeling are employed to address these gaps.
Firstly, we collect almost all existing optimization problem datasets, including NL4Opt (Ramamon-
jison et al., 2021), Mamo (EasyLP and ComplexLP) (Huang et al., 2024), IndustryOR (Tang et al.,


                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2024), NLP4LP (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024) and ComplexOR (Xiao et al., 2024) whose detailed
information is introduced in the Appendix A. Subsequently, 100 samples are randomly selected
from each dataset as the reserved test dataset. For datasets with fewer than 100 samples, all data are
used for testing. The remaining samples are used for data augmentation, ensuring a clear separation
between training and testing data. In the data augmentation process, LLMs effectively generate data
through prompt engineering (Tang et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2023). To build a high-quality dataset,
seven distinct instructions are applied to 1,763 seed problems. These instructions comprehensively
extend the original problems from various perspectives, such as modifying constraints, changing
scenarios, altering optimization types, and branching out from the original problem, among other
approaches. Finally, experts review the generated problems, removing those with unclear descrip-
tions or infeasible solutions to ensure data diversity and quality. Prompts are detailed in Appendix I.
Then, the labeling of optimization problems using five-element and solver code is performed by
experts. GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) is also used to generate labels with uncertain correctness, which
can be used in the model alignment. As shown in Figure 2(a), for each optimization problem p,
experts label the five-element formulation f and solver code s, and GPT-4 generates the formulation
f ′ and code s′ , respectively. Since GPT-4 may produce errors, experts validate it and assign a
desirability label d′ to indicate whether GPT-4’s label is accurate (True) or not (False). This process
produces two types of labeled data: fully accurate formulations and solver codes, and those with
potential errors but validated by experts. The two kinds of data are well-suited for the processes of
multi-instruction supervised fine-tuning and model alignment, as discussed in the next section. The
detailed process of data labeling and augmentation is introduced in Appendix K.

3.3     L EARNING : M ULTI -I NSTRUCTION SFT AND M ODEL A LIGNMENT

3.3.1    M ULTI -I NSTRUCTION SFT
Direct utilization of LLM to address optimization problems described in natural language often
results in inaccuracies, primarily due to their inability to comprehensively capture implicit informa-
tion. To address this issue, we enhance the capability to both define and solve the problems through
multi-instruction supervised fine-tuning (SFT).
                                          f        s
The multi-instruction dataset DSFT = DSFT      ∪ DSFT , labeled by experts, is designed to improve both
the problem formulation and solving code generation abilities of LLM. The formulation dataset
  f                  N
DSFT   = {(ui , vi )}i f focuses on enhancing the LLM’s ability to accurately define general optimiza-
tion problems by providing data pairs (ui , vi ), where ui represents a problem p after being applied
to a template, and vi is its corresponding five-element formulation f . Meanwhile, the solving dataset
  s
DSFT   = {(ui , vi )}Ni
                        s
                          focuses on improving the LLM’s ability to generate solver code. It contains
two types of data: in one, ui is the problem p and vi is the solver code s; in the other, ui is the
formulation f and vi is the solver code s. Both are aligned with the appropriate templates and all
the labels in DSFT are correctly labeled by experts. The instruction templates used in the learning
process are detailed in Appendix H, which provides a comprehensive explanation, including a more
in-depth description of the five-element to facilitate better understanding by the LLM.
Then, given the instruction u and its label v, the
                                                 Q objective of SFT is to maximize the conditional
probability p(v | u). Assuming that p(v | u) = i=1 p(vi | v0:i−1 , u), this leads to minimizing the
negative log-likelihood:
                                                 X
                       LSFT (θ) = −E(u,v)∼DSFT       log π(vi | v0:i−1 , u; θ) ,                (2)
                                                  i=1

                                                                                           f
where DSFT denotes the multi-instruction SFT dataset, which combines instructions from DSFT   and
  s
DSFT to train the LLM in defining and solving optimization problems. π(·) represents the predicted
probability distribution of the LLM, and θ denotes its parameters.

3.3.2    M ODEL A LIGNMENT
Despite SFT training the model to learn how to write solving code, LLMs may still exhibit hal-
lucination when faced with novel problems. This hallucination manifests as outputs that appear
plausible but are, in fact, fabricated or inaccurate. To mitigate hallucinations, we incorporate model


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


alignment, which is not utilized by other learning-based methods. We use Kahneman-Tversky Op-
timization (KTO)(Ethayarajh et al., 2024) as our alignment method, as it avoids reward model bias
and mitigates the data demands of ranking-based approaches like PPO(Ouyang et al., 2022) and
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023).
The KTO algorithm aligns the model using (instruction, completion, desirability) data, where desir-
ability reflects the correctness of the completion using a binary label: True or False. Specifically, the
dataset DKTO = {(ui , vi , di )}N
                                i
                                  KTO
                                      , used by KTO, contains GPT-4 completions with expert-assigned
desirability labels. The instructions ui in DKTO match those in DSFT , covering formulation and
code generation tasks. However, the completions vi , generated by GPT-4, do not always fulfill the
instructions ui correctly, and experts assign desirability labels di to achieve the model alignment.
Building upon the previous work by Rafailov et al. (2023), it is evident that the LLM can be inter-
preted as a reward function. Consequently, we can express the optimal reward for KTO as follows:
                                     ∗                  π ∗ (v | u)
                                   rKTO  (u, v) = β log              .                            (3)
                                                        πref (v | u)
In this equation, r∗ (·) denotes the optimal reward function of the completion v in response to the
instruction u, and π ∗ (·) represents the optimal model (i.e., the KTO model), πref (·) indicates the
reference model (i.e., the SFT model), and β serves as the scaling factor. This ratio measures the
relative confidence of the optimal model in generating v compared to the reference model.
Inspired by classic prospect theory (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992), the value function employs a lo-
gistic transformation on the adjusted ratio of log probabilities, thereby assessing the value of each
generation in terms of its desirability and the divergence of the policy from the reference. By sub-
stituting the exponential function with a sigmoid function, we derive the value function as follows:

                                        σ(rKTO (u, v) − zref ) if d = True | u, v ,
                   ϕKTO (u, v; β) =                                                                      (4)
                                        σ(zref − rKTO (u, v)) if d = False | u, v ,
where zref is defined as the reference point, formulated as: zref = βKL(π ∗ (v ′ | u) || πref (v ′ | u)).
Another essential component of KTO loss is the weight function, which can be expressed as follows:

                                         λD if d = True | u, v ,
                             w(v) =                                                            (5)
                                         λU if d = False | u, v .
The weight function w(v) assigns weights to the loss depending on the desirability of the outcome
v, with λD and λU representing the weights for desirable and undesirable outcomes, respectively.
Finally, the KTO loss function is formulated as:
                    LKTO (π ∗ , πref ) = E(u,v,d)∼DKTO [w(v)(1 − ϕKTO (u, v; β))] .                     (6)
The KTO loss function encourages the optimal model π ∗ to produce completions that align more
closely with expert-labeled data, improving the overall optimization generalization of both problem
formulation and solver generation.

3.4   AUTO -T ESTING : F ORMULATION , S OLVING AND S ELF -C ORRECTION

In the auto-testing process, first, the optimization problem is formulated using the five-element
framework based on its natural language description; second, the solver code is generated for the
five-element formulation and executed; finally, the solver’s running logs, including output results
and errors, are analyzed to determine whether self-correction is necessary. The auto-testing pro-
cess automates the entire workflow of problem definition and solver code generation, while also
integrating the self-correction mechanism for continuous improvement.
Inspired by Chen et al. (2024), to enhance optimization generalization, we implement self-correction
to automatically analyze the output results and identify errors arising during the execution of the
solver code. Specifically, the instruction is organized around the problem, the five-element formula-
tion, the solver code, and the execution output results, following a template outlined in Appendix H.
The self-correction LLM then determines whether further resolution is necessary or whether the
optimal solution has been achieved. If resolution is needed, the model generates an analysis with
suggestions and decides to return to whether the problem formulation step or the code generation
step. The self-correction mechanism ensures a more robust and adaptive optimization process, im-
proving optimization generalization especially in the accuracy of formulations and final solutions.

                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     E XPERIMENT

To analyze the performance of LLMOPT, we conduct SFT and model alignment based on the open-
source LLM Qwen1.5-14B (Bai et al., 2023) and compare it with various learning-based and prompt-
based methods on extensive datasets. The experiments aim to answer four key questions below.

    (Q1) Learning-based vs. Prompting-based Methods: What advantages do learning-based meth-
         ods, such as LLMOPT, have over LLMs that rely solely on prompt engineering?
    (Q2) Optimization Generalization (Accuracy and Generality): To what extent can LLMOPT
         improve optimization generalization ability compared with existing methods?
    (Q3) Importance of Problem Definition in LLMOPT: How does the proposed five-element for-
         mulation as an intermediate step contribute to boost accuracy in solving optimization tasks?
    (Q4) Effectiveness of Model Alignment in LLMOPT: How effective is model alignment in en-
         hancing the solving accuracy of LLMs for optimization tasks?

The four questions are answered in order in the next sections which include a detailed introduction
to the experiments, followed by the analysis of results.

4.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

The experiments are conducted on six real-world optimization and operation task datasets, namely
NL4Opt (Ramamonjison et al., 2021), Mamo (EasyLP and ComplexLP) (Huang et al., 2024), In-
dustryOR (Tang et al., 2024), NLP4LP (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024), ComplexOR (Xiao et al.,
2024). These datasets encompass about 20 scenario and 7 types of optimization problems. Detailed
descriptions of these datasets are provided in Appendix A. Training and testing data are strictly sep-
arated. For the NL4Opt, Mamo (EasyLP and ComplexLP) datasets, we shuffle the original datasets
and randomly extract 100 data from each dataset as the test datasets, and the remaining data are used
as seed data for data augmentation. The IndustryOR dataset retains its original partitioning. Due to
the limited data in NLP4LP and ComplexOR, all data from these datasets are used for testing and
excluded from the training process.
In the experiment, we use three performance metrics to comprehensively evaluate the optimization
generalization of the algorithm, namely, Execution Rate (ER), Solving Accuracy (SA), and Average
Solving Times (AST). Specifically, ER refers to the proportion of solutions whose code can run
without any errors and has running results output. SA refers to the proportion of solutions that
correctly solve the optimization problem, i.e., find the optimal solution. AST refers to the average
number of times the self-correction process is performed during the test. In our experiment, the
maximum number of self-correction re-solves is set to 12 times.

4.2    A NALYSIS OF O PTIMIZATION G ENERALIZATION

In this section, we compare LLMOPT with prompt-based methods (Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023),
Chain-of-Experts (Xiao et al., 2024), OptiMUS (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024)), learning-based
methods (ORLM (Tang et al., 2024) built on Mistral-7B, Deepseek-Math-7B-Base, LLaMa3-8B),
and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), demonstrating the optimization generalization capability of LLMOPT.


Table 1: Comparison of the SA metric between LLMOPT and learning-based methods. The results
for ORLM are cited from Tang et al. (2024). Underlined results indicate the previous SOTA, while
bold results indicate the current SOTA.
                      Datasets                  NL4Opt   Mamo Easy   Mamo Complex    IndustryOR
                   GPT-4 Directly               47.3%      66.5%         14.6%          28.0%
                        Mistral-7B              84.4%      81.4%         32.0%          27.0%
           ORLM         Deepseek-Math-7B-Base   86.5%      82.2%         37.9%          33.0%
                        LLaMa3-8B               85.7%      82.3%         37.4%          38.0%
      LLMOPT (Ours)     Qwen1.5-14B             93.0%      97.0%         68.0%          46.0%
                Improvement Rate ↑              +6.5%     +14.7%        +30.1%          +8.0%


                                                   7
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        100%                   91.0% 89.0%
                                       88.0%                                               GPT-4o                                                  100%                   96.0% 97.0%             LLMOPT w/o 5-Element


Solving Accuracy (SA)


                                                                                                                           Solving Accuracy (SA)
                               81.0%                                                                                                                      91.0% 93.0%
                        80%                                                                Qwen1.5 with Only SFT                                                                                  LLMOPT               83.8%
                                                                                                                                                   80%                                                                    73.0%           72.7% 72.7%
                        60%                                                                                                                                                               64.0% 68.0%
                                                                                                   54.1%
                                                                     46.0%                                         45.5%
                                                                                                                                                   60%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  46.0%
                        40%                                  34.0%           34.0% 33.0%   32.4%                                                   40%                                                    41.0%
                                                                                                           27.3%
                        20%                                                                                                                        20%
                         0%    NL4Opt          Mamo E. Mamo C. IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR
                                                                                                                                                    0%    NL4Opt          Mamo E. Mamo C. IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR
                        (a) Comparison between GPT-4o and Qwen1.5-14B with only SFT.                                                                                          (b) Ablation of five-element.
                        100%                   97.0% 97.0%           LLMOPT w/o KTO                                                                100%           93.0%           97.0%
Solving Accuracy (SA)


                                                                                                                           Solving Accuracy (SA)
                               90.0% 93.0%                                                                                                                88.0%           89.0%
                                                                     LLMOPT                        83.8%                                                                                                                          83.8%
                        80%                                                                                        72.7%
                                                                                                                                                   80%                                                                                            72.7%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  68.0%
                                                             65.0% 68.0%                   64.9%
                        60%                                                                                54.6%                                   60%                                                                    54.1%
                                                                                                                                                                                          46.0%                   46.0%                   45.5%
                                                                             43.0% 46.0%
                        40%                                                                                                                        40%                                                    33.0%

                        20%                                                                                                                        20%            LLMOPT w/o KTO & 5-Element
                                                                                                                                                                  LLMOPT
                         0%    NL4Opt          Mamo E. Mamo C. IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR
                                                                                                                                                    0%    NL4Opt          Mamo E. Mamo C. IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR
                         (c) Ablation of KTO.                    (d) Ablation of both five-element and KTO.
     Figure 3: The results of the SA metric. Sub-figure (a) compares the SA performance of GPT-4o
     and the Qwen1.5-14B model with only SFT, showing the potential of learning-based methods. Sub-
     figures (b), (c) and (d) perform ablation on five-element and KTO. The Mamo Easy and Mamo
     Complex datasets are abbreviated as Mamo E. and Mamo C., due to space constraints.

     Table 2: Comparison of the SA metric between LLMOPT and prompt-based methods. The results
     for Reflexion, Chain-of-Experts, and OptiMUS are cited from Xiao et al. (2024). Underlined results
     indicate the previous SOTA, while bold results indicate the current SOTA.
                                                                               Datasets                        NL4Opt                               NLP4LP                ComplexOR
                                                                         GPT-4 Directly                             47.3%                            35.8%                        9.5%
                                                                           Reflexion                                53.0%                            46.3%                    19.1%
                                                                        Chain-of-Experts                            64.2%                            53.1%                    38.1%
                                                                           OptiMUS                                  78.8%                            72.0%                    66.7%
                                                                       LLMOPT (Ours)                                93.0%                            83.8%                    72.7%
                                                                  Improvement Rate ↑                               +14.2%                            +11.8%                   +6.0%


     Learning-based vs. Prompting-based Methods (Answer to Q1). To demonstrate the potential of
     the learning-based method, we perform SFT on Qwen1.5-14B Bai et al. (2023) and compare it with
     GPT-4o using the same prompt (Appendix H). As shown in Figure 3(a), the results indicate that
     LLM with only SFT can achieve comparable performance to GPT-4o. For the complete LLMOPT
     (including model alignment and self-correction), as shown in Figure 4, LLMOPT outperforms both
     GPT-4o and GPT-4-Turbo, achieving higher solving accuracy with fewer solving times across all six
     datasets. All these results demonstrate the potential of learning-based methods.
     Accuracy (Answer to Q2-1). We compare the solving accuracy (SA) of LLMOPT with prompt-
     based and learning-based methods as shown in Table 1 and 2, respectively. To ensure consistency
     in reproduction, we only cite the results from the original paper. LLMOPT achieves state-of-the-art
     (SOTA) performance in SA across six datasets, outperforming both prompt-based and learning-
     based methods. Compared to learning-based methods, defining with the five-element formulation
     and self-correction process improves the accuracy, with an average increase of 14.83% on four
     datasets. For prompt-based methods, SFT and model alignment enhance the LLM’s ability to solve
     optimization problems, yielding a 10.67% average improvement across three datasets. Overall,
     LLMOPT improves SOTA performance by an average of 11.08% across the six datasets.
     Generality (Answer to Q2-2). To analyze the generality of LLMOPT on general optimization
     problems, we conduct testing on six datasets, each covering diverse optimization types, such as
     linear programming, nonlinear programming, integer programming, mixed-integer programming,
     multi-objective optimization, and combinatorial optimization, as detailed in Appendix G. These
     datasets span over 20 different fields, including agriculture, energy, and healthcare, as detailed in
     Appendix F. LLMOPT achieves state-of-the-art results across all datasets including a variety of
     optimization problems, demonstrating its generality. Appendix L shows the specific experimental
     results by question types. Moreover, despite the absence of NLP4LP and ComplexOR data in the


                                                                                                                           8
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      NL4Opt            Mamo Easy                Mamo Complex                                 IndustryOR             NLP4LP             ComplexOR
                        100%                                                                                                100%

                                                                                                                            86%
Solving Accuracy (SA)


                                                                                                    Solving Accuracy (SA)
                        80%
                                                                                                                            72%
                        60%
                                                                                                                            58%
                                                                                                                                           LLMOPT
                        40%           LLMOPT (Ours)                                                                                        w/o 5-Element
                                      GPT-4o                                                                                44%            w/o KTO
                                      GPT-4-Turbo                                                                                          w/o 5-Element & KTO
                        20%1.0         3.0        5.0         7.0          9.0          11.0                                30%1.0          3.0        5.0        7.0        9.0     11.0
                                             Average Solving Times (AST)                                                                          Average Solving Times (AST)
                                 (a) Comparison with GPT-4o and GPT-4-Turbo.                                                               (b) Comparison with ablation versions.

                           Figure 4: Comparison of SA and AST between LLMOPT, GPT-4, and ablated versions.


    Table 3: The ablation results of LLMOPT without (w/o) five-element formulation, KTO alignment
    and self-correction, respectively. In the experiments without self-correction, the model is called only
    once, resulting in an AST of 1.00. Bold indicates the best performance for each metric.
                                     Metrics             ER           SA          AST           ER                             SA          AST         ER         SA        AST
                                     Dataset                        NL4Opt                                      Mamo Easy                                 Mamo Complex
                                   LLMOPT               99.0%       93.0%         3.07         100.0%                        97.0%      1.70         97.0%       68.0%       6.30
                                 w/o five-element       99.0%       91.0%         2.95         100.0%                        96.0%      2.36         98.0%       64.0%       6.38
                                    w/o KTO             99.0%       90.0%         3.47         100.0%                        97.0%      2.80         95.0%       65.0%       6.79
                                w/o self-correction     79.0%       57.0%        (1.00)         85.0%                        71.0%     (1.00)        52.0%       32.0%      (1.00)
                                     Dataset                  IndustryOR                                                    NLP4LP                           ComplexOR
                                   LLMOPT               92.0%       46.0%         8.35         100.0%                        83.8%      7.00          94.7%      72.7%      10.27
                                 w/o five-element       92.0%       41.0%         8.50          96.9%                        73.0%      7.43          94.7%      72.7%      10.05
                                    w/o KTO             92.0%       43.0%         8.88          89.2%                        64.9%      8.32         100.0%      54.6%      10.84
                                w/o self-correction     55.0%       31.0%        (1.00)         47.7%                        35.2%     (1.00)         47.4%      18.2%      (1.00)



    training dataset, LLMOPT still achieves SOTA performance on them, as shown in Table 1, fur-
    ther proving its generality. Furthermore, seven examples of the five-element formulation applied to
    various optimization problems are provided in Appendix J to illustrate the generality of this defi-
    nition. The high accuracy and generality demonstrate the optimization generalization capability of
    LLMOPT.


     4.3                       A BLATION S TUDY

    In this section, we conduct comprehensive ablation experiments, including LLMOPT without five-
    element formulation, without KTO alignment, and without self-correction. The results of these
    experiments are shown in Figure 3, Figure 4, and Table 3. We also design detailed ablation experi-
    ments on the self-correction mechanism, which are introduced in Appendix M.
    Importance of Problem Definition (Answer to Q3). In order to explore the importance of problem
    definition, we evaluate three metrics on the ablation experiments: Execution Rate (ER), Solving
    Accuracy (SA), and Average Solving Time (AST). As detailed in Table 3 and Figure 3(b), these
    results show that using the five-element formulation as the problem definition improves SA across
    all six datasets. However, this definition can sometimes lower the ER, as the LLM may oversimplify
    the problem without it, producing error-free but inaccurate code. In contrast, using the five-element
    approach ensures correct code generation, improving SA at the cost of slightly reduced ER.
    Effectiveness of Model Alignment (Answer to Q4). Alignment typically enhances the efficiency
    and effectiveness of LLMs on specific tasks. As shown in Figure 4(b) and 3(c), the ablation results
    shows that KTO alignment not only significantly boosts SA but also reduces AST across all six
    datasets. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 4(b), 3(d), and Table 3, the combination of five-element
    and KTO alignment improves performance in terms of SA and AST on complex datasets.


                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   D ISCUSSION
Attempt on Larger Models. To explore the potential for further performance improvement of LL-
MOPT on larger models, we deploy it on Qwen2-72B (Yang et al., 2024a). The detailed results
are provided in Appendix D. We conduct experiments on two complex task datasets, Mamo Com-
plex and IndustryOR, and the results show that LLMOPT based on Qwen2-72B shows significant
improvements in both SA and ER compared with its performance on Qwen1.5-14B. Given the trade-
off between performance and the costs of training and deployment, i.e., green computing issue, we
opt not to use larger models, since Qwen1.5-14B already achieves state-of-the-art performance.
Compared with OpenAI o1 Model. OpenAI o1 model (OpenAI, 2024) has recently garnered
attention for its strong reasoning ability. However, due to the limited availability of its API and
restrictions on the number of weekly trials, our evaluation of the o1 model’s performance is limited.
We conduct experiments on 10 easy and 10 complex problems from the Mamo Complex dataset.
With a single call, the o1 model successfully generated code to solve 7 easy problems and 5 complex
problems. These results suggest that the o1 model is more accurate in solving optimization problems
compared with GPT-4 series models. However, due to the lack of open access, the absence of
detailed technical specifications and training data description of o1, as well as the limitations on
usage and high costs, fine-tuning open-source large models with LLMOPT presents a more cost-
effective solution for achieving better optimization generalization in real industrial scenarios.
The Seesaw Issue of LLMs. The seesaw issue in LLMs refers to the trade-off between improving
the performance on specialized tasks and its generalization across diverse tasks, where gains in one
area often result in losses in another. To assess whether enhancing the LLM’s ability to define and
solve optimization problems affects its performance on other tasks, we compared the model’s per-
formance before and after fine-tuning across 10 general tasks, including math, code, classification,
information extraction, open QA, closed QA, text generation, brainstorming, rewriting and summa-
rization. The results indicate that the fine-tuned model showed performance improvements in 6 tasks
and declines in 4 tasks, with an average performance increase of 0.3% across all tasks. Importantly,
no significant trade-off or seesaw effect is observed. Detailed results are provided in Appendix E.
About High-Quality Training Data. High-quality data are crucial for fine-tuning LLMs (Villalo-
bos et al., 2024). Accurate and diverse training data allow the model to improve its task-specific
performance. However, optimization problem data described in natural language are relatively
scarce. Although we have collected as many optimization problem datasets as possible, which are
detailed in Appendix A, these datasets often lack high-quality labels. For instance, in the IndustryOR
dataset (Tang et al., 2024), some data have incorrectly labeled optimal solutions, and the NL4Opt
dataset (Ramamonjison et al., 2021) does not provide optimal solution annotations but only entity
labels. This highlights the scarcity of optimization problems training data. Although prompt engi-
neering for data augmentation is employed in this work, expert labeling remains a time-consuming
and labor-intensive process. Efficiently gathering, synthesizing and generating more diverse and
well-labeled high-quality data remains an issue that cannot be ignored in this research direction in
future. Moreover, for large-scale problems, data are typically stored in specific databases or files
rather than extracted from natural language descriptions. The understanding of these data structures
remains a new topic that requires further exploration.

6   C ONCLUSION
This paper focuses on the challenge of optimization generalization in LLMs, including the accuracy
in solving optimization problems and the generality of the problem types that LLMs can handle. We
propose a learning-based framework called LLMOPT, which significantly improves LLMs’ ability
to define and solve general optimization problems through multi-instruction supervised fine-tuning
and model alignment. LLMOPT introduces the five-element formulation as a universal definition for
various types of optimization problems to enhance solving accuracy. LLMOPT is extensively eval-
uated on a wide range of optimization tasks. It achieves state-of-the-art optimization generalization
ability across all of them, i.e., a notable 11.08% average solving accuracy improvement.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive and valuable suggestions.
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62476091), Ant
Group and the Ant Group Research Intern Program.


E THICS AND R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Ethics. This work does not involve any human subjects, personal data, or sensitive information. All
the test datasets used are publicly available, and no proprietary or confidential information is used.
We follow recommendations to use the Azure OpenAI service when using GPT models.
Reproducibility. Experimental settings are described in Section 4 and Appendix B, and datasets
included in Appendix A. The code is available at https://github.com/caigaojiang/
LLMOPT.


R EFERENCES
Ali AhmadiTeshnizi, Wenzhi Gao, and Madeleine Udell. OptiMUS: Scalable optimization modeling
  with (MI)LP solvers and large language models. In Proceedings of the Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria, 2024.

Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenhang Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Luo Ji, Mei Li, Junyang Lin, Runji Lin, Dayiheng Liu, Gao
   Liu, Chengqiang Lu, K. Lu, Jianxin Ma, Rui Men, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Chuanqi
   Tan, Sinan Tan, Jianhong Tu, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Wei Wang, Shengguang Wu, Benfeng
   Xu, Jin Xu, An Yang, Hao Yang, Jian Yang, Jian Yang, Shusheng Yang, Yang Yao, Bowen Yu,
   Yu Bowen, Hongyi Yuan, Zheng Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, Xing Zhang, Yichang Zhang, Zhenru
   Zhang, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Xiaohuan Zhou, and Tianhang Zhu. Qwen technical report.
   CoRR, abs/2309.16609, 2023.

Paolo Brandimarte. Routing and scheduling in a flexible job shop by tabu search. Annals of Opera-
  tions Research, 41:157–183, 1993.

Matthew Brown, Bo An, Christopher Kiekintveld, Fernando Ordóñez, and Milind Tambe. Multi-
 objective optimization for security games. In Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference
 on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 863–870, Valencia, Spain, 2012.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 33, Virtual, 2020.

Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  Vienna, Austria, 2024.

Yi Chen, Aimin Zhou, and Swagatam Das. Utilizing dependence among variables in evolutionary
  algorithms for mixed-integer programming: A case study on multi-objective constrained portfolio
  optimization. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 66:100928, 2021.

Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Model align-
  ment as prospect theoretic optimization. In Proceedings of the Forty-first International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria, 2024.

Roman Garnett. Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian,
  and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields pow-
  erful prompt optimizers. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, Vienna, Austria, 2024.
David Ke Hong, Yadi Ma, Sujata Banerjee, and Z. Morley Mao. Incremental deployment of sdn in
  hybrid enterprise and isp networks. Proceedings of the Symposium on SDN Research, 2016.
Xuhan Huang, Qingning Shen, Yan Hu, Anningzhe Gao, and Benyou Wang. Mamo: A mathematical
  modeling benchmark with solvers. CoRR, abs/2405.13144, 2024.
Beibin Li, Konstantina Mellou, Bo qing Zhang, Jeevan Pathuri, and Ishai Menache. Large language
  models for supply chain optimization. CoRR, abs/2307.03875, 2023.
Fei Liu, Xi Lin, Zhenkun Wang, Shunyu Yao, Xialiang Tong, Mingxuan Yuan, and Qingfu Zhang.
  Large language model for multi-objective evolutionary optimization. CoRR, abs/2310.12541,
  2023.
Shengcai Liu, Caishun Chen, Xinghua Qu, Ke Tang, and Yew-Soon Ong. Large language models
  as evolutionary optimizers. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Compu-
  tation, pp. 1–8, Yokohama, Japan, 2024a.
Tennison Liu, Nicolás Astorga, Nabeel Seedat, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Large language models
  to enhance Bayesian optimization. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, Vienna, Austria, 2024b.
Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jianguang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng, Qing-
  wei Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. WizardMath: Empowering mathematical reasoning
  for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct. CoRR, abs/2308.09583, 2023.
Zeyuan Ma, Hongshu Guo, Jiacheng Chen, Guojun Peng, Zhiguang Cao, Yining Ma, and Yue jiao
  Gong. LLaMoCo: Instruction tuning of large language models for optimization code generation.
  CoRR, abs/2403.01131, 2024.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
OpenAI. Introducing Openai o1. https://openai.com/o1/, 2024.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser
  Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan
  Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, New Orleans, LA, 2022.
Hong Qian and Yang Yu. Derivative-free reinforcement learning: a review. Frontiers of Computer
  Science, 15(6):156336, 2021.
Hong Qian, Yu-Peng Wu, Rong-Jun Qin, Xin An, Yi Chen, and Aimin Zhou. Provable space
  discretization based evolutionary search for scalable multi-objective security games. Swarm and
  Evolutionary Computation, 92:101770, 2025.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D. Manning, Stefano Ermon, and
  Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, New Orleans, LA, 2023.
Rindranirina Ramamonjison, Timothy T. L. Yu, Raymond Li, Haley Li, Giuseppe Carenini, Bissan
  Ghaddar, Shiqi He, Mahdi Mostajabdaveh, Amin Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Zirui Zhou, and Yong
  Zhang. NL4Opt competition: Formulating optimization problems based on their natural language
  descriptions. In NeurIPS 2022 Competition Track, pp. 189–203, Virtual, 2021.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflex-
  ion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 36, New Orleans, LA, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhengyang Tang, Chenyu Huang, Xin Zheng, Shixi Hu, Zizhuo Wang, Dongdong Ge, and
  Benyou Wang. ORLM: Training large language models for optimization modeling. CoRR,
  abs/2405.17743, 2024.
Simon Trimborn, Mingyang Li, and Wolfgang Karl Härdle. Investing with cryptocurrencies - A
  liquidity constrained investment approach. Capital Markets: Market Efficiency eJournal, 2018.
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
 uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5:297–323, 1992.
Pablo Villalobos, Anson Ho, Jaime Sevilla, Tamay Besiroglu, Lennart Heim, and Marius Hobbhahn.
  Position: Will we run out of data? Limits of LLM scaling based on human-generated data. In
  Proceedings of the Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria,
  2024.
Runzhong Wang, Junchi Yan, and Xiaokang Yang. Combinatorial learning of robust deep graph
  matching: An embedding based approach. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 45:6984–7000, 2020.
Ziyang Xiao, Dongxiang Zhang, Yangjun Wu, Lilin Xu, Yuan Jessica Wang, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin
  Fu, Tao Zhong, Jia Zeng, Mingli Song, and Gang Chen. Chain-of-Experts: When LLMs meet
  complex operations research problems. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, Vienna, Austria, 2024.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang,
  Jialin Wang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Ma, Jianxin Yang, Jin Xu, Jingren
  Zhou, Jinze Bai, Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Chen, Kexin Yang,
  Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Na Ni, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Ru Peng, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Runji Lin,
  Shijie Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Tianhang Zhu, Tianhao Li, Tianyu Liu, Wenbin Ge, Xiaodong
  Deng, Xiaohuan Zhou, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Zhang, Xipin Wei, Xuancheng Ren, Xuejing Liu,
  Yang Fan, Yang Yao, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yunfei Chu, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru
  Zhang, Zhifang Guo, and Zhihao Fan. Qwen2 technical report. CoRR, abs/2407.10671, 2024a.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, Vienna, Austria, 2024b.
Heng Yang and Ke Li. InstOptima: Evolutionary multi-objective instruction optimization via large
  language model-based instruction operators. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP, pp. 13593–13602, Singapore, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     DATASETS

A.1   T HE I NTRODUCTION OF DATASETS

We conduct experiments on the following real-world optimization task datasets.

                    Table 4: The statistics of the optimization problem datasets.

                  Dateset Name               # of Data                     Notes
       NL4Opt (Ramamonjison et al., 2021)      1101        All data are unlabeled optimal solution.
       Mamo Complex (Huang et al., 2024)        211                            -
        Mamo Easy (Huang et al., 2024)          652                            -
         IndustryOR (Tang et al., 2024)         100      Another 3000 data without optimal solution.
      NLP4LP (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024)       65        All data are unlabeled optimal solution.
         ComplexOR (Xiao et al., 2024)           19        All data are unlabeled optimal solution.


NL4Opt (Ramamonjison et al., 2021). The NL4Opt Competition curates a dataset comprising 1101
annotated LPWPs across 6 diverse domains. Each set contained LPWPs from source domains like
sales, advertising, and investment, ensuring representation across all splits. However, LPWPs from
target domains such as production, transportation, and sciences were exclusively reserved for the
development and test sets.
Mamo (Huang et al., 2024). The optimization dataset of Mamo benchmark consists of two parts,
Easy LP and Complex LP. Easy LP contains 652 high school-level MILP problems for basic learn-
ing of linear and mixed integer linear programming. Complex LP provides 211 undergraduate-
level challenges, integrating LP and MILP, suitable for advanced learners and researchers. These
problems are more complex, covering different applications and theoretical challenges, suitable for
advanced courses and research projects, and provide comprehensive development of optimization
skills from basic to complex.
IndustryOR (Tang et al., 2024). IndustryOR is the first industrial dataset designed specifically for
optimization modeling. It incorporates data from 13 different industries and covers a variety of real-
world scenarios. IndustryOR consists of real operations research (OR) problems from eight different
industries. It covers five types of optimization problems: linear programming, integer programming,
mixed integer programming, nonlinear programming, and other special problem types. These prob-
lems are also divided into three difficulty levels. The training dataset of IndustryOR contains 3000
instances without labeling optimal solution and the test dataset contains 100 instances with optimal
solution.
NLP4LP (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024). NLP4LP (Natural Language Processing for Linear Pro-
gramming) is a dataset that includes 65 samples we identified from its repository. These problems
are sourced from optimization textbooks and lecture notes covering areas such as facility location,
network flow, scheduling, and portfolio management. Each instance in NLP4LP includes a de-
scription, sample parameter data file, and optimal value derived from textbook solutions or manual
solving, offering a range of complex optimization challenges of varying lengths.
ComplexOR (Xiao et al., 2024). ComplexOR dataset is developed with the collaboration of three
specialists in operations research. We identify 19 samples from its repository, sourced from diverse
references such as academic papers, textbooks, and real-world industrial scenarios. These problems
encompass a broad spectrum of topics, including supply chain optimization, scheduling problems,
and warehousing logistics.

A.2   T RAINING DATASETS FOR M ULTI -I NSTRUCTION SFT AND M ODEL A LIGNMENT

We introduce the training datasets used for multi-instruction SFT and model alignment, as illustrated
in Table 5. After data augmentation, the SFT dataset comprises 9,828 instances, while the KTO
alignment dataset contains 19,563 instances. To keep the generalization capability of the language
model, we incorporated additional data into the datasets, which is open source and available at


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 5: The number of samples in the dataset for SFT and model alignment.

                                              # of Optimization Data        # of Other Data           Total
                              SFT                      9828                      20000                29828
                              True Label      9827                          26384                36212
                  KTO         False Label     9735           19563           3616       30000    13351       49563



https://instructions.apps.allenai.org/ and https://huggingface.co/
datasets/argilla/ultrafeedback-binarized-preferences-cleaned-kto.
It is important to note that we do not utilize the entire datasets, but instead randomly selected 20,000
and 30,000 instances for the learning process.

B      D ETAIL SETTING OF MULTI - INSTRUCTION SFT AND MODEL ALIGNMENT.

We implement all model training using the PyTorch framework and utilize Qwen 1.5 with 14 billion
parameters (Bai et al., 2023) as the base model. We utilize NVIDIA 8*A100 Tensor Core GPUs
with 80 GB each for model training and employ 1*A100 GPU for model inference. The hyper-
parameters of the training are shown in Table 6. (Un-)DesirableWeight in the table represents the
hyperparameters λU and λD of KTO in the paper.

                      Table 6: The detail training settings for SFT and KTO alignments.
       LoRA Dropout    LoRA R    LoRA Alpha   LearningRate   WarmUp Ratio   BatchSize   MaxLength   Epochs   (Un-)DesirableWeight   Beta
 SFT       0.05          64          16         3.00E-04         0.01          24         2048        20              /              /
 KTO       0.05          16          16         5.00E-07          0.1           4         2048        20             1.0            0.1



For SFT, we adopt the code from the public Github repository at https://github.com/
QwenLM/Qwen, and for KTO training, we adopt the code from the public Github repository at
https://github.com/huggingface/trl. And our project code is available at https:
//github.com/caigaojiang/LLMOPT.

C      D ETAILED R ESULTS

In this section, we present detailed results of comparing LLMOPT with the GPT-4 series models,
including the Solving Accuracy (SA) shown in Table 7, the Execution Rate (ER) shown in Table 8,
and the Average Solving Times (AST) shown in Table 9. All the results LLMOPT are based on
Qwen1.5-14B. In all the tables, the values in bold represent the best performance achieved by LL-
MOPT, while the underlined values indicate the best performance among the GPT-4 series models.
Across all six datasets, LLMOPT outperforms GPT-4 in both Solving Accuracy (SA) and Execution
Rate (ER) metrics. Additionally, LLMOPT often achieves better performance than GPT-4 in terms
of Average Solving Times (AST).

D      C OMPARISON BETWEEN Q WEN 1.5 AND Q WEN 2

In this section, we compare the performance of LLMOPT based on Qwen1.5-14B and Qwen2-
72B (Yang et al., 2024a), focusing on two challenging tasks: Mamo Complex and IndustryOR. As
illustrated in Figure 5, LLMOPT based on Qwen2-72B demonstrates superior performance in both
tasks. Specifically, LLMOPT on Qwen2-72B outperforms Qwen1.5-14B across both the Solving
Accuracy (SA) and Execution Rate (ER) metrics, highlighting the enhanced capabilities of the larger
model in handling complex optimization problems.

E      G ENERALIZATION ON OTHER TASKS

In this section, we compare the model’s performance before and after fine-tuning across 10 tasks:
Math, Code, Classification, Extraction, Open QA, Closed QA, Text Generation, Brainstorming,


                                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Detailed results of solving accuracy (SA). Bold indicates LLMOPT’s best performance,
while underlined indicates the best results from GPT-4 models.
                                                               NL4Opt    Mamo Easy      Mamo Complex     IndustryOR   NLP4LP      ComplexOR
                                            Directly           47.0%          65.0%        13.0%           26.0%        13.5%          9.1%
                      GPT-4-turbo           + 5-elem           48.0%          66.0%        19.0%           28.0%        10.8%          0.0%
                                            Directly           52.0%          67.0%        19.0%           31.0%        18.9%          9.1%
                        GPT-4o              + 5-elem           62.0%          67.0%        23.0%           27.0%        16.2%          18.2%
          w/o debug                  w/o five-element & KTO    56.0%          65.0%        29.0%           22.0%        16.2%          9.1%
                                             w/o KTO           52.0%          63.0%        33.0%           28.0%        18.9%          9.1%
                       LLMOPT           w/o five-element       60.0%          72.0%        31.0%           27.0%        16.2%           9.1%
                                      LLMOPT (w/o debug)       57.0%          71.0%        32.0%           31.0%        35.2%          18.2%
                                             + debug           75.0%          81.0%        25.0%           30.0%        32.4%          18.2%
                      GPT-4-turbo       + 5-elem + debug       76.0%          85.0%        27.0%           29.0%        37.8%          27.3%
                                             + debug           81.0%          91.0%        34.0%           34.0%        32.4%          27.3%
                        GPT-4o          + 5-elem + debug       83.0%          90.0%        38.0%           34.0%        35.2%          36.4%
         with debug                  w/o five-element & KTO    88.0%          89.0%        46.0%           33.0%        54.1%          45.5%
                                             w/o KTO           90.0%          97.0%        65.0%           43.0%        64.9%          54.6%
                       LLMOPT           w/o five-element       91.0%          96.0%        64.0%           41.0%        73.0%          72.7%
                                        LLMOPT (Full)          93.0%          97.0%        68.0%           46.0%        83.8%          72.7%


Table 8: Detailed results of execution rate (ER). Bold indicates LLMOPT’s best performance, while
underlined indicates the best results from GPT-4 models.

                                                              NL4Opt     Mamo Easy        Mamo Complex       IndustryOR         NLP4LP         ComplexOR
                                       Directly               64.0%           71.0%              24.0%          34.0%            21.5%           15.8%
              GPT-4-turbo              + 5-elem               57.0%           68.0%              23.0%          33.0%            20.0%           15.8%
                                       Directly               71.0%           71.0%              42.0%          40.0%            35.4%           42.1%
                GPT-4o                 + 5-elem               69.0%           72.0%              38.0%          36.0%            33.9%           36.8%
 w/o debug                   w/o five-element & KTO           74.0%           74.0%              41.0%          39.0%            33.9%           36.8%
                                     w/o KTO                  73.0%           72.0%              39.0%          38.0%            33.9%           26.3%
               LLMOPT              w/o five-element           82.0%           86.0%          53.0%              63.0%            38.5%           42.1%
                                 LLMOPT (w/o debug)           79.0%           85.0%          52.0%              55.0%            47.7%           47.4%
                                         + debug              95.0%           99.0%              95.0%          87.0%            81.5%           79.0%
              GPT-4-turbo           + 5-elem + debug          93.0%           98.0%              91.0%          83.0%            78.5%           79.0%
                                         + debug              99.0%            99.0%             96.0%          83.0%            86.2%           89.5%
                GPT-4o              + 5-elem + debug          96.0%           100.0%             96.0%          82.0%            84.6%           84.2%
 with debug                  w/o five-element & KTO           100.0%          100.0%             96.0%          90.0%            73.9%           73.7%
                                     w/o KTO                   99.0%          100.0%             95.0%          92.0%            89.2%          100.0%
               LLMOPT               w/o five-element          99.0%           100.0%         98.0%              92.0%            96.9%           94.7%
                                    LLMOPT (Full)             99.0%           100.0%         97.0%              92.0%           100.0%           94.7%


Table 9: Detailed results of average solving times (AST). Bold indicates LLMOPT’s best perfor-
mance, while underlined indicates the best results from GPT-4 models.

                                                  NL4Opt        Mamo Easy             Mamo Complex       IndustryOR       NLP4LP           ComplexOR
                           + debug                     4.66            3.87               9.76               9.13           9.97                11.32
 GPT-4-turbo          + 5-elem + debug                 4.75            3.59               9.81               9.47           10.08               11.32
                           + debug                     3.89            3.26               9.15               8.96            9.89               11.13
   GPT-4o             + 5-elem + debug                 3.93            3.61               9.06               8.97           10.40               10.95
                 w/o five-element & KTO                3.58           3.45                8.11               9.25               8.68            10.79
                         w/o KTO                       3.47           2.80                6.79               8.88               8.32            10.84
  LLMOPT             w/o five-element                  2.95           2.36                6.38               8.50               7.43            10.05
                    LLMOPT (Full)                      3.07           1.70                6.30               8.35               7.00            10.27


                                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                LLMOPT based on Qwen1.5-14B                                                                                  LLMOPT based on Qwen1.5-14B
                                  80%                           LLMOPT based on Qwen2-72B                                                                                    LLMOPT based on Qwen2-72B
                                                    73.0%                                                                               100%                       100.0%                              98.0%
                                         68.0%                                                                                                        97.0%

          Solving Accuracy (SA)


                                                                                                                  Execution Rate (ER)
                                                                                           60.0%                                                                                         92.0%
                                  60%
                                                                               46.0%
                                                                                                                                        80%
                                  40%


                                  20%
                                                                                                                                        60%

                                  0%
                                        Mamo Complex                             IndustryOR                                                           Mamo Complex                        IndustryOR
                                        (a) Solving Accuracy Comparison.                                                                               (b) Execution Rate Comparison.
Figure 5: Comparison in (a) solving accuracy and (b) execution rate between Qwen1.5 and Qwen2.


Rewriting, and Summarization, as shown in Figure 6. The results indicate that LLMOPT does not
significantly degrade performance on a broad range of tasks.


                      100%                Qwen1.5 (Pre-trained)
                                          LLMOPT based on Qwen1.5                                                                              +3.1                          -2.5
                                                                                                                                                              +2.3
                                                       +6.7                                                                                        91.4%           91.2% 92.4% 89.9%      -5.7
                                                            89.0%       -4.4                                                -0.5           88.3%           88.9%                       88.5%              +0.3
                                                                     85.6%            +1.5                        85.5% 85.0%                                                                          85.1% 85.4%
                                           +1.3                                            83.5%                                                                                               82.8%
                                                    82.3%                    81.2% 82.0%
                                        80.6% 81.9%                                                    +0.5
       Accuracy


                            80%                                                                     77.2% 77.7%


                            60%

                                          Math        Code          Classification Extract          Open QA Closed QA Generation Brainstorming Rewrite Summarization Average

                                            Figure 6: Results of performance evaluation on other task types.



F       S CENARIOS OF DATASETS

The scenarios of the datasets are presented in Figure 7, covering 20 scenarios approximately.

                                                  NL4Opt                Mamo Easy                  Mamo Complex                           IndustryOR                   NLP4LP                  ComplexOR             Sum.
       Agriculture                                  23                     30                            5                                     6                          3                        1                   68
         Energy                                      5                     33                            7                                     1                          4                        0                   50
         Health                                     52                     49                           53                                     3                          1                        1                  159
          Retail                                    34                     47                           37                                    11                          2                        1                  132
      Environment                                    6                     40                            0                                     0                          0                        0                   46
        Education                                   11                     32                            0                                     3                          1                        0                   47
    Financial Services                               5                     46                            2                                     6                          4                        0                   63
     Transportation                                 36                     73                           76                                    18                          7                        7                  217
     Public Utilities                                6                     29                           11                                     0                          2                        0                   48
     Manufacturing                                  44                     71                            8                                    45                         31                        8                  207
        Software                                     2                      0                           10                                     1                          7                        1                   21
      Construction                                   4                     56                            1                                     1                          0                        0                   62
          Legal                                      0                      0                            0                                     0                          2                        0                    2
    Customer Service                                 2                      2                            0                                     0                          0                        0                    4
      Entertainment                                 10                     44                            0                                     0                          0                        0                   54
         Others                                      5                    100                            1                                     5                          1                        0                  112
         # Data                                    245                    652                          211                                    100                        65                       19                 1292


                                                                             Figure 7: Scenarios of the datasets.



                                                                                                              17
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     G     O PTIMIZATION T YPES OF DATASETS
     The types of optimization problems are presented in Figure 8, categorized into 7 different classes.

                                     NL4Opt   Mamo Easy   Mamo Complex   IndustryOR   NLP4LP   ComplexOR   Sum.
          Linear Programming          104        2             59             20        15         7        207
          Integer Programming         105       238            12             11         3         1        370
       Mixed Integer Programming       35       412            48             44        35         8        582
        Nonlinear Programming           0        0              2             0          7         0          9
       Combinatorial Optimization       0        0             65             9          5         3         82
       Multi-objective Programming      0        0              0             8          0         0          8
                  Others                1                      25             8          0         0         34
                  # Data              245        652          211            100        65        19       1292


                                       Figure 8: Optimization types of the datasets.


     H     T EMPLATES FOR I NSTRUCTIONS ON L EARNING AND AUTO -T ESTING
     In this section, all instruction templates are introduced. Each template contains instruction con-
     structed by fully filling in the curly braces “{·}” to specify the required content. The following
     templates are used both for constructing learning instructions and for prompts during auto-testing.
 1   In mathematics, optimization problem can be modeled as the following
         expression $\min_{\boldsymbol{x} \in \mathcal{X}} f(\boldsymbol{x}),
         {\rm s.t.} G(\boldsymbol{x}) \leq \boldsymbol{c}$, where
         $\boldsymbol{x} = (x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_D)ˆ\top$ is the
         $D$-dimensional decision variable, $\mathcal{X} \subset
         \mathbb{R}ˆD$ is the feasible domain, $f: \mathcal{X} \rightarrow
         \mathbb{R}$ is the objective function and the goal is to find the
         minima of $f$, $G(\boldsymbol{x}) \leq \boldsymbol{c}$ are the
         constraints of $\boldsymbol{x}$.
 2
 3   The above definition can be mapped to a five-element consisting of
         ‘‘Variables, Objective, Constraints, Sets, Parameters’’. Variables
         indicates what $\boldsymbol{x}$ is, Objective describes the form of
         the objective function $f(\boldsymbol{x})$, and Constraints
         indicates the constraints $G(\boldsymbol{x})$ and $\mathcal{X}$.
         These three can abstract the optimization problem. Sets and
         Parameters are their specific explanations: Sets describes and
         explains the subscripts of the vectors or matrices in them, and
         Parameters supplement their specific values.
 4
 5   You need to write the corresponding five-element model based on the
         problem description and information provided.
 6
 7   The problem description is as follows:
 8   ‘‘‘
 9   {PROBLEM DESCRIPTION}
10   ‘‘‘
11
12   Please write the corresponding five-element model. Please use LaTeX and
         ‘‘‘ plain text environment to complete the following template to
         model the above optimization problem into five-element:
13
14   ‘‘‘
15   ## Sets:
16   [You need to fill in]
17
18   ## Parameters:
19   [You need to fill in]
20
21   ## Variables:
22   [You need to fill in]
23


                                                             18
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


24   ## Objective:
25   [You need to fill in]
26
27   ## Constraints:
28   [You need to fill in]
29   ‘‘‘
     Listing 1: Instruction template of define the five-element formulation from the problem description.

 1   The five-element model is the abstraction of an optimization problem,
         which transforms specific problem scenarios into formal mathematical
         problems. You need to write the corresponding Pyomo code based on
         the five-element model provided.
 2
 3   The following is the five-element model of an optimization problem:
 4   ‘‘‘
 5   {FIVE-Element}
 6   ‘‘‘
 7
 8   Please write the corresponding Pyomo code. Please add ‘from
         pyomo.environ import *‘ at the beginning of your code (You can add
         other ‘import‘ as well). Please print the optimal solution and the
         value of the objective function. Please do not output the running
         log. You need to write it in the form of a class and add a main
         function:
 9
10   ‘‘‘python
11   [Write your code here]
12   ‘‘‘
        Listing 2: Instruction template of generate the solver code from the five-element formulation.

 1   The five-element model is the abstraction of an optimization problem,
         which transforms specific problem scenarios into formal mathematical
         problems. You need to write the corresponding Pyomo code based on
         the five-element model provided.
 2
 3   The problem description is as follows:
 4   ‘‘‘
 5   {PROBLEM DESCRIPTION}
 6   ‘‘‘
 7
 8   Please write the corresponding Pyomo code. Please add ‘from
         pyomo.environ import *‘ at the beginning of your code (You can add
         other ‘import‘ as well). Please print the optimal solution and the
         value of the objective function. Please do not output the running
         log. You need to write it in the form of a class and add a main
         function:
 9
10   ‘‘‘python
11   [Write your code here]
12   ‘‘‘
          Listing 3: Instruction template of generate the solver code from the problem description.

 1   For the following optimization problem, modeling is performed, and pyomo
         code is generated and executed based on the modeling. Please judge
         whether the modeling and code are correct.
 2   The problem is as follows.
 3   ‘‘‘
 4   {PROBLEM DESCRIPTION}
 5   ‘‘‘
 6
 7   The five-element formulation is as follows.


                                                     19
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 8   ‘‘‘
 9   {FIVE-Element}
10   ‘‘‘
11
12   The code is as follows.
13   ‘‘‘
14   {SOLVER CODE}
15   ‘‘‘
16
17   Run the code and get the following running information.
18   ‘‘‘
19   {OUTPUT INFORMATIONS}
20   {ERROR INFORMATIONS}
21   ‘‘‘
22
23   Please judge whether the above five-element and code are correct, and
         give your analysis according to the template below.
24
25   ‘‘‘
26   The five-element is [Fill in True/False here].
27
28   The code is [Fill in True/False here].
29
30   Analysis:
31   [Fill in your analysis here]
32   ‘‘‘
                              Listing 4: Instruction template of self-correction.


     I   T EMPLATES FOR DATA AUGMENTATION
     In this section, a general template for data augmentation is introduced. The same as previous section,
     the curly braces “{·}” should be fully filled. The “ONE OF THE RULES BELOW” represents one
     of the rules of generating new questions, selected randomly from the ones introduced below.
 1   Please generate an optimization problem according to the following
         requirements and the given format.
 2
 3   {ONE OF THE RULES BELOW}
 4
 5   The original optimization problem is as follows:
 6   ‘‘‘
 7   {ORIGINAL OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM DESCRIPTION}
 8   ‘‘‘
 9
10   Please construct a new optimization problem according to the above
         requirements and the provided questions and in the following format:
11   ‘‘‘
12   [Write your new problem here]
13   ‘‘‘
                             Listing 5: General template for data augmentation.

 1   1. The following is an optimization problem. Please construct a new
         optimization problem based on the context of this problem.
 2   2. The following is an optimization problem. Please find similar
         problems in other fields and construct a new optimization problem
         with a new scenario.
 3   3. There are two optimization problems. Please construct a new
         optimization problem based on the scenario of problem A and the
         optimization problem type of problem B.
 4   4. The following is an optimization problem. Please modify the
         constraints of this problem and construct a new optimization problem.


                                                      20
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   5. The following is an optimization problem. Please modify the
        constraints and object of this problem and construct a new
        optimization problem.
6   6. The following is an optimization problem. Please modify the variables
        and parameters of this problem reasonably and construct a new
        optimization problem.
7   7. The following is an optimization problem. Please modify the
        description of some statements and construct a new optimization
        problem without changing the meaning of the original problem.

                                     Listing 6: Rules for data augmentation.


    J   E XAMPLES OF F IVE -E LEMENT F ORMULATION FOR D IFFERENT
        O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEMS
    This section presents examples of five-element formulations for different optimization problems,
    including seven examples spanning linear programming, integer programming, mixed-integer pro-
    gramming, nonlinear programming, and combinatorial optimization. By illustrating the five-element
    formulation across these diverse problem types, we aim to show the broad applicability of this mod-
    eling approach for general optimization problems.

        Linear Programming

        Problem Statement:
        A person plans to invest $100,000 in stocks and bonds over the next year to maximize the
        return on their investment portfolio. The expected annual return rate for stocks is 8%, while
        the annual return rate for bonds is 4%. At the same time, the risk coefficient for stocks
        is 0.08, and the risk coefficient for bonds is 0.02. The investor wants at least 60% of the
        funds to be invested in bonds, and the total risk of the entire portfolio cannot exceed 0.05.
        The investor needs to determine how to allocate this $100,000 under the above conditions to
        achieve the maximum possible expected return.

        Five-Element Formulation:
        Sets                                                Constraints
        Set of investment methods: S = {s, b}               Total investment constraint:

        Parameters                                                             xs + xb = I
        Annual return rate for stocks: Rs = 0.08            Minimum investment in bonds constraint:
        Annual return rate for bonds: Rb = 0.04
        Risk coefficient for stocks: Cs = 0.08                                   xb ≥ αI
        Risk coefficient for bonds: Cb = 0.02
        Total investment amount: I = 100000                 Total portfolio risk constraint:
        Minimum proportion of bonds: α = 0.60                                xs      xb
        Maximum total risk allowed: Cmax = 0.05                         Cs      + Cb    ≤ Cmax
                                                                             I       I
        Variables                                           Non-negativity constraint:
        Amount of money to be invested in stocks: xs
                                                                             xs ≥ 0,     xb ≥ 0
        Amount of money to be invested in bonds: xb

        Objective
        Maximize the total expected return:
                     max      Rs xs + Rb xb
                     xs ,xb


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Integer Programming

   Problem Statement:
   An accounting firm employs part time workers and full time workers. Full time workers
   work 8 hours per shift while part time workers work 4 hours per shift. In addition, full time
   workers are paid $300 per shift while part time workers are paid $100 per shift. Currently,
   the accounting firm has a project requiring 450 hours of labor. If the firm has a budget of
   $15000, how many of each type of worker should be scheduled to minimize the total number
   of workers.

   Five-Element Formulation:

   Sets                                                    Objective
   Set of employee types: S = {f, p}                       Minimize employee number: minxf ,xp xf +xp
                                                           Constraints
   Parameters
                                                           Labor time constraint:
   Hours per shift: hf = 8, hp = 4
   Wages per shift: wf = 300, wp = 100                                    hf x f + hp x p ≥ T
   Total labor time required: T = 450
   Budget: B = 15000                                       Budget constraint:

   Variables                                                             wf xf + wp xp ≤ B
   Employees shifts: xf , xp                               Positive integer constraint:

                                                                               xf , xp ∈ Z+


   Integer Programming 2

   Problem Statement:
   A company intends to construct residential buildings on a new property and needs to com-
   plete the design and construction drawings. Influenced by various factors such as the market,
   the time required for design and construction exhibits cyclical peaks and troughs throughout
   the 12 months of the year. Specifically, the time required to complete the design drawings
   for each month is as follows: 3, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 6, 5, 4, 4, 3, 3 months; the time required for
   construction is as follows: 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 7, 5, 4 months. What is the shortest
   time required for the company to go from the start of the design phase to the completion of
   construction?

   Five-Element Formulation:
   Sets                                                    Objective
   Month Set:                                              Minimize the total time span:
       M = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12}             min     y + tc ((y − 1) mod 12 + 1) − x
                                                                x,y


   Parameters
                                                           Constraints
   Design time (per month) is td (x):
                                                           Order constraint:
         td = [3, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 6, 5, 4, 4, 3, 3]
                                                                               y ≥ x + td (x)
   Construction time (per month) is tc (y mod 12):
                                                           Value constraint:
          tc = [3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 7, 5, 4]
                                                                          x ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 12}

   Variables                                               Value constraint:
   The month design starts: x                                                     y ∈ Z+
   The month construction starts: y



                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Mixed Integer Programming

   Problem Statement:
   MarketFlow Inc. must decide how to allocate resources for efficiently supplying six retail stores. They
   have identified four potential distribution centers, each with different opening costs and capabilities.
   The challenge is to choose the right mix of centers and optimal transportation routes to meet retail
   demands at the lowest total cost, which includes both opening expenses and transportation costs.
   Specifically, the supply capacity of each distribution center, measured in units, is as follows: Center
   1 has a capacity of 1,631 units, Center 2 has 1,954 units, Center 3 has 1,446 units, and Center 4 has
   820 units. The demand for each retail store, expressed in units, is as follows: Store 1 has a demand of
   910 units, Store 2 has 875 units, Store 3 has 589 units, Store 4 has 962 units, Store 5 has 966 units,
   and Store 6 has 643 units. The opening costs for each distribution center are as follows: Center 1 costs
   $151,000, Center 2 costs $192,000, Center 3 costs $114,000, and Center 4 costs $171,000.
   The transportation cost per unit from each distribution center to retail stores is as follows:
    • From Center 1: $5 to Store 1, $5 to Store 2, $2 to Store 3, $3 to Store 4, $3 to Store 5, $3 to Store 6
    • From Center 2: $5 to Store 1, $4 to Store 2, $3 to Store 3, $5 to Store 4, $2 to Store 5, $4 to Store 6
    • From Center 3: $2 to Store 1, $4 to Store 2, $5 to Store 3, $1 to Store 4, $4 to Store 5, $2 to Store 6
    • From Center 4: $5 to Store 1, $4 to Store 2, $1 to Store 3, $1 to Store 4, $3 to Store 5, $3 to Store 6
   MarketFlow Inc. aims to efficiently meet demand at its six retail stores while minimizing costs related
   to opening distribution centers and transporting goods. This involves strategically allocating resources
   by selecting which centers to open and how much to transport to each store, all within supply con-
   straints. What is the optimal total cost for MarketFlow Inc. to open the necessary centers and transport
   goods, ensuring demands are met at the lowest overall expense?


   Five-Element Formulation:
   Sets
   Set of potential distribution centers: I = {1, 2, 3, 4}
   Set of retail stores: J = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}

   Parameters
   Demand of each store: d = (910, 875, 589, 962, 966, 643)⊤
   Supply capacity of each center: s = (1631, 1954, 1446, 820)⊤
   Opening cost of each center: c = (151000, 192000, 114000, 171000)⊤
   Transportation cost per unit tij from center i to store j:
                                                   5 5 2 3 3 3
                                                                
                                                5 4 3 5 2 4 
                                     T|I|×|J| = 
                                                   2 4 5 1 4 2
                                                   5 4 1 1 3 3


   Variables
   Amount of goods transported from distribution center i to retail store j: xij
   Binary variable indicating whether distribution center i is open: yi

   Objective                                  X               XX
                                        min         ci yi +             tij xij
                                              i∈I             i∈I j∈J


   Constraints
   Demand fulfillment constraint:          X
                                                 xij = dj ,      ∀j ∈ J
                                           i∈I

   Supply capacity constraint:            X
                                                 xij ≤ si yi ,    ∀i ∈ I
                                           j∈J

   Non-negativity constraint:
                                          xij ≥ 0,      ∀i ∈ I, ∀j ∈ J
                                            yi ∈ {0, 1},         ∀i ∈ I


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Nonlinear Programming

   Problem Statement:
   The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen decides to build a circular fountain on the
   campus. The school wants the fountain to be round and as large as possible but it must be
   restricted in a polygonal construction field, which is given by the following points: (0, 1), (0,
   6), (4, 10), (8, 10), (11, 7), (11, 4), (7, 0), and (1, 0), the unit is m. Give a linear optimization
   formulation and find the maximal area. Keep your answer in four significant digit number.

   Five-Element Formulation:
   Sets
   Set of polygon vertices: P = {(xi , yi ) | i = 1, . . . , 8}

   Parameters
   Polygon vertices:
             P1 = (0, 1)              P2 = (0, 6)                 P3 = (4, 10)         P4 = (8, 10)
             P5 = (11, 7)             P6 = (11, 4)                P7 = (7, 0)          P8 = (1, 0)
   Variables
   Center of the circular fountain: (xc , yc )
   Radius of the circular fountain: r

   Objective
                                                     max πr2
                                                    xc ,yc ,r

   Constraints
   Center inside polygon constraint:
   For each edge defined by vertices (xi , yi ) and (xi+1 , yi+1 ), ensure:
                (yi+1 − yi )xc − (xi+1 − xi )yc + xi+1 yi − yi+1 xi
                         p                                          ≥ 0 for i = 1, . . . , 8
                             (yi+1 − yi )2 + (xi+1 − xi )2
   Distance to edges constraint:
   The distance from the center (xc , yc ) to each edge must be at least the radius r:
                |(yi+1 − yi )xc − (xi+1 − xi )yc + xi+1 yi − yi+1 xi |
                          p                                            ≥r        for i = 1, . . . , 8
                              (yi+1 − yi )2 + (xi+1 − xi )2
   Non-negativity constraint:
                                                        r≥0


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Combinatorial Optimization 1 (0-1 Knapsack Problem)

   Problem Statement:
   There are 4 items with weights of 4, 3, 1, and 1, and their values are 300, 200, 150, and
   200 respectively, with only one of each item available. If we select items such that the total
   weight does not exceed 5, what is the maximum value that can be obtained?

   Five-Element Formulation:
   Sets                                                    Objective
   Set of items: I = {1, 2, 3, 4}                          Maximize the total value:
                                                                                  X
   Parameters                                                              max       vi xi
   Weight of items: w = (4, 3, 1, 1)⊤                                                i∈I

   Value of items: v = (300, 200, 150, 200)⊤
   Maximum allowable weight: W = 5                         Constraints
                                                           Weight constraint:
   Variables                                                               X
   Binary variable indicator: x signifies whether                                  wi xi ≤ W
   item i is selected (xi = 1) or not (xi = 0), for                         i∈I
   i∈I
                                                           Binary constraint:
                                                                      xi ∈ {0, 1} for all i ∈ I


   Combinatorial Optimization 2 (Traveling Salesman Problem)

   Problem Statement:
   In a network consisting of four cities, namely A, B, C, and D, the distances between the
   cities are as follows: the distance from city A to city B is 10 units, the distance from city A
   to city C is 15 units, the distance from city A to city D is 20 units, the distance from city B
   to city C is 35 units, the distance from city B to city D is 25 units, and the distance from city
   C to city D is 30 units. All distances are symmetrical, meaning the distance from city i to
   city j is equal to the distance from city j to city i. A travel route is defined as: starting from
   a certain city, visiting all cities exactly once, and ultimately returning to the starting city.
   Please find a travel route that meets the requirements and minimizes the total travel distance.

   Five-Element Formulation:
   Sets                                                    Objective
   Set of cities: I = {A, B, C, D}.                        Minimize the total travel distance:
                                                                            X X
   Parameters                                                         min                 dij xij
   Distance between city i and city j:                                          i∈I j∈I,i̸=j

                
                  10 if {i, j} = {A, B}
                
                                                          Constraints
                  15    if {i, j} = {A, C}
                
                
                
                
                                                          Visit and leave constraints:
                20 if {i, j} = {A, D}
                
                                                                        X
          dij = 35 if {i, j} = {B, C}                                          xij = 1 ∀i ∈ I
                                                                       j∈I,i̸=j
                25 if {i, j} = {B, D}
                
                
                
                
                  30 if {i, j} = {C, D}
                                                                        X
                                                                                  xij = 1      ∀j ∈ I
                
                
                
                
                  0     if i = j                                       i∈I,i̸=j

                                                           Subtour elimination constraint:
   Variables                                               ui − uj + |I| · xij ≤ |I| − 1 , ∀i, j ∈ I, i ̸= j
   Binary route indicator: xij , ∀i, j ∈ I
   Visit order of city i: ui , ∀j ∈ I



                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    D ETAILED P ROCESS OF DATA L ABELING AND AUGMENTATION
In this section, we introduce the process of data labeling and augmentation, which is divided into
four stages: preliminary review, expert labeling, expert review, and data aggregation.

      1. Preliminary review. Initially review the data and remove unfeasible problems (unfeasible
         not means difficult). With the help of GPT-4o, we divide optimization problems into two
         categories according to their difficulty. Problems that meet one of the following conditions
         will be classified as difficult problems: at least 3 out of 5 solutions using GPT-4o are
         inconsistent, the code generated by GPT-4o has errors, and experts have found complex
         constraints, reasoning, or large amounts of data.
      2. Expert labeling. For simple questions, 2 experts independently annotate. And 3 experts
         independently label for complex questions. For each question, five-element and solver
         code need to be labeled, and the code must be run without errors. In this stage, experts
         may use GPT-4o to generate text that meets the expert’s intentions to reduce typing time
         and generate more formatted code. In order to improve data quality, experts may modify
         questions appropriately to make them more suitable for the problem scenario, or delete
         inappropriate questions (such as unfeasible ones).
      3. Expert review. For each question, a new expert checks the labels of other experts in the
         previous step, which is based on the correctness of the problem modeling and the consis-
         tency of the labels of different experts (the same question may have different but correct
         labels from different experts). Highly controversial questions or those with incorrect labels
         are included in an independent challenging dataset.
      4. Data aggregation. Five experts discuss and analyze each of the data in the independent
         difficult dataset to determine whether the problem has a solution or can be adjusted to
         a feasible problem, and decide whether to abandon the problem based on this. If not, the
         experts will discuss and complete the labeling of these data. The correctly labeled questions
         that have passed the expert review will be summarized. And the other feasible questions
         that have been incorrectly labeled during the entire labeling process will be summarized.

The above steps are completed by 12 experts. The “preliminary review” and “expert labeling” are
finished by 9 undergraduate students with bachelor’s degrees or above (computer science or mathe-
matics, all of whom have taken optimization courses), including 4 master’s students in related fields
(1 doctoral student). The “expert review” is finished by 1 university professor whose research is
optimization in machine learning and 2 algorithm engineers working on operations research opti-
mization. “Data aggregation” is finished by the experts except undergraduates. During the data
labeling process, we ensure that each expert completed the labeling independently. In the first three
stages, a question would not be assigned to the same expert twice.
The review pass rate for the seven experts assigned to simple question labeling exceeds 90%, while
the pass rate for the four experts labeling complex question labeling is above 80% (2 experts la-
beled both simple and complex questions). Considering the above statistics, along with the fact
that the labeling results will undergo review by senior experts in the third stage, the reliability and
effectiveness of the expert labeling process are well supported.

L    M ORE E XPERIMENTS FOR G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCE
In order to demonstrate the generality of LLMOPT, we re-analyzed all experimental results and clas-
sified the types of optimization problems involved in each dataset, including Linear Programming
(LP), Integer Programming (IP), Mixed Integer Programming (MIP), Nonlinear Programming (NP),
Combinatorial Optimization (CO), Multi-objective Programming (MOP) and Others. The follow-
ing table shows the SA performance of LLMOPT in solving various types of problems on different
datasets. The data are the solving accuracy (SA), and the values in brackets represent “number of
problems solved correctly/number of problems in the dataset”. Detailed statistics are shown in Ta-
ble 10. The results show that LLMOPT is universal in various types of optimization problems and
can solve almost all kinds of optimization problems. However, due to the different distribution of
problem formulating difficulties, the accuracy of LLMOPT on these datasets is also different, which
will be one of the focuses of future work.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: SA of LLMOPT (based on Qwen-1.5-14B) organized by the type of optimization prob-
lems. The values in brackets represent “number of problems solved correctly/number of problems
in the dataset”.

              NL4Opt         MamoEasy        MamoComplex       IndustryOR        NLP4LP        ComplexOR
  LP       90.5% (38/42)           -         76.0% (19/25)    60.0% (12/20)     77.8% (7/9)     60.0% (3/5)
   IP      95.8% (46/48)    100.0% (36/36)    100.0% (5/5)    45.5% (5/11)       0.0% (0/1)          -
  MIP       90.0% (9/10)     95.3% (61/64)   73.9% (17/23)    47.7% (21/44)    95.2% (20/21)    80.0% (4/5)
  NP             -                 -          100.0% (1/1)          -          100.0% (3/3)          -
  CO             -                 -         60.0% (21/35)     33.3% (3/9)      33.3% (1/3)    100.0% (1/1)
 MOP             -                 -               -           37.5% (3/8)           -               -
 Others          -                 -          50.0% (5/10)     25.0% (2/8)           -               -
  Total    93.0% (93/100)   97.0% (97/100)   68.0% (68/100)   46.0% (46/100)   83.8% (31/37)   72.7% (8/11)


          Table 11: Performance of Different Inference Models and Correction Mechanisms

     Inference Model             Correction Mechanism         IndustryOR Dataset          NL4Opt Dataset
  LLMOPT (Qwen-1.5)                  Self-correction                  46.0%                    93.0%
  LLMOPT (Qwen-1.5)               Correction by GPT-4o                41.0%                    89.0%
  LLMOPT (Qwen-1.5)                Best of 12 repeats                 42.0%                    89.0%
 GPT-4o OpenAI (2023)             Correction by GPT-4o                34.0%                    84.0%
 GPT-4o OpenAI (2023)              Best of 12 repeats                 32.0%                    84.0%
 ORLM Tang et al. (2024)           Best of 12 repeats                 39.0%                    88.0%


M     M ORE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS FOR C ORRECTION M ECHANISM
To further explore the superiority of self-correction and LLMOPT, we deploy experiments on the
NL4Opt and IndustryOR datasets (NL4Opt has relatively simple problems, while IndustryOR has
relatively complex problems). We change two correction mechanisms, one is correction by GPT-
4o with the same prompt of self-correction, and the other is to repeat the inference 12 times and
manually judge the optimal solution (which means that only one optimal solution needs to be found
in 12 repeated experiments). The reason we chose 12 is that self-correction is limited to a maximum
of 12 repeated checks, so this is fair. We also conduct experiments on GPT-4o and ORLM Tang et al.
(2024). We reproduce the open source model of ORLM Tang et al. (2024), but found that this model
seems to have lost other abilities except writing coptpy code for optimization problems. We find
that ORLM has a serious seesaw problem, which is performance as without generalization ability,
and cannot answer other questions. Therefore, only the “Best of 12 repeats” correction mechanism
is experimented. The results are shown in Table 11. The results show that, when LLMOPT (based
on Qwen-1.5) is used as the inference model, the correction performance of GPT-4 is lower than the
self-correction solving accuracy of LLMOPT. This indicates that the Qwen-1.5 model learned by
LLMOPT shows stronger overall capabilities in both solving optimization problems and correction
compared to other methods. Although manually selecting the best result from 12 repetitions shows
performance improvement (considering once solving correct if one out of 12 repetitions is accurate),
it still falls short of the effectiveness compared with the self-correction mechanism. This highlights
that identifying and correcting errors is more critical than simply repeating executions, emphasizing
the necessity of implementing a correction mechanism.


                                                    27
