Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IFFERENTIABLE AND L EARNABLE W IRELESS
S IMULATION WITH G EOMETRIC T RANSFORMERS
 Thomas Hehn, Markus Peschl, Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Arash Behboodi, Johann Brehmer∗
                                Qualcomm AI Research†



                                               A BSTRACT

            Modelling the propagation of electromagnetic wireless signals is critical for de-
            signing modern communication systems. Wireless ray tracing simulators model
            signal propagation based on the 3D geometry and other scene parameters, but
            their accuracy is fundamentally limited by underlying modelling assumptions and
            correctness of parameters. In this work, we introduce Wi-GATr, a fully-learnable
            neural simulation surrogate designed to predict the channel observations based on
            scene primitives (e. g., surface mesh, antenna position and orientation). Recog-
            nizing the inherently geometric nature of these primitives, Wi-GATr leverages an
            equivariant Geometric Algebra Transformer that operates on a tokenizer specif-
            ically tailored for wireless simulation. We evaluate our approach on a range of
            tasks (i. e., signal strength and delay spread prediction, receiver localization, and
            geometry reconstruction) and find that Wi-GATr is accurate, fast, sample-efficient,
            and robust to symmetry-induced transformations. Remarkably, we find our results
            also translate well to the real world: Wi-GATr demonstrates more than 35% lower
            error than hybrid techniques, and 70% lower error than a calibrated wireless tracer.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Modern communication is wireless: more and more, we communicate via electromagnetic waves
through the antennas of various devices, leading to progress in and adoption of mobile phones, au-
tomotive, AR/VR, and IoT technologies (Chen et al., 2021; Dahlman et al., 2020). All these innova-
tions build upon electromagnetic (EM) wave propagation. Therefore, modelling and understanding
wave propagation in space is a core research area in wireless communication, and remains crucial as
we are moving toward new generations of more efficient and spatially-aware wireless technologies.
How can one model the influence of spatial environments on EM waves transmitted by one antenna
and received by another? Model-based approaches (specifically wireless ray tracing methods) are
popularly used, which identify physical propagation paths and their corresponding characteristics
(e. g., power, phase) between the two antennas. The propagation paths are naturally influenced by
the environment, causing phenomena such as reflection, diffraction, and transmission. Although
popular, model-based approaches have shortcomings: Due to their approximate nature, they suffer
from a sim-to-real gap in non-trivial environments, and in most cases they are neither learnable nor
differentiable.
Hybrid and fully-learnt approaches attempt to address some shortcomings of model-based meth-
ods. Hybrid approaches (Orekondy et al., 2022b; Hoydis et al., 2023) retain some aspects of model-
based techniques (e. g., evaluating physical propagation paths), and introduce learnable components
(e. g., neural evaluation of materials). The learnable parameters help with incorporating real mea-
surement data to reduce the sim-to-real gap. However, similar to model-based approaches, they
are once again bottle-necked by availability of accurate and efficient implementations of explicit
physical models. In contrast, fully-learnt approaches (Hehn et al., 2023; Levie et al., 2021; Lee &
Molisch, 2024), propose an end-to-end neural surrogate that consumes a visual representation of
the scene and predicts spatial wireless characteristics. The core idea, which we too leverage in this
work, is to enable the neural surrogate to implicitly learn the physical models that best explain the
    ∗
        Work was completed while an employee at Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V.
    †
        Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


observations. While there have been some advances in this direction, we find the choice of architec-
tures ill-suited and inefficient for the task.
Existing fully-learnt surrogates largely rely on CNN-based architectures and are limited to lossy 2D
representations of the scene (i. e., top-down binarized images). We argue that wireless propagation is
inherently a three-dimensional geometric problem: a directional signal is transmitted by an oriented
transmitting antenna, the signal interacts with oriented surfaces in the environment, and the signal
eventually impinges an oriented receiving antenna. For this reason, it is critical for neural surrogates
to model and flexibly represent 3D geometric aspects in the propagation environment.
Learning neural surrogates directly on 3D data presents two significant challenges. The first chal-
lenge involves representing the diverse 3D geometric input data such that a neural network can ef-
ficiently learn the signal propagation interactions among scene elements. The second challenge is
ensuring that the neural network can generalize to unseen scenes, given that the received wireless
signal remains invariant under rotations, translations, and reflections of the entire scene.
In this work, we aim to tackle these challenges with a novel fully-learnt approach to model wireless
signal propagation in 3D. We propose Wi-GATr, a backbone based on Geometric Algebra Trans-
formers (GATr) (Brehmer et al., 2023) for surrogate models utilizing 3D geometric representations
and strong geometric inductive biases. A key component is a new tokenizer that defines the input
representation for the diverse, geometric 3D data of wireless scenes. Furthermore, this architecture
is E(3)-equivariant with respect to the symmetries of wireless propagation, but maintains the scala-
bility of a transformer architecture.
A geometric, fully-learnt treatment of modelling the influence of simulation parameters (e. g., scene
mesh, antenna position, orientation) on resulting wireless measurements (e. g., receive signal
strength) offers many advantages. First, the underlying inductive biases of Wi-GATr enable sample-
efficient learning with the resulting predictions being robust to certain variations, such as the choice
of coordinate frame. Second, since Wi-GATr is fully differentiable w.r.t. all its simulation parame-
ters, we can leverage it to tackle inverse problems (e.g., localization). Finally, Wi-GATr can be eas-
ily adapted into a generative framework and thereby allowing probabilistic inferences.
We present a comprehensive evaluation of Wi-GATr across various tasks and use cases. To facilitate
large-scale evaluation and training, we introduce two novel wireless datasets, Wi3R and WiPTR,
each comprising thousands of indoor scenes with varying complexity. Our results show that Wi-
GATr outperforms competing approaches. For instance, on WiPTR, Wi-GATr achieves an MAE of
0.64 dB using only 10% of the training dataset, surpassing PLViT (1.28 dB) and a Transformer (0.69
dB) trained on the full data. Furthermore, we demonstrate the versatility of our surrogate by leverag-
ing the differentiability of Wi-GATr for receiver localization, achieving accuracy up to 60 cm. Ad-
ditionally, we show how Wi-GATr can serve as a generative diffusion model trained on joint simula-
tion parameters, enabling the reconstruction of various scene variables, including the intricate mesh
geometries. We also train and evaluate Wi-GATr on the real-world measurement dataset DICHA-
SUS (Euchner et al., 2021), where it achieves state-of-the-art results. Specifically, Wi-GATr outper-
forms both hybrid approaches (with >35% reduction in error) and a calibrated wireless ray tracer
(with >70% reduction in error). Overall, our results indicate that our proposed approach Wi-GATr
takes a promising step towards a sample-efficient and robust fully-learnt simulator that can effec-
tively leverage the underlying 3D scene parameters to simulate wireless propagation effects.1


2       BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

Wireless signal propagation. How do wireless signals propagate from a transmitting antenna
(Tx) to a receiver antenna (Rx) in a (static) 3D environment? While the system is fundamentally
described by Maxwell’s equations, for many realistic problems the ray approximation of geometric
optics suffices (Keller, 1962). It approximates the solution to Maxwell’s equations as a sum of planar
waves propagating in all directions from Tx. Each planar wave is represented as a ray, characterized
by various attributes (e. g., power, phase, delay) since transmission. As a ray reaches an object—
that is, it intersects with its mesh—the interaction is modelled as reflection, refraction, or diffraction.
During such interactions, the power, phase, polarization, and propagation direction of the wave can
    1
        Our Wi-GATr code is available at https://github.com/Qualcomm-AI-research/Wi-GATr.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           Wi-GATr ℎ!

                         Receiver 𝐱 !"               Tokenizer          GATr

   Transmitter 𝐱 #"                           ∇( ℒ                                ∇' ℒ                                                    ℒ(ℎ, ℎ$%& )

                      3D Geometry 𝐅                   Wireless Ray Tracer

           Scene parameters 𝝍                                                                         Channels ℎ
                                                     (a) Wi-GATr: Learnable and Differentiable

                Wi-GATr: Diffusion model
                                                                                                                                          -66.0 dBm
                                …
                                                                                   -45.8 dBm
                                                            …
                                                           𝐅 ∼ 𝑝(𝐅|(loor, ceiling, 𝐱 !" , 𝐱 #" , ℎ)                𝒙 ∼ 𝑝(𝐱 #" |𝐅, 𝐱 !" , ℎ)

           (b) Generative model formulation            (c) Conditional generation: 3D geometry         (d) Conditional generation: Receiver location

Figure 1: Wi-GATr as a geometric neural surrogate for wireless simulation. (a): Akin to a ray tracer, Wi-
GATr as a forward-model maps the 3D geometry, transmitter, and receiver properties to desired channel infor-
mation, such as the received power. Wi-GATr is differentiable and can provide useful gradients with respect to
its inputs. (b): In a probabilistic approach based on diffusion, Wi-GATr can reconstruct 3D environments (c)
and antenna positions (d) from the wireless signal.


change in complex, material-dependent ways. In addition, new rays can emanate from the point of
                                                                                                                                                        13
interaction. After multiple interactions, the rays eventually reach the receiving antenna. The Tx and
Rx are then linked by a connected path p of multiple rays.P     The effects on the received signal are
described by the channel impulse response (CIR) h(τ ) = p ap δ(τ − τp ), where ap ∈ C is the
complex gain and τp the delay of the paths at the receiver (Tse & Viswanath, 2005).
Wireless channel models and simulation. Wireless propagation models play a key role in design
and evaluation of communication systems, for instance by characterizing the gain of competitive de-
signs in realistic settings or by network performance as in base station placement for maximal cov-
erage. Statistical approaches (3GPP TR 38.901) represent propagation as a generative model where
the parameters of a probabilistic model are fitted to measurements. On the other hand, wireless ray-
tracing approaches (Remcom; Amiot et al., 2013; Hoydis et al., 2022) approximate wave propaga-
tion using geometric optics principles: propagation paths between a transmit and receive antenna
are estimated, and corresponding per-path characteristics (e. g., time-of-flight) are calculated. They
are sufficiently accurate in many use cases and do not require expensive field measurement collec-
tion campaigns.
Neural wireless simulations. Both statistical and ray-tracing simulation techniques are accompa-
nied by their own shortcomings, subsequently mitigated by their neural counterparts. Neural sur-
rogates for statistical models (Ye et al., 2018; O’Shea et al., 2019; Dörner et al., 2020; Orekondy
et al., 2022a) reduce the amount and cost of measurements required. Neural ray tracers (Orekondy
et al., 2022b; Hoydis et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023) address the non-differentiability of simula-
tors using a NeRF-like strategy (Mildenhall et al., 2020) by parameterizing the scene using a spatial
MLP and rendering wireless signals using classic ray-tracing or volumetric techniques. While these
techniques can be faster than professional ray tracers, they are similarly bottlenecked by expensive
bookkeeping and rendering steps (involving thousands of forward passes). In contrast, we propose a
framework to simulate wireless signals with a single forward pass through a geometric transformer
that is both sample-efficient and generalizes to novel scenes.
Geometric Algebra Transformer. The growing field of geometric deep learning (Bronstein et al.,
2021) aims to incorporate structural properties of a problem into neural network architectures and
algorithms. A central concept is equivariance to symmetry groups (Cohen, 2021): a network f (x)
is equivariant with respect to a group G if its outputs transform consistently with any symmetry
transformation g ∈ G of the inputs, f (g · x) = g · f (x), where · denotes the group action. The
Geometric Algebra Transformer (GATr) (Brehmer et al., 2023) is an E(3)-equivariant architecture
for geometric problems, where E(3) is the three dimensional Euclidean group. We will show that
this representation is particularly well-suited for wireless channel modelling. Second, GATr is a
transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). It computes the interactions between multiple tokens
through scaled dot-product attention. With efficient backends like FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022),


                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the architecture is scalable to large systems, without any restrictions on the sparsity of interactions
like in message-passing networks.

3     T HE W IRELESS G EOMETRIC A LGEBRA T RANSFORMER (W I -GAT R )
Our goal is to model the wireless channel, i. e., the interplay between the transmitted wireless sig-
nal, the 3D environment, and the transmitting and receiving antennas. We first outline the specific
problem setup before we provide the details of how we tokenize the environment in geometric alge-
bra primitives that provide the foundation of our Wi-GATr backbone.

3.1   P ROBLEM SETUP

Wireless simulation: fully-learnt forward model. The fundamental problem in simulating wire-
less propagation is to model an accurate forward process: mapping simulation parameters ψ to the
‘wireless channel’ h which describes the transformation between the transmitted signal and the re-
ceived signal. In this work, we propose a fully-learnable surrogate hθ (ψ) for the forward process.
The core idea is to implicitly learn physical propagation models that best explain the observations.
Simulation inputs: parameters ψ. A simulation scenario is defined by a large set of parameters
ψ. Similar to prior works, we consider three groups of representative parameters: (a) scene geome-
try and materials F : parameterized as a 3D mesh, with each face associated with a discrete material
class; (b) transmit antenna properties xtx : parameterized by 3D position and orientation; (c) receive
antenna properties xrx : also parameterized by 3D position and orientation. Note that in our setting,
we assume that antenna radiation patterns are shared between all receivers and transmitters, respec-
tively, and as a consequence, they need to be learned implicitly. To the best of our knowledge, we
present the first fully-learnt surrogate that works on the full 3D geometry (as opposed to 2D/2.5D
image representations).
Simulation outputs: wireless channel h. For a fixed set of simulation inputs, we want the sim-
ulator to predict the wireless channel h. Since we propose a learnable model, we rely on channel
measurements for supervised training which can be collected using conventional devices (e. g., mo-
bile phones). Measuring the exact channel h is challenging (Euchner et al., 2021), which is why we
describe the signal transformation by averaged statistics of the channel. Similar to prior works, we
learn to predict real-valued, scalar channel characteristics h: non-coherent received power (Section
5.1), band-limited received power, and band-limited delay spread (both Section 5.4).

3.2   W I -GAT R BACKBONE

We want a learnable forward-model for simulations hθ (ψ), that can effectively leverage a wireless
scene ψ to reason about spatially-varying channels h (e. g., receive power). Our core insight is that
the forward-process is inherently geometric: electromagnetic waves are emitted by an oriented trans-
mit antenna, interact (e. g., reflect and refract) multiple times with various surfaces in space and fi-
nally reach an oriented receive antenna at a different location. To exploit this inherent geometric na-
ture of propagation, we propose ‘Wi-GATr’, a Wireless Geometric Algebra Transformer (Wi-GATr)
backbone. Wi-GATr consists of two main components: a tokenizer and a network architecture. The
tokenizer embeds the information of the wireless scene into geometric algebra while the network
learns to model the channel. We now elaborate on these individual components.
Wireless GA tokenizer. The tokenizer takes as input information characterizing simulation pa-
rameters ψ and outputs a sequence of tokens that can be processed by the network. A key challenge
of the tokenizer is efficiently representing a variable set of diverse data types. In our case, the data
types range from 3D environment mesh F , which features three-dimensional objects with dielectric
material properties such as buildings, to antennas xtx and xrx characterized through a point-like po-
sition, an antenna orientation, and additional information about the antenna type, and the character-
istics of the channel h.
To support all of these data types, we propose a new tokenizer that outputs a sequence of geometric
algebra (GA) tokens. Each token consists of a number of elements (channels) of the projective
geometric algebra G3,0,1 in addition to the usual unstructured scalar channels. We define the GA


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


precisely in Appendix A. Its main characteristics are that each element is a 16-dimensional vector
and can represent various geometric primitives: 3D points including an absolute position, lines,
planes, and so on. The richly structured space of projective geometric algebra G3,0,1 is thus ideally
suited to represent the different elements encountered in a wireless problem. It naturally supports
scalars for wireless scalar fields (e. g., power, delay spread), points for positions (e. g., antennas,
mesh vertices), vectors for orientations (e. g., antennas), and planes for surfaces (e. g., mesh faces).
Details of our tokenization scheme are specified in Appenndix B.
Network. After tokenizing, we process the input data with a Geometric Algebra Transformer
(GATr) (Brehmer et al., 2023). This architecture naturally operates on our G3,0,1 parameterization
of the scene. It is equivariant with respect to permutations of the input tokens as well as E(3),
the symmetry group of translations, rotations, and reflections. These are exactly the symmetries
of wireless signal propagation, with one addition: wireless signals have an additional reciprocity
symmetry that specifies that the signal is invariant under an role exchange between transmitter and
receiver. We will later show how we can incentivize this additional symmetry property through data
augmentation.2 Finally, because GATr is a transformer, it can process sequences of variable lengths
and scales well to systems with many tokens. Both properties are crucial for complex wireless
scenes, which can in particular involve a larger number of mesh faces.

3.3   A PPLICATIONS BEYOND FORWARD MODELLING

In the previous section, we proposed a Wi-GATr backbone for forward-simulations hθ (ψ). We now
highlight two additional benefits of the proposed backbone. First, exploiting differentiability of hθ
to solve inverse problems. Second, adapting the Wi-GATr within a generative model formulation
and thereby allowing probabilistic inferences (either for forward, or inverse problems).
Inverse problems solved by gradient descent. The differentiability of surrogate models make
them well-suited to solve inverse problems. More generally, the differentiability enables gradient-
based optimization of input data (i. e., simulation parameters) to minimize a given loss. For instance,
we can use the surrogates for receiver localization. Given a 3D environment F , transmitters {xtx         i },
and corresponding signals {hi }, and a random initialization xrx  0 , we can  compute   the  gradients of the
predicted channels ∇xrx hθ (F , xtx ,
                                  i P0x rx
                                           ). Using  gradient descent,  we  iteratively  refine the receiver
                                                                  2
position to solve x̂rx = arg minxrx i ∥hθ (F , xtx       rx
                                                    i , x ) − hi ∥ .

Probabilistic inference with diffusion models. While a predictive model of the signal can serve
as a versatile neural simulator, it has two shortcomings. First, solving an inverse problem through
gradient descent requires a sizable computational cost for every problem instance. Second, predic-
tive models are deterministic and do not allow us to model stochastic forward processes or express
the inherent uncertainty in inverse problems. To overcome this, we draw inspiration from the in-
verse problem solving capabilities of diffusion models using guidance (Chung et al., 2022; Gloeck-
ler et al., 2024). We hereby follow the DDPM framework and use a Wi-GATr model as score estima-
tor (denoising network) to learn a joint distribution pθ (F , xtx , xrx , h) between 3D environment mesh
F , transmitter xtx , receiver xrx , and channel h, for a single transmitter-receiver pair (see Fig. 1b).
See Appendix E.2 for more details.

4     N EW DATASETS WITH DIVERSE SCENE GEOMETRY

To show the importance of geometry and symmetries in wireless signal propagation, we require a
dataset that comprises complex signal interactions with diverse geometries. While several datasets of
wireless simulations and measurements exist (Orekondy et al., 2022b; Zhang et al., 2023; Alkhateeb,
2019; Alkhateeb et al., 2023), they either do not include geometric information, lack scene diversity
or the signal predictions are not realistic. Therefore, we generate two datasets that feature indoor
scenes and channel information at a frequency of 3.5 GHz using Wireless InSite, a state-of-the-art
ray-tracing simulator (Remcom).3 We focus on indoor scenes as transmission plays a stronger role
than outdoors. The datasets provide detailed characteristics for each path between Tx and Rx, such
   2
     We also experimented with a reciprocity-equivariant variation of the architecture, but that led to a
marginally worse performance without a significant gain in sample efficiency.
   3
     The datasets are available at https://github.com/Qualcomm-AI-research/WiInSim.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Ground truth                                               Wi-GATr
                                                   40                                                      40


                                                    Received power [dBm]


                                                                                                             Received power [dBm]
                                                   50                                                      50
                                                   60                                                      60
                                                   70                                                      70

                  Transformer                                                PLViT
                                                   40                                                      40


                                                    Received power [dBm]


                                                                                                             Received power [dBm]
                                                   50                                                      50
                                                   60                                                      60
                                                   70                                                      70


Figure 2: Qualitative signal prediction results. We show a single floor plan from the WiPTR test set. The
black lines indicate the walls and doors, the colors show the received power as a function of the transmitter
location (brighter colours mean a stronger signal). The transmitting antenna is shown as a black cross. The z
coordinates of transmitter and receiver are all fixed to the same height. We compare the ground-truth predictions
(top left) to the predictions from different predictive models, each trained on only 100 WiPTR floor plans. Wi-
GATr is able to generalize to this unseen floor plan even with such a small training set.


as gain, delay, angle of departure and arrival at Tx/Rx, and the electric field at the receiver itself,
which allows users to compute various quantities of interest themselves. See Appendix D for more
details.
Wi3R dataset. Our first dataset focuses on diversity of room layouts and their impact on the
signal. We take 5000 layouts from Wi3Rooms (Orekondy et al., 2022b) and randomly sample 3D Tx
positions and Rx positions. In Appendix D we provide more details and define training, validation,
and test splits as well as an out-of-distribution set to test the robustness of different models.
WiPTR dataset. To increase complexity, we generate a second, more varied, realistic dataset that
includes material properties, varying number of faces, and varying layout dimensions. The floor
layouts are based on the ProcTHOR-10k dataset for embodied AI research (Deitke et al., 2022).
This dataset consists of 12k different floor layouts, split into training, test, validation, and OOD
sets as described in Appendix D. WiPTR stands out among wireless datasets in terms of geometric
diversity of scenes, which enables the geometric deep learning community to study symmetries
in electromagnetic signal propagation. Additionally, since it is based on ProcTHOR-10k, it can
provide wireless signals as a novel modality for embodied AI research.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In our experiments, we provide empirical evidence for the benefits of the inductive bias of our
equivariant architecture, as well as the inference speed, differentiability, and expressiveness of fully-
learnt neural simulation surrogates on simulated and real-world data. In addition, we demonstrate
probabilistic inference through a diffusion model.

5.1   S IGNAL STRENGTH PREDICTION ON SIMULATED DATA

On thePsimulated data, we focus on the prediction of the time-averaged non-coherent received power
h = p |ap |2 , where |ap |2 is the received power of each independent ray tracing path p. We train
surrogates hθ (F , xtx , xrx ) that predict the power as a function of the Tx position and orientation
xtx , Rx position and orientation xrx , and 3D environment mesh F , on both the Wi3R and WiPTR
datasets. All models are trained with reciprocity augmentation, i. e., randomly flipping Tx and Rx


                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Wi3R dataset                              WiPTR dataset
                             Wi-GATr                                         Wi-GATr
                                          Transf.   SEGNN        PLViT                    Transf.    PLViT
                                (ours)                                          (ours)
  In distribution
  Unseen Rx positions             0.63       1.14         0.92    4.52            0.39       0.62     1.27
  Unseen floor plans              0.74       1.32         1.02    4.81            0.41       0.69     1.28
  Symmetry transformations
  Rotation                        0.74      78.68         1.02    4.81            0.41     38.51      1.28
  Translation                     0.74      64.05         1.02    4.81            0.41      4.96      1.28
  Permutation                     0.74       1.32         1.02    4.81            0.41      0.69      1.28
  Reciprocity                     0.80       1.32         1.01   10.15            0.41      0.69      1.28
  Out of distribution
  OOD layout                      7.03      14.06         2.34    5.89            0.43       0.86     1.23

Table 1: Signal prediction results. We show the mean absolute error on the received power in dB (lower is
better, best in bold). Top: In-distribution performance. Middle: Generalization under symmetry transforma-
tions. Bottom: Generalization to out-of-distribution settings. In almost all settings, Wi-GATr is the highest-
fidelity surrogate model.


labels during training. This improves data efficiency, especially for the transformer baseline.
Baselines. In addition to our Wi-GATr model, described in Sec. 3, we train several baselines. The
first is a vanilla transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), based on the same inputs and tokenization of the
wireless scene, but without the geometric inductive biases. To ablate the effect of our tokenization
scheme, we also test a transformer without it, which represents the scene as a simple sequence of 3D
positions. Next, we compare to the E(3)-equivariant SEGNN (Brandstetter et al., 2022b) on Wi3R.
On WiPTR, training this model was impractical as it required too much memory (>80 GB). As
state-of-the-art method for image-based wireless channel modelling, we train a PLViT model (Hehn
et al., 2023). We have also considered WiNeRT (Orekondy et al., 2022b) and Sionna RT (Hoydis
et al., 2022) as baselines, but found them unsuited for the problem setup as explained in Appendix E.
More details on our experiment setup and the baselines are also given in Appendix E.
In-distribution and out-of-distribution performance. In Fig. 2 we illustrate the prediction task
on a WiPTR floor plan. We show signal predictions for the simulator as well as for surrogate models
trained on only 100 floor plans. While the transformer and PLViT show memorization artifacts, Wi-
GATr is able to capture the propagation pattern, although this floor plan was not seen during training.
In Tbl. 1 we compare surrogate models trained on the full Wi3R and WiPTR datasets. Both when
evaluating unseen Rx positions on seen training floor plans as well as when evaluating on new scenes
unseen during training, Wi-GATr offers the highest-fidelity approximation of the simulator. Wi-
GATr as well as the equivariant baselines are by construction robust to symmetry transformations,
while the performance of a vanilla transformer degrades substantially. All methods but SEGNN
struggle to generalize to an OOD setting on the Wi3R dataset. This is not surprising given that
the training samples are so similar to each other. On the more diverse WiPTR dataset, Wi-GATr is
almost perfectly robust under domain shift.
Data efficiency. Next, we study the data efficiency of the different surrogates in Fig. 3. Wi-GATr is
more data-efficient than any other method with the exception of the E(3)-equivariant SEGNN, which
performs similarly well for a small number of training samples. This confirms that equivariance is a
useful inductive bias when data is scarce. But Wi-GATr scales better than SEGNN to larger number
of samples, showing that our architecture combines the small-data advantages of strong inductive
biases with the large-data advantages of a transformer architecture. We find clear benefits of our
wireless tokenizer when comparing the transformer baselines with and without the tokenizer.
Inference speed. One of the advantages of neural surrogates is their test-time speed. Both Wi-GATr
and a transformer are over a factor of 20 faster than the ground-truth ray tracer (see Appendix E).


                                                      7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           10                                                          3
                                                  Wi3R                                                WiPTR                                            5                                     WiPTR


                                                                                                                      Mean Rx localization error [m]
            5                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                       2
MAE [dB]


                                                            MAE [dB]
            2                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                       1
            1             PLViT
                          Trf. w/o tokenizer
                          Transformer                                                                                                          0.5                      Transformer
      0.5                 SEGNN                    0.5
                          Wi-GATr (ours)                                                                                                                                Wi-GATr (ours)
                10            100        1000 4500     10                         100        1000            10k                                           1         2 3          5      10
                            Training rooms                                        Training rooms                                                                  Number of transmitters
 Figure 3: Signal prediction. We show the mean absolute error on                                                          Figure 4: Rx localization error,
 the received power as a function of the training data on Wi3R (left)                                                     as a function of the number of Tx.
 and WiPTR (right). Wi-GATr outperforms the transformer and PLViT                                                         Lines and error band show mean
 baselines at any amount of training data, and scales better to large data                                                and its standard error over 240 mea-
 or many tokens than SEGNN.                                                                                               surements.

                   (a) Unconditional generation                               (b) Receiver localization                                                        (c) Geometry reconstruction
                              Signal strength = -45.8 dBm                                                 -37.0 dBm                                                                  -45.8 dBm


                                          Receiver                                                   Sampled
                Transmitter
                                                                           GT receiver               receiver
                                                                                                     locations                                                          Predicted geometry

                                              -26.7 dBm                                                   -66.0 dBm                                                                  -62.7 dBm


 Figure 5: Probabilistic modelling. We formulate various tasks as sampling from the unconditional or condi-
 tional densities of a single diffusion model. (a): Unconditional sampling of wireless scenes p(F , xtx , xrx , h).
 (b): Receiver localization as conditional sampling from p(xrx |F , xtx , h) for two different values of h and xrx .
 (c): Geometry reconstruction as conditional sampling from p(Fu |Fk , xtx , xrx , h) for two different values of h,
 keeping xtx , xrx , Fk fixed.

 5.2             I NVERSE RECEIVER LOCALIZATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                     13



 We show how differentiable surrogates let us solve inverse problems, focusing on the problem of re-
 ceiver (Rx) localization. We infer the Rx position with the predictive surrogate models by optimiz-
 ing through the neural surrogate of the simulator as discussed in Sec. 3.3. The performance of our
 surrogate models is shown in Fig. 4 and Appendix E.4 The two neural surrogates achieve a similar
 performance when only one or two transmitters are available, a setting in which the receiver position
 is ambiguous. With more measurements, Wi-GATr lets us localize the transmitter more precisely.

 5.3             I NVARIANT DIFFUSION FOR INVERSE PROBLEMS

 In the following, we consider the problem of signal prediction as well as the inverse problems of
 receiver localization and geometry reconstruction. All three are instances of sampling from condi-
 tional densities: h ∼ pθ (h|F , xtx , xrx ), xrx ∼ pθ (xrx |F , xtx , h) and F ∼ pθ (F |xtx , xrx , h), respec-
 tively. We obtain the conditional densities by inpainting during the sampling from the joint densities
 (Sec. 3.3;Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015)). To do so, we train a diffusion model using a Wi-GATr back-
 bone with the DDPM pipeline and 1000 denoising steps. We additionally apply conditional masking
 strategies to improve inpainting performance. See Appendix C for a detailed description of our dif-
 fusion model, the masking protocol, as well a discussion on equivariant generative modelling. For
     4
       Neither the SEGNN nor PLViT baselines are fully differentiable with respect to object positions when
 using the official implementations from Refs. (Brandstetter et al., 2022a; Hehn et al., 2023). We were therefore
 not able to accurately infer the transmitter positions with these architectures.


                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


comparison, we study a transformer baseline and a transformer trained on the same data augmented
with random rotations. More details on the model architectures can be found in Appendix E.
We qualitatively show results for this approach in Figs. 1 and 5. All predictions are probabilistic,
which allows our model to express uncertainty in ambiguous inference tasks. In Fig. 5 we visualize
different conditional samples. For each example, we sample from the same trained Wi-GATr diffu-
sion model, while only varying the conditioning mask. In the case of receiver localization, we sam-
                                               B
ple a single batch of points (F , xtx , xrx                     tx
                                         i , h)i=1 , where F , x and h are fixed and B denotes the batch
size. In this case, we observe that the model learns multimodal densities corresponding to plausi-
ble receiver locations. Furthermore, we see that the model is sensitive to a change in signal strength
h, with large values of h resulting in receiver locations close to the given transmitter xtx , whereas
small values of h result in sample locations that avoid direct line of sight with the transmitter. Sim-
ilarly, when reconstructing geometry, the model will sample diverse floor plans as long as they are
consistent with the transmitted signal, see the right panel of Fig. 5. Additional results on signal and
geometry prediction are given in Appendix E.2.
We quantitatively evaluate these mod-                                                      Transformer
els through the variational lower bound                          Wi-GATr (ours)
                                                                                     default data augm.
on the log likelihood of test data under
the model. To further analyze the ef-      Canonicalized   scenes
fects of equivariance, we test the model   Signal pred.                      1.62        3.00       15.66
both on canonicalized scenes, in which     Receiver loc.                     3.64        8.28       14.42
all walls are aligned with the x and y     Geometry   reco.                 -3.95       -3.61        -2.10
axis, and scenes that are arbitrarily ro-  Scenes in arbitrary rotations
tated. The results in Tbl. 2 show that     Signal pred.                      1.62        9.57       17.65
Wi-GATr outperforms the transformer        Receiver loc.                     3.64 105.68            14.45
baseline across all three tasks, even in   Geometry reco.                   -3.95 389.34             -2.34
the canonicalized setting or when the
transformer is trained with data aug- Table 2: Probabilistic modelling results. We show variational
mentation. The gains of Wi-GATr are upper bounds on the negative log likelihood for different condi-
particularly clear on the signal predic- tional inference tasks (lower is better, best in bold).
tion and receiver localization problems.

5.4    C OMPARISON TO DIFFERENTIABLE RAY TRACING ON REAL - WORLD DATA

The utility of wireless channel simulation is ideally evaluated on real data. Unfortunately, the
scarcity of available measurement data limits evaluation to simple scenarios and prevents thorough
testing of the geometric generalization capabilities. Yet, we aim to highlight limitations of hybrid
ray tracing methods compared to our fully-learnt approach. To this end, we replicate the evaluation
setup of Hoydis et al. (2023) on the DICHASUS dataset (Euchner et al., 2021).
The dataset consists of a single                                                                  Transformer
hallway with receiver arrays at       3.0                                   45                    Wi-GATr (ours, pt)
                                                                              Mean Relative Absolute Error [%]


                                                                            40                    Wi-GATr (ours)
                                         Mean Absolute Error [dB]


each end and an occluded corri-       2.5                                                         Neural Materials
dor in between. During collec-                                              35                    Learned Materials
tion, a robot-mounted transmit-       2.0                                   30
ter was moving through the hall-                                            25
way, covering most of the area,       1.5                                   20
with accurate location data com-                                            15
                                      1.0
ing from a tachymeter. We train                                             10
our model to predict the average      0.5
received power and the average            10        100           1000 5000    10        100           1000 5000
                                             # Tx positions in training set       # Tx positions in training set
delay spread for each receiver ar-
ray, using the same data splits Figure 6: Signal prediction on real measurements. As a function of
and evaluation scheme as in Hoy- the training data size, we show the mean absolute (logarithmic) error
dis et al. (2023). We report the on the received power (left) and the relative absolute error on the delay
mean absolute (logarithmic) error spread (right).
on the average received power and the relative absolute error on the average delay spread (see equa-
tions 44 & 45 in Hoydis et al. (2023)). For this purpose, we can consider each array as a single
receiver without modifications to our Wi-GATr backbone. As baselines, we run their hybrid ap-


                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


proaches named Learned Materials and Neural Materials.
In Figure 6, we show the performance in both prediction tasks with respect to the number of trans-
mitter locations used during training. Each transmitter location corresponds to two data samples,
one per receiver. The Learned Materials approach maintains consistent performance due to model
bias, making it robust with limited data but less flexible with larger datasets. Neural Materials also
benefits from model bias with little data but, thanks to its flexible material model, can leverage
data to overcome other model and geometry limitations. Our fully-learnt approaches Wi-GATr and
the Transformer outperform both hybrid models as the dataset size grows, while their drawback of
higher variance in the small data regime can be stabilized through pretraining on WiPTR (indicated
by “pt”). We find that using a Transformer with the Wi-GATr tokenization scheme slightly outper-
forms GATr in the small data regime. However, we attribute this to simplicity of the dataset, where
symmetry transformations of 3D space are neither observed nor required.

6     C ONCLUSION
We developed a class of neural surrogates grounded in geometric representations and strong induc-
tive biases. They are based on the Wi-GATr backbone, consisting of a new tokenization scheme for
wireless scenes together with an E(3)-equivariant transformer architecture. In our experiments, we
demonstrated the benefits of the inductive bias, inference speed, differentiability, and expressiveness
of our fully-learnt equivariant neural simulation surrogate on simulated and real-world data. In ad-
dition, we showed how our backbone can be used in a diffusion model for probabilistic inference.
Limitations. Our paper presents a step towards fully-learnt wireless simulations, which has natural
trade-offs when compared to model-based and hybrid ray tracers. Unlike model-based approaches
(which require no training data), learnable approaches depend on reasonably-sized amounts of train-
ing data and hence involve data collection overhead. Furthermore, model-based approaches are
highly configurable (e. g., scene parameterization, antenna patterns, controlling precision), whereas
our approach is less configurable with many configuration choices learnt implicitly using training
data. Finally, we emphasize that we are not proposing a drop-in replacement of a model-based ray
tracer, but rather take a step towards the overarching goal of learning wireless simulations from data.
Acknowledgements.
We thank Suresh Sharma, Pim de Haan, Maximilian Arnold, and Jens Petersen for fruitful discus-
sions.

R EFERENCES
3GPP TR 38.901. Study on channel model for frequencies from 0.5 to 100 ghz. Standard, 3GPP,
  Valbonne, FR, March 2022. (Cited on page 3)
A. Alkhateeb. DeepMIMO: A generic deep learning dataset for millimeter wave and massive MIMO
  applications. In ITA, 2019. (Cited on page 5)
Ahmed Alkhateeb, Gouranga Charan, Tawfik Osman, Andrew Hredzak, Joao Morais, Umut
  Demirhan, and Nikhil Srinivas. Deepsense 6g: A large-scale real-world multi-modal sensing and
  communication dataset. IEEE Communications Magazine, 2023. (Cited on page 5)
Nicolas Amiot, Mohamed Laaraiedh, and Bernard Uguen. Pylayers: An open source dynamic
  simulator for indoor propagation and localization. In ICC, 2013. (Cited on page 3)
Johannes Brandstetter, Rianne van den Berg, Max Welling, and Jayesh K Gupta. Clifford neural
  layers for PDE modeling. arXiv:2209.04934, 2022a. (Cited on page 8)
Johannes Brandstetter, Rob Hesselink, Elise van der Pol, Erik J Bekkers, and Max Welling. Geo-
  metric and physical quantities improve E(3) equivariant message passing. In ICLR, 2022b. (Cited
    on pages 7 and 18)

Johann Brehmer, Pim de Haan, Sönke Behrends, and Taco Cohen. Geometric Algebra Transformer.
  In NeurIPS, 2023. (Cited on pages 2, 3, 5, 14, and 15)


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Johann Brehmer, Joey Bose, Pim De Haan, and Taco S Cohen. Edgi: Equivariant diffusion for
  planning with embodied agents. NeurIPS, 2024. (Cited on page 15)
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. 2021. (Cited on page 3)
Wanshi Chen, Peter Gaal, Juan Montojo, and Haris Zisimopoulos. Fundamentals of 5G communica-
 tions: connectivity for enhanced mobile broadband and beyond. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2021.
  (Cited on page 1)

Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael T Mccann, Marc L Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion
  posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. arXiv:2209.14687, 2022. (Cited on pages 5
  and 15)

Taco Cohen. Equivariant Convolutional Networks. PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam, 2021.
  (Cited on page 3)

Erik Dahlman, Stefan Parkvall, and Johan Skold. 5G NR: The Next Generation Wireless Access
  Technology. Elsevier Science, October 2020. (Cited on page 1)
Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. FlashAttention: Fast and memory-
  efficient exact attention with IO-awareness. NeurIPS, 2022. (Cited on page 3)
Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Jordi Salvador, Kiana Ehsani, Winson
 Han, Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. ProcTHOR: Large-
 Scale Embodied AI Using Procedural Generation. In NeurIPS, 2022. (Cited on pages 6 and 17)
Sebastian Dörner, Marcus Henninger, Sebastian Cammerer, and Stephan ten Brink. Wgan-based
  autoencoder training over-the-air. In SPAWC, 2020. (Cited on page 3)
Leo Dorst. A guided tour to the plane-based geometric algebra pga. 2020. URL https://
  geometricalgebra.org/downloads/PGA4CS.pdf. (Cited on page 14)
Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus,
  Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Sussman Grathwohl. Reduce, reuse, recycle:
  Compositional generation with energy-based diffusion models and mcmc. In ICML, 2023. (Cited
  on page 20)

Florian Euchner, Marc Gauger, Sebastian Doerner, and Stephan ten Brink. A Distributed Massive
  MIMO Channel Sounder for ”Big CSI Data”-driven Machine Learning. In WSA 2021; 25th
  International ITG Workshop on Smart Antennas, pp. 1–6, 2021. (Cited on pages 2, 4, and 9)
Manuel Gloeckler, Michael Deistler, Christian Dietrich Weilbach, Frank Wood, and Jakob H.
 Macke. All-in-one simulation-based inference. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Kather-
 ine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Pro-
 ceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceed-
 ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 15735–15766. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https:
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gloeckler24a.html. (Cited on pages 5 and 15)
Thomas M. Hehn, Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Ori Shental, Arash Behboodi, Juan Bucheli, Akash
  Doshi, June Namgoong, Taesang Yoo, Ashwin Sampath, and Joseph B Soriaga. Transformer-
  based neural surrogate for link-level path loss prediction from variable-sized maps. In IEEE
  Globecom, 2023. (Cited on pages 1, 7, 8, and 18)
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS,
  2020. (Cited on page 15)
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv:2210.02303, 2022. (Cited on page 15)
Emiel Hoogeboom, Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Clément Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant diffu-
  sion for molecule generation in 3d. In ICML, 2022. (Cited on page 15)


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sepidehsadat Sepid Hossieni, Mohammad Amin Shabani, Saghar Irandoust, and Yasutaka Fu-
  rukawa. Puzzlefusion: Unleashing the power of diffusion models for spatial puzzle solving.
  NeurIPS, 2024. (Cited on page 15)
Jakob Hoydis, Sebastian Cammerer, Fayçal Ait Aoudia, Avinash Vem, Nikolaus Binder, Guillermo
  Marcus, and Alexander Keller. Sionna: An open-source library for next-generation physical layer
  research. arXiv, 2022. (Cited on pages 3 and 7)
Jakob Hoydis, Fayçal Aı̈t Aoudia, Sebastian Cammerer, Florian Euchner, Merlin Nimier-David,
  Stephan ten Brink, and Alexander Keller. Learning radio environments by differentiable ray
  tracing. arXiv:2311.18558v1, 2023. (Cited on pages 1, 3, and 9)
Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for
 flexible behavior synthesis. arXiv:2205.09991, 2022. (Cited on page 15)
Joseph B. Keller. Geometrical theory of diffraction∗. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 52, Feb 1962. doi: 10.1364/
  JOSA.52.000116. URL https://opg.optica.org/abstract.cfm?URI=josa-52-
  2-116. (Cited on page 2)
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. ICLR, 2014. (Cited on
  page 15)

Jonas Köhler, Leon Klein, and Frank Noé. Equivariant flows: exact likelihood generative learning
  for symmetric densities. In ICML, 2020. (Cited on page 15)
Ju-Hyung Lee and Andreas F Molisch. A scalable and generalizable pathloss map prediction. IEEE
  Transactions on Wireless Communications, 2024. (Cited on page 1)
Ron Levie, Çağkan Yapar, Gitta Kutyniok, and Giuseppe Caire. Radiounet: Fast radio map estima-
  tion with convolutional neural networks. IEEE TWC, 2021. (Cited on page 1)
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In CVPR, 2022. (Cited on
  page 15)

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
  (Cited on page 3)

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In ICML, 2021. (Cited on page 20)
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Arash Behboodi, and Joseph B Soriaga. Mimo-gan: Generative mimo
  channel modeling. In ICC, 2022a. (Cited on page 3)
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Pratik Kumar, Shreya Kadambi, Hao Ye, Joseph Soriaga, and Arash Be-
  hboodi. Winert: Towards neural ray tracing for wireless channel modelling and differentiable
  simulations. In ICLR, 2022b. (Cited on pages 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 17, and 18)
Timothy J O’Shea, Tamoghna Roy, and Nathan West. Approximating the void: Learning stochastic
  channel models from observation with variational generative adversarial networks. In ICNC,
  2019. (Cited on page 3)
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. arXiv:2212.09748,
 2022. (Cited on pages 15 and 19)
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022. (Cited on page 15)
Remcom. Remcom Wireless InSite®. https://www.remcom.com/wireless-insite-
  propagation-software. [Accessed 10-05-2024]. (Cited on pages 3 and 5)
David Ruhe, Jayesh K Gupta, Steven de Keninck, Max Welling, and Johannes Brandstetter. Geo-
  metric clifford algebra networks. In ICLR, 2023. (Cited on page 14)


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In ICML, 2015. (Cited on pages 8, 15, and 16)
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. ICLR, 2021.
  (Cited on pages 14 and 15)

Julian Suk, Pim De Haan, Baris Imre, and Jelmer M. Wolterink. Geometric algebra transformers for
  large 3d meshes via cross-attention. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Geometry-grounded Representa-
  tion Learning and Generative Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=T2bBUlaJTA. (Cited on page 19)
David Tse and Pramod Viswanath. Fundamentals of wireless communication. Cambridge university
  press, 2005. (Cited on page 3)
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need. NeurIPS, 2017. (Cited on pages 3
  and 7)

Pascal Vincent. A Connection Between Score Matching and Denoising Autoencoders. Neural
  computation, 23(7):1661–1674, 2011. (Cited on page 15)
Hao Ye, Geoffrey Ye Li, Biing-Hwang Fred Juang, and Kathiravetpillai Sivanesan. Channel Agnos-
  tic End-to-End Learning Based Communication Systems with Conditional GAN. In IEEE Globe-
  com Workshops, 2018. (Cited on page 3)
Lihao Zhang, Haijian Sun, Jin Sun, and Rose Qingyang Hu. WiSegRT: Dataset for Site-specific
  Indoor Radio Propagation Modeling with 3D Segmentation and Differentiable Ray-Tracing.
  arXiv:2312.11245, 2023. (Cited on page 5)
Xiaopeng Zhao, Zhenlin An, Qingrui Pan, and Lei Yang. NeRF2: Neural Radio-Frequency Radiance
  Fields. In ACM MobiCom, 2023. (Cited on page 3)


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    G EOMETRIC ALGEBRA
As representation, Wi-GATr uses the projective geometric algebra G3,0,1 . Here we summarize key
aspects of this algebra and define the canonical embedding of geometric primitives in it. For a
precise definition and pedagogical introduction, we refer the reader to Dorst (2020).
Geometric algebra. A geometric algebra Gp,q,r consists of a vector space together with a bilinear
operation, the geometric product, that maps two elements of the vector space to another element of
the vector space.
The elements of the vector space are known as multivectors. Their space is constructed by extending
a base vector space Rd to lower orders (scalars) and higher-orders (bi-vectors, tri-vectors, . . . ). The
algebra combines all of these orders (or grades) in one 2d -dimensional vector space. From a basis
for the base space, for instance (e1 , e2 , e3 ), one can construct a basis for the multivector space. A
multivector expressed in that basis then reads, for instance for d = 3, x = x∅ + x1 e1 + x2 e2 +
x3 e3 + x12 e1 e2 + x13 e1 e3 + x23 e2 e3 + x123 e1 e2 e3 .
The geometric product is fully defined by bilinearity, associativity, and the condition that the geo-
metric product of a vector with itself is equal to its norm. The geometric product generally maps
between different grades. For instance, the geometric product of two vectors will consist of a scalar,
the inner product between the vectors, and a bivector, which is related to the cross-product of R3 .
In particular, the conventional basis elements of grade k > 1 are constructed as the geometric prod-
uct of the vector basis elements ei . For instance, e12 = e1 e2 is a basis bivector. From the defining
properties of the geometric products it follows that the geometric product between orthogonal  basis
elements is antisymmetric, ei ej = −ej ei . Thus, for a d-dimensional basis space, there are kd inde-
pendent basis elements at grade k.
Projective geometric algebra. To represent three-dimensional objects including absolute posi-
tions, we use a geometric algebra based on a base space with d = 4, adding a homogeneous coordi-
nate to the 3D space.5 We use a basis (e0 , e1 , e2 , e3 ) with a metric such that e20 = 0 and e2i = 1 for
i = 1, 2, 3. The multivector space is thus 24 = 16-dimensional. This algebra is known as the pro-
jective geometric algebra G3,0,1 .
Canonical embedding of geometric primitives. In G3,0,1 , we can represent geometric primitives
as follows:
    • Scalars (data that do not transform under translation, rotations, and reflections) are represented
      as the scalars of the multivectors (grade k = 0).
    • Oriented planes are represented as vectors (k = 1), encoding the plane normal as well as the
      distance from the origin.
    • Lines or directions are represented as bivectors (k = 2), encoding the direction as well as the
      shift from the origin.
    • Points or positions are represented as trivectors (k = 3).
For more details, we refer the reader to Tbl. 1 in Brehmer et al. (2023), or to Dorst (2020).

B    W IRELESS G EOMETRIC A LGEBRA T OKENIZER
Table 3 outlines how the individual scene parameters are embedded into Geometric Algebra.

C    D IFFUSION MODEL
Formally, we employ theR standard DDPM framework Song et al. (2021) to train a latent vari-
able model pθ (x0 ) = pθ (x0:T )dx1:T , where x0 = [F , xtx , xrx , h] denotes the joint vector of
variables following the dataset distribution pdata (x0 ). In DDPM, the latent variables x1:T are
noisy versions of the original data, defined by a discrete forward noise process q(xt |xt−1 ) =
    5
      A three-dimensional base space is not sufficient to represent absolute positions and translations acting
on them in a convenient form. See Dorst (2020); Ruhe et al. (2023); Brehmer et al. (2023) for an in-depth
discussion.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



         √
N xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I and βi > 0. We approximate the reverse distribution q(xt−1 |xt ) with
pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), σt2 I). The variance σ 2 is typically chosen to match the vari-
ance of q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ), which has been shown to follow a closed-form normal distribution Ho et al.
(2020). Furthermore, instead of parametrizing µθ to predict the mean µ̃ of q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ), we opt to
predict the denoised sample x̂0 = fθ (xt , t). For a discussion of these different parametrizations we
refer to (Ho et al., 2020, Section 3.2). The forward and backward distributions q and p form a varia-
tional auto-encoder Kingma & Welling (2014) which can be trained with a variational lower bound
loss. Using the above parametrization of pθ (xt−1 |xt ), however,  allows for a simple  approximation
of this lower bound by training on an MSE objective L = Ext ,x0 ||fθ (xt , t) − x0 ||2 which resem-
bles denoising score matching Vincent (2011). We provide an outline of the training algorithm in
Algorithm 1, which closely follows the proposed scheme of Ho et al. (2020).
To predict denoised samples using fθ (xt , t), we pass the raw representation of xt through the wire-
less GA tokenizer of Wi-GATr and, additionally, we embed the scalar t through a learned timestep
embedding Peebles & Xie (2022). The embedded timesteps can then be concatenated along the
scalar channels in the GA representation in a straightforward manner. Similar to GATr Brehmer
et al. (2023), the neural network outputs a prediction in the GA representation, which is subsequently
converted to the original latent space. Note that this possibly simplifies the learning problem, as the
GA representation is inherently higher dimensional than our diffusion space with the same dimen-
sionality as x0 .
Related Work. Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021)
are a class of generative models that iteratively invert a noising process. They have become the
de-facto standard in image and video generation (Ramesh et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022). Recently,
they have also shown to yield promising results in the generation of spatial and sequential data,
such as in planning (Janner et al., 2022) and puzzle solving (Hossieni et al., 2024). Aside from
their generative modelling capabilities, diffusion models provide a flexible way for solving inverse
problems (Chung et al., 2022; Lugmayr et al., 2022; Gloeckler et al., 2024) through multiplication
with an appropriate likelihood term (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015). Furthermore, by combining an
invariant prior distribution with an equivariant denoising network, one obtains equivariant diffusion
models (Köhler et al., 2020). These yield a sampling distribution that assigns equal probability
to all symmetry transformations of an object, which can improve performance and data efficiency
in symmetry problems like molecule generation (Hoogeboom et al., 2022) and planning (Brehmer
et al., 2024). We demonstrate similar benefits in modelling wireless signal propagation.
Equivariant generative modelling. A diffusion model with an invariant base density and an
equivariant denoising network defines an invariant density, but equivariant generative modelling
has some subtleties Köhler et al. (2020). Because the group of translations is not compact, we
cannot define a translation-invariant base density. Previous works have circumvented this issue by
performing diffusion in the zero center of gravity subspace of euclidean space Hoogeboom et al.


Data type            Input parameterization       Tokenization           Channels (G3,0,1 embedding)
3D environment F • Triangular mesh                1 token per mesh face • Mesh face center (point)
                                                                        • Vertices (points)
                                                                        • Mesh face plane (oriented plane)
                     • Material classes                                 • One-hot material emb. (scalars)
Antenna xtx / xrx    • Position                   1 token per antenna    • Position (point)
                     • Orientation                                       • Orientation (direction)
                     • Receiving / transmitting                          • One-hot type embedding (scalars)
                     • Additional characteristics                        • Characteristics (scalars)
Channel h            • Antennas                   1 token per link       • Tx position (point)
                                                                         • Rx position (point)
                                                                         • Tx-Rx vector (direction)
                     • Received power                                    • Normalized power (scalar)
                     • Phase, delay, . . .                               • Additional data (scalars)

Table 3: Wireless GA tokenizer. We describe how the mesh parameterizing the 3D environment and the
information about antennas and their links are represented as a sequence of geometric algebra tokens. The
mathematical representation of G3,0,1 primitives like points or orientated planes is described in Appendix A.

                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Diffusion Wi-GATr Training
 1: Input ϕ, Initialize θ                                       ▷ Specify mask probability distribution
 2: repeat
 3:    x0 ∼ pdata (x0 )
 4:    t ∼ Uniform({1, . . . , T })
 5:    xt ∼ q(xt |x0 )                                                          ▷ Create noisy sample
 6:    m ∼ pmask (m; ϕ)                                             ▷ Sample binary conditioning mask
 7:    xmt = m ⊙ xt + (1 − m) ⊙ x0                                      ▷ Apply conditioning per token
 8:    Take  gradient descent step on
        ∇θ ||m ⊙ (fθ (xm
                       t , t, m) − x0 ) ||
                                          2

 9: until converged


Algorithm 2 Diffusion Wi-GATr Sampling
 1: Input m, xm  0                                         ▷ Specify conditioning mask and conditions
 2: xT ∼ N (0, I)
 3: for t = T . . . 0 do
 4:     xt = m ⊙ xt + (1 − m) ⊙ xm 0                                  ▷ Apply conditioning per token
 5:     x̂0 = fθ (xt , t, m)                                               ▷ Predict denoised sample
 6:     xt−1 ∼ q (xt−1 |xt , x̂0 )                       ▷ Compute predicted sample at t − 1 from x̂0
 7: end for
 8: return x0



(2022). However, we found that directly providing the origin as an additional input to the denoising
network also resulted in good performance, at the cost of full E(3) equivariance. We also choose to
generate samples in the convention where the z-axis represents the direction of gravity and positive
z is “up”; we therefore provide this direction of gravity as an additional input to our network.
Unifying forward prediction and inverse problems as conditional sampling. A diffusion model
trained to learn the joint density pθ (F , xtx , xrx , h) does not only allow us to generate unconditional
samples of wireless scenes, but also lets us sample from various conditionals: given a partial wire-
less scene, we can fill in the remaining details, in analogy to how diffusion models for images al-
low for inpainting. To achieve this, we use the conditional sampling algorithm proposed by Sohl-
Dickstein et al. (2015): at each step of the sampling loop, we fix the conditioning variables to their
known values before feeding them into the denoising network. This algorithm lets us solve signal
prediction (sampling from pθ (h|F , xtx , xrx )), receiver localization (from pθ (xrx |F , xtx , h)), geom-
etry reconstruction (from pθ (Fu |Fk , xtx , xrx , h)), or any other inference task in wireless scenes. We
thus unify “forward” and “inverse” modelling in a single algorithm. Each approach is probabilistic,
enabling us to model uncertainties. This is important for inverse problems, where measurements of-
ten underspecify the solutions.
Masking strategies. In principle, the unconditional diffusion objective should suffice to enable
test-time conditional sampling. In practice, we find that we can improve the conditional sampling
performance with two modifications. First, we combine training on the unconditional diffusion ob-
jective with conditional diffusion objectives. For the latter, we randomly select tokens to condi-
tion on and evaluate the diffusion loss only on the remaining tokens. Second, we provide the bi-
nary conditioning mask as an additional input to the denoising model. Non-zero entries in the
mask indicate what data we wish to generate, while zero entries are the ones we condition on. We
sample masks from a discrete categorical distribution with probabilities ϕ = (0.2, 0.3, 0.2, 0.3)
corresponding to masks for unconditional, signal, receiver and mesh prediction, respectively. If
we denote this distribution over masks as pmask (m; ϕ), the  modified loss function then reads as
L = Em∼pmask (m;ϕ),xt ,x0 ||m ⊙ fθ (xm                         2          m
                                        t , t, m) − m ⊙ x0 || , where xt is equal to x0 along the
masked tokens according to m. To see how the masks are used during training and inference, we re-
fer to Algorithm 1 and 2. We note that while any arbitrary mask m of adequate dimensionality can
be passed into the model, we only test on masks m ∈ supp(pmask (m; ϕ)). That is, we only sample
from the unconditional distribution or a conditional distribution corresponding to signal prediction,
receiver localization and geometry reconstruction, while respectively keeping all other tokens fixed.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     DATASETS

Table 4 summarizes major characteristics of the two datasets. In the following we explain more
details on data splits and generation.
Wi3R dataset. Based on the layouts of the Wi3Rooms dataset by Orekondy et al. (2022b), we run
simulations for 5000 floor layouts that are split into training (4500), validation (250), and test (250).
These validation and test splits thus represent generalization across unseen layouts, transmitter, and
receiver locations. From the training set, we keep 10 Rx locations as additional test set to evaluate
generalization only across unseen Rx locations. To evaluate the generalization performance, we also
introduce an out-of-distribution (OOD) set that features four rooms in each of the 250 floor layouts.
In all layouts, the interior walls are made of brick while exterior walls are made of concrete. The Tx
and Rx locations are sampled uniformly within the bounds of the floor layouts (10m × 5m × 3m).
WiPTR dataset. Based on the floor layouts in the ProcTHOR-10k dataset for embodied AI re-
search Deitke et al. (2022), we extract the 3D mesh information including walls, windows, doors,
and door frames. The layouts comprise between 1 to 10 rooms and can cover up to 600 m2 . We as-
sign 6 different dielectric materials for different groups of objects (see Tbl. 5). The 3D Tx and Rx
locations are randomly sampled within the bounds of the layout. The training data comprises 10k
floor layouts, while test and validation sets each contain 1k unseen layouts, Tx, and Rx locations.
Again, we introduce an OOD validation set with 5 layouts where we manually remove parts of the
walls such that two rooms become connected. While the multi-modality in combination with the
ProcTHOR dataset enables further research for joint sensing and communication in wireless, our
dataset set is also, to the best of our knowledge, the first large-scale 3D wireless indoor datasets suit-
able for embodied AI research.

E     E XPERIMENTS

E.1   P REDICTIVE MODELLING

Models. We use an Wi-GATr model that is 32 blocks deep and 16 multivector channels in addition
to 32 additional scalar channels wide. We use 8 attention heads and multi-query attention. Overall,
the model has 1.6 · 107 parameters. These settings were selected by comparing five differently sized
networks on an earlier version of the Wi3R dataset, though somewhat smaller and bigger networks
achieved a similar performance.
Our Transformer model has the same width (translating to 288 channels) and depth as the Wi-
GATr model, totalling 16.7 · 106 parameters. These hyperparameters were independently selected
by comparing five differently sized networks on an earlier version of the Wi3R dataset.
For SEGNN, we use representations of up to ℓmax = 3, 8 layers, and 128 hidden features. The model
has 2.6 · 105 parameters. We selected these parameters in a scan over all three parameters, within


                                                           Wi3R       WiPTR
                              Total Channels              5M      >5.5M
                              Materials                     2        6
                              Transmitters per layout      5       1-15
                              Receivers per layout        200    Up to 200
                              Floor layouts                5k       12k
                              Simulated frequency      3.5 GHz 3.5 GHz
                              Reflections                  3         6
                              Transmissions                1         3
                              Diffractions                 1         1
                              Strongest paths retained    25        25
                              Antennas                 Isotropic Isotropic
                              Waveform                 Sinusoid Sinusoid


                   Table 4: Dataset details and simulation settings for dataset generation.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   3                            Wi3R


                                  Mean Rx localization error [m]
                                                                   2



                                                                   1

                                                                               Transformer
                                                                               Wi-GATr (ours)
                                                           0.5
                                                                       1      2 3          5      10
                                                                           Number of transmitters
Figure 7: Rx localization error, as a function of the number of Tx. Lines and error band show mean and its
standard error over 240 measurements.


the ranges used in Brandstetter et al. (2022b).
The PLViT model is based on the approach introduced by Hehn et al. (2023). We employ the
same centering and rotation strategy as in the original approach around the Tx. Further, we extend
the original approach to 3 dimensions by providing the difference in z-direction concatenated with
the 2D x-y-distance as one token. Since training from scratch resulted in poor performance, we
finetuned a ViT-B-16 model pretrained on ImageNet and keeping only the red channel. This resulted
in a model with 85.4 · 107 parameters and also required us to use a fixed image size for each dataset
that ensures the entire floor layout is visible in the image data.
Finally, we attempt to compare Wi-GATr also to WiNeRT (Orekondy et al., 2022b), a neural ray
tracer. However, this architecture, which was developed to be trained on several measurements on
the same floor plan, was not able to achieve useful predictions on our diverse datasets with their
focus on generalization across floor plans.
Optimization. All models are trained on the mean squared error between the model output and
the total received power in dBm. We use a batch size of 64 (unless for SEGNN, where we use a
smaller batch size due to memory limitations), the Adam optimizer, an initial learning rate of 10−3 ,
and a cosine annealing scheduler. Models are trained for 5 · 105 steps on the Wi3R dataset and for
2 · 105 steps on the WiPTR dataset.
Inference speed. To quantify the trade-off between inference speed and accuracy of signal pre-
diction, we compare the ray tracing simulation with our machine learning approaches. For this pur-
pose, we evaluate the methods on a single room of the validation set with 2 different Tx locations
and two equidistant grids at z ∈ {2.3, 0.3} with each 1637 Rx locations.
The left panel of Fig. 8 summarizes the average inference times per link with the corresponding
standard deviation. While Wireless InSite (6/3/1, i.e., 6 reflections/3 transmissions/1 diffraction)
represents our method that was used to generate the ground truth data, it is also by far the slowest
approach. Note that we only measure the inference speed of Wireless InSite for each Tx individually


 Object                  Material name                                       Rel. Permittivity [1] Conductivity [S/m] Thickness [cm]
 Ceiling                 ITU Ceiling Board 1.5                                                     0.002148          0.95
 Floor                   ITU Floor Board   3.66                                                    0.02392           3.0
 Exterior walls          Concrete          7.00                                                    0.0150            30.0
                                           2.94                                                    0.028148          1.30
                       ITU Layered Drywall
 Interior walls                            1                                                       0                 8.90
                       (3 layers)
                                           2.94                                                    0.028148          1.30
 Doors and door frames ITU Wood            1.99                                                    0.017998          3.0
 Windows               ITU Glass           6.27                                                    0.019154          0.3


                        Table 5: Dielectric material properties of objects in WiPTR.


                                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     12            Wireless InSite
                                   Sionna (GT mat.)                                    103
                     10            Sionna (learned mat.)


                                                                  Time per Tx-Rx link [s]
                                   Transformer                                         102
                      8            Wi-GATr (ours)
          MAE [dB]
                      6                                                                101
                      4                                                                100
                      2                                                          10 1
                      0                                                          10 2
                          10 2          10 1           100                                   103      104       105   106
                                 Time per link [s]                                                 Number of tokens
Figure 8: Left: Inference wall time vs signal prediction error per Tx/Rx prediction on the first room of the
WiPTR validation set. Right: Scaling of the inference wall time as a function of the number of tokens (mesh
faces, antennas, and links) in the scene for Wi-GATr.



without the preprocessing of the geometry. By reducing the complexity, e.g., reducing the number of
allowed reflections or transmissions, of the ray tracing simulation the inference time can be reduced
significantly. For example, the configuration 3/2/1 shows a significant increase in inference speed,
but at the same time we can already see that the simulation results do not match the ground truth
anymore. This effect is even more pronounced for the case of Wireless InSite 3/1/1. As of version
0.19, Sionna RT does not support any transmission and only supports first order diffraction, i. e., the
path cannot include other reflection events. Therefore, in indoor scenarios such as WiPTR, where
signals propagate through walls, Sionna is inaccurate but very fast due to the simplified model
and optimized implementation. In addition, it can improve its accuracy by learning more suitable
material parameters to compensate for the model simplicity, yet a fundamental gap remains. This
shows that if the model is incomplete, the ground truth parameters (see Tab. 5) are not necessarily
the optimal parameters. Our neural surrogates provide a favorable trade-off in terms of inference
speed and prediction accuracy.
For larger scenes, the inference time of Wi-GATr grows quadratically in the number of mesh faces,
just like for a standard transformer. We show this behaviour in the right panel of Fig. 8. Recently,
Suk et al. (2024) have successfully demonstrated possibilities to scale GATr to large mesh sizes.
In addition, the differentiability of ML approches enables them to solve inverse problems and such
as finetuning to real-world measurement data. Finetuning, often referred to as calibration, remains
challenging for simulation software and will likely lead to increased MAE as the ground truth is not
given by Wireless InSite itself anymore.

E.2   P ROBABILISTIC MODELLING USING DIFFUSION

Experiment setup. For all conditional samples involving p(Fu |Fk , xtx , xrx , h), we always choose
to set Fk to be the floor and ceiling mesh faces only and Fu to be the remaining geometry. This
amounts to completely predicting the exterior walls, as well as the separating walls/doors of the
three rooms, whereas the conditioning on Fk acts only as a mean to break equivariance. Since F
is always canonicalized in the non-augmented training dataset, this allows for direct comparison of
variational lower bounds in Tbl. 2 with the non-equivariant transformer baseline.
Models. For both Wi-GATr and the transformer baseline, we follow similar architecture choices as
for the predictive models, using an equal amount of attention layers. To make the models timestep-
dependent, we additionally employ a standard learnable timestep embedding commonly used in
diffusion transformers Peebles & Xie (2022) and concatenate it to the scalar channel dimension.
Optimization. We use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 for the Wi-GATr models.
The transformer models required a smaller learning rate for training stability, and thus we chose
3 · 10−4 . In both cases, we linearly anneal the learning rate and train for 7 · 105 steps with a batchsize
of 64 and gradient norm clipping set to 100.


                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              10                         Wi3R

                                               5


                                  MAE [dBm]
                                               2

                                                        Transformer
                                               1        Wi-GATr (ours)
                                                   10    100        1000 4500
                                                        Training rooms
Figure 9: Mean absolute errors of received power as a function of number of training rooms for conditional
diffusion model samples.


Evaluation. We use the DDIM sampler using 100 timesteps for visualizations in Fig. 5 and for
the error analysis in Fig. 9. To evaluate the variational lower bound in Tbl. 2, we follow Nichol &
Dhariwal (2021) and evaluate Lvlb := L0 + L1 + . . . LT , where L0 := − log pθ (x0 |x1 ), Lt−1 :=
DKL (q(xt−1 |xt , x0 )||pθ (xt−1 |xt )) and LT := DKL (q(xT |x0 ), p(xt )). To be precise, for each
sample x0 on the test set, we get a single sample xt from q and evaluate Lvlb accordingly. Table 2
reports the mean of all Lvlb evaluations over the test set.
Additional results. Fig. 9, shows the quality of samples from pθ (h|F , xtx , xrx ) as a function of the
amount of available training data, where we average over 3 samples for each conditioning input. It
is worth noting that diffusion samples have a slightly higher error than the predictive models. This
shows that the joint probabilistic modelling of the whole scene is a more challenging learning task
than a deterministic forward model.
To further evaluate the quality of generated rooms, we analyze how often the model generates walls
between the receiver and transmitter, compared to the ground truth. Precisely, we plot the distribu-
tion of received power versus the distance of transmitter and receiver in Fig. 10 and color each point
according to a line of sight test. We can see that, overall, Wi-GATr has an intersection error of 0.26,
meaning that in 26% of the generated geometries, line of sight was occluded, while the true geometry
did not block line of sight between receiver and transmitter. This confirms that the diffusion model
correctly correlates the received power and receiver/transmitter positions with physically plausible
geometries. While an error of 26% is non-negligible, we note that this task involves generating the
whole geometry given only a single measurement of received power, making the problem heavily
underspecified. Techniques such as compositional sampling (Du et al., 2023) could overcome this
limitation by allowing to condition on multiple receiver and received power measurements.

F    D ISCUSSION
Progress in wireless channel modelling is likely to lead to societal impact. Not all of it is positive.
The ability to reconstruct details about the propagation environment may have privacy implications.
Wireless networks are ubiquitous and could quite literally allow to see through walls. At the same
time, we believe that progress in the development of wireless channel models may help to reduce
radiation exposure and power consumption of wireless communication systems, and generally con-
tribute to better and more accessible means of communication.


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Wi-GATr: Intersection Error: 0.264                              Transformer: Intersection Error: 0.261                               True distribution
                1.75                                                                                                                                1.75       Occluded
                                                                                    1.75                                                                       Line of Sight
                1.50                                                                1.50                                                            1.50
                1.25                                                                1.25                                                            1.25
Link distance


                                                                    Link distance


                                                                                                                                    Link distance
                1.00                                                                1.00                                                            1.00
                0.75                                                                0.75                                                            0.75
                0.50                                                                0.50                                                            0.50
                0.25              Occluded                                          0.25              Occluded                                      0.25
                                  Line of Sight                                     0.00              Line of Sight
                0.00                                                                                                                                0.00
                       6         4         2        0           2                                 4          2        0       2                            6   4       2            0   2
                                         RSRP                                                               RSRP                                                     RSRP

Figure 10: A scatter plot of normalized received power versus normalized distance between receiver and
transmitter. Each point is colored depending on having line of sight between the receiver and transmitter given
the room geometry. Left: The geometry used for calculating line of sight is given by conditional diffusion
samples using Wi-GATr. Middle: The geometry used for calculating line of sight is given by transformer
samples. Right: The geometry used for calculating line of sight is taken from the test data distribution.


                                                                                                         21
