Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


EDU-RAG: A RAG B ENCHMARK WITH W EB -
ENHANCED C ONTENT IN E DUCATION D OMAIN . C AN
RAG H ELP AI T UTOR ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Hallucination has been a persistent challenge when using Large Language Models
         (LLMs). Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has emerged as a popular ap-
         proach to mitigate this issue by maintaining context and coherence in generated
         outputs, as well as incorporating customized knowledge (Lewis et al., 2020a). In
         this paper, we propose a benchmark dataset for evaluating LLM performance in
         the domain of middle-school science question answering, using textbook questions
         augmented with real-world web search results. We assess the performance of
         various LLMs, including GPT-4o, Llama2-7b, and Llama3-8b, with and without
         the application of RAG. Our goal is to determine whether RAG can reduce hal-
         lucinations stemming from the inherent biases of pre-trained LLMs or from the
         retrieval of irrelevant knowledge, even when relevant information is accessible
         (Ji et al., 2023a). The dataset and methodology introduced here provide a robust
         foundation for advancing the evaluation and development of RAG techniques in
         mitigating hallucinations across diverse LLMs.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent research in RAG emphasizes its potential to augment natural language generation by retrieving
relevant documents or information, which helps maintaining context and coherence in generated
outputs (Lewis et al., 2020a). A notable challenge highlighted by research is hallucination – RAG
models may draw invalid correlations or rely on biased model knowledge, overriding retrieved
information and subsequently hallucinating, even when relevant information is accessible. (Ji et al.,
2023a).
Our project aims to address these challenges by refining RAG benchmarks and algorithms. Ad-
dressing hallucinations remains a key concern in RAG, requiring advanced techniques to evaluate
information relevance and factual consistency effectively. Furthermore, domain-specific nuances
may be incorporated to reduce misleading or inaccurate outputs, particularly in critical areas such as
education.
Education domain is selected because Artificial Intelligence (AI) tutors are popular applications for
LLMs. We would like to study the current status of the field, and provide a useful benchmark to help
improve AI tutors. This is an important field because AI tutors can provide low cost solutions to
people who don’t have access to expensive education resources.
Figure 1 demonstrates an example of the benchmark. The input contains a questions, choices and the
expected answer. This is a question related to Mendel’s experiments in the biology field. With the
LLM (Llama2-7b in this case), it provided a wrong answer. With the RAG solution (Llama2-7b with
the input of web search results), it provided the correct answer. The benchmark also contains web
search results based on the questions, which can be used for the RAG algorithm.
The project is inspired by Meta KDD Cup 2024 RAG: Comprehensive RAG Benchmark (CRAG)
(Yang et al., 2024). Currently CRAG only includes five domains: Finance, Music, Movie, Sports, and
Open, and it does not include the Education domain. Our project creates a new benchmark for the
Education domain, with different data sources and processes.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 1: Example of Question, Choice Set, and Result with LLM with and without RAG



2   R ELATED W ORK

RAG has significant potential to augment natural language generation by retrieving relevant docu-
ments or information, which helps in maintaining context and coherence in generated outputs (Lewis
et al., 2020a). There is an also a more recent survey shows that RAG models may draw invalid
correlations with retrieved knowledge or use biased model knowledge, despite access to relevant
information (Ji et al., 2023a).
The Head-to-Tail Paper (Sun et al., 2024) offers valuable insights into LLMs’ knowledge capabilities,
providing a foundation for further research on enhancing factuality and reducing hallucinations in
NLP models. In addition, there are methods like FreshLLMS to enhance factual consistency in
LLMs through real-time information retrieval, offering a holistic view of NLP research in reducing
hallucinations and improving factuality (Vu et al., 2023).
LLMs are very good at memorizing the content used for its pretraining. However, there are many
drawbacks of using its memorization capability directly for Question Answering (QA) tasks. For
example, depending on the size of the model, the quality of the pretraining data, and the type of
questions, LLMs’ memorization capability can be very limited and hard to be controlled. The LLMs
are also hard to be updated unless through retraining or fine tuning, so LLMs can not handle questions
on recent events if deployed. Arguably the most problematic drawback of using LLMs for QA is
it can hallucinate, especially so if the models do not know if the context contains the information
needed to answer a question.
Fine tuning is a straightforward way to update the knowledge of LLMs if the updated information
become available. However, due to the scarcity of GPUs and limitations of access to high quality data,
it is not feasible for lots of use cases. Furthermore, the behavior of tuning language model is not well
studied, and fine tuning with bad data or practices might decrease the model’s capabilities, causing
modality collapse unless more complex methods such as RLHF are used (Ouyang et al., 2022).
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020b; Gao et al., 2024) is a popular way to
address the shortcomings of LLMs, by augmenting LLMs with non-parametric data sources, utilizing
LLMs’ powerful in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020) capability. (Gao et al., 2024) grouped the
approaches of using RAG for LLMs into three categories: Naive RAG, Advanced RAG (Ma et al.,
2023; Zheng et al., 2024), and Modular RAG (Yu et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2023). The Naive and
Advanced RAG are widely in practice due their simplicity and low cost on development. They are
generally consisted of three parts: non-parametric database curation, retrieving relevant snippets from
the database given the query, LLMs generation by in-context learning and prompt engineering with
the snippets that are related the query.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While the research on combining LLMs and RAG for QA mainly focus texts, there is also research
on utilizing resources beyond pure texts, such images (Chen et al., 2022), audio (Zhao et al., 2023),
video (Yang et al., 2023) and code (Nashid et al., 2023) to augment the capabilities of language
models.
There are various efforts on creating RAG benchmarks and proposing appropriate evaluation metrics
in recent years. (Yang et al., 2024) is one of the recent ones, which is the foundation of this paper.
(Yang et al., 2024) created a factual question answering benchmark of 4,409 question-answer pairs
and mock APIs to simulate web and Knowledge Graph (KG) search. It also proposes an evaluation
mechanism, which distinguishes hallucination and missing answers, and gives hallucination a higher
penalty. (Chen et al., 2024) created a RAG evaluation benchmark in both English and Chinese, and
analyzed different LLMs from 4 aspects: noise robustness, negative rejection, information integration,
and counterfactual. They found that LLMs show a certain degree of noise robustness, but struggle
significantly in other aspects.
Apart from specific RAG datasets, there are many existing Question-answering (QA) datasets which
include context passages for each question. These datasets can also be used for RAG experiments,
and cover a wide range of questions such as multiple-choice QA (Pang et al., 2022; Clark et al., 2018;
Talmor et al., 2019), single-hop QA (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019; Joshi et al., 2017; Rajpurkar et al.,
2016), multi-hop QA (Yang et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2020; Trivedi et al., 2022), and Domain-specific
QA (Dasigi et al., 2021; Möller et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2024).
Hallucination (Ji et al., 2023b) in LLMs is a well-known problem, and can generally be grouped
into intrinsic hallucinations and extrinsic hallucinations. Intrinsic hallucinations are generated output
that contradicts the input content. For example, generated abstractive summarization that includes
contradicting facts from the original article. Another example is generated answers contradicting
facts presented in the context of a RAG task. Extrinsic hallucinations include generated output that
can’t be verified from the input. In this situation, the LLMs draw upon their stored "knowledge" and
produce outputs that can be correct and relevant, correct and not relevant, or erroneous. Hallucination
in LLMs is considered a very challenging issue which can not be improved by directly scaling up
models (Lin et al., 2022).
One way to deal with hallucinations is detection. (Snyder et al., 2023) trained a binary classifiers
on artifacts from the LLM’s inputs, internal state and outputs to classify the generated outputs into
hallucinations and non-hallucinations. (Kadavath et al., 2022) fine-tuned the model itself to predict
whether it knows the correct answer. (Azaria and Mitchell, 2023) trained a classifier on the LLM’s
internal state to predict whether the output is truthful. (Zhang et al., 2024) invested using the LLMs
to self-identify hallucination after the answers are generated.


3     A PPROACH

Our approach comprises two primary components. First, we constructed a benchmark dataset tailored
for LLM RAG use cases in the education domain. This dataset includes middle school-level science
question-answering (QA) pairs in multiple-choice format, along with an augmented knowledge base
for each question derived from web search results. Second, we implemented a RAG module and
evaluated the performance of the LLMs with RAG by incorporating the augmented knowledge as
in-context learning in the prompt, to be compared with the performance of vanilla LLM models.

3.1   B ENCHMARK C ONSTRUCTION

The benchmark construction process extracted QA pairs from an existing Textbook Question Answer-
ing (TQA) dataset(Kembhavi et al., 2017), and added the additional web content data per question.
As shown in Figure 2, the Web Content Handler calls the Web Search Engine API to get the top
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) based on the question, and then crawls the web content from the
URLs. More details are as follows.
QA Pair: We leveraged the TQA dataset (downloadable from https://allenai.org/data/tqa), which
draws textbook content such as lesson topics, and questions and answers from middle school science
curricula such as Life Science, Earth Science, and Physical Science textbooks. We sampled from the
13,693 non-DiagramQuestions as example in Appendix 4 that don’t reply on accompanying diagrams


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Figure 2: Benchmark Construction Process


including multiple-choice, including true/false questions also in multiple-choice format. We have the
dataset in csv with columns of beingAsked (question), answerChoices (choice-set) and correctAnswer
(correct choice label).
Web Page Content: For each question, we leveraged the Google Search Python API googlesearch-
pythonweb to pragmatically obtain the URLs of the top search results by querying the question
prompt (not including the choice set), The cleaned article content from these web pages was then
extracted using web scraping services (beautifulSoup, requests) and natural language toolkit (nltk,
newspaper3k). We converted each web page content into a txt file. The setup was configured to fetch
the top 10 Web pages for each search query, and with a request timeout of 5 seconds to avoid issues
related to excessive website redirects or delay due to login/human verification. Web page content files
smaller than 0.5K were filtered out, as they typically contained web access errors or empty frames.
This configuration allowed us to obtain an average of three web pages per question, with the average
length of the extracted content being approximately 8,285 characters, as detailed in Appendix Table 4
4.


3.2   RAG D ESIGN

As shown in Figure 3, the key components of the RAG design include Retriever, Reranker, Generator
and Evaluator.
Retriever: Pre-processes the extracted content for each question, including concatenating the content
from all web pages fetched for one question, and transforming the article into sentences.
Reranker: Selects the top K closest sentences for each question, by encoding each question and
each sentence from the extracted web search content to vector representations via S-BERT Sentence
Transformer (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019). After that, computes the similarity scores between each
sentence and the question, and picks the top K.
Generator: Calls the LLM Service, instructing it to respond with only the one choice letter, with
the augmented sentences in the prompt (reference to the Llama Prompt Structure without RAG in
Prompt 3.1, Llama Prompt Structure with RAG in Prompt 3.2 and GPT-4o Prompt Structure with
RAG in Prompt 3.3).
Evaluator: Calculates the evaluation metrics.



                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Figure 3: RAG Design



   Prompt 3.1: Llama Prompt Example without RAG

         • Instruction Part1: You are a helpful science tutor. You should output only a single
           letter indicating the choice you make. You must choose a letter even if you are
           unsure.
         • Question Part: <TQA Dataset Question> e.g., ____symbol for the second offspring
           generation in genetics experiments
         • Choices Set part: <TQA Dataset Choice Set for the Question> e.g., a. F1 | b. law
           of independent assortment | c. F2 | d. dominant | e. P | f. law of segregation | g.
           recessive
         • Instruction Part2: I have to choose a letter option. The letter chosen is


   Prompt 3.2: Llama Prompt Example with RAG

         • Instruction Part1: You are a helpful science tutor. You should output only a single
           letter indicating the choice you make. You must choose a letter even if you are
           unsure.
         • Knowledge Augmentation: <Closest sentences from top search results:> e.g., The
           parent plants in the experiments are referred to as the P (for parent) generation.
           You can explore an interactive animation of Mendel’s first set of experiments at
           this link: http://www2.edc.org/weblabs/Mendel/mendel.html. Reciprocal crosses
           generated identical F 1 and F 2 offspring ratios. By examining sample sizes, Mendel
           showed that traits were inherited as independent events. In modern terms, we call
           the parents the P generation and the offspring the F1 generation. F1 stands for first
           filial generation – filial means child. For the example of the P generation of purple
           crossed with white flowers, all the F1 offspring were purple. If he crossed plants
           that varied in a single character – purple flowers and white flowers, for example – he
           found that the first generation of offspring always matched the appearance of one of
           the parents. But the F 1 possesses the information needed to produce both parental
           phenotypes in the following generation. If two F1 offspring were crossed, though,
           both traits of the original parents would be seen in the next generation, called the F2
           generation. For the purple flower x white flower cross, there were both purple and



                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              white F2 offspring. Mendel called purple the “dominating” trait; in modern terms
              we use the word dominant....
           • Question Part: <TQA Dataset Question> e.g., ____symbol for the second offspring
             generation in genetics experiments
           • Choices Set part: <TQA Dataset Choice Set for the Question> e.g., a. F1 | b. law
             of independent assortment | c. F2 | d. dominant | e. P | f. law of segregation | g.
             recessive
           • Instruction Part2: I have to choose a letter option. The letter chosen is


      Prompt 3.3: GPT-4o Prompt Example with RAG

           • Instruction Part: Assume you are a scientist. Given the multi-choice question
             below, generate the correct answer. You must output only the letter of the correct
             choice within (a, b, c, d, e, f, g). If you don’t know, answer "I don’t know". Please
             be concise and answer in one word.
           • Knowledge Augmentation: <Closest sentences from top search results:> e.g., The
             parent plants in the experiments are referred to as the P (for parent) generation.
             You can explore an interactive animation of Mendel’s first set of experiments at
             this link: http://www2.edc.org/weblabs/Mendel/mendel.html. Reciprocal crosses
             generated identical F 1 and F 2 offspring ratios. By examining sample sizes, Mendel
             showed that traits were inherited as independent events. In modern terms, we call
             the parents the P generation and the offspring the F1 generation. F1 stands for first
             filial generation – filial means child. For the example of the P generation of purple
             crossed with white flowers, all the F1 offspring were purple. If he crossed plants
             that varied in a single character – purple flowers and white flowers, for example – he
             found that the first generation of offspring always matched the appearance of one of
             the parents. But the F 1 possesses the information needed to produce both parental
             phenotypes in the following generation. If two F1 offspring were crossed, though,
             both traits of the original parents would be seen in the next generation, called the F2
             generation. For the purple flower x white flower cross, there were both purple and
             white F2 offspring. Mendel called purple the “dominating” trait; in modern terms
             we use the word dominant....
           • Question Part: <TQA Dataset Question> e.g., ____symbol for the second offspring
             generation in genetics experiments
           • Choices Set part: <TQA Dataset Choice Set for the Question> e.g., a. F1 | b. law
             of independent assortment | c. F2 | d. dominant | e. P | f. law of segregation | g.
             recessive

In the Retrieval stage, we leverage cosine similarity. For each question i in the 1.25K QA pair, we
generate the question sentence embedding Qi . For each sentence j in the retrieved documents via the
top 10 web search result pages for question i, we generate the embedding Dij . The cosine similarity is
calculated as follows And then for each question i, fetch the top-k sentences based on these similarity
scores.

                                                           Qi · Dij
                                   simcos (Qi , Dij ) =                                                (1)
                                                          ∥Qi ∥∥Dij ∥


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1    DATA

We tested different models on a sample of 1,255 TQA question-answer pairs, including the question,
choice set, and augmented knowledge in-context for RAG use case.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2   E VALUATION METHOD

To simplify measurement, as TQA provides a multiple-choice set, we asked the LLM to return a
single choice letter rather than a natural language response. In addition, when there is case with
missing response / failed prediction, or respond with "I don’t know", it’s considered a missing.
Since our research topic is to evaluate whether RAG can help reduce hallucination, the total score
metrics is designed to penalize on incorrect predictions and to encourage the model to predict "I don’t
know" instead. If the model predicts "I don’t know" or nothing, we treat this as "missing" cases and
there is no deduction on total score. If there is a wrong prediction, we treat this as "incorrect" cases,
and there is deduction on total score.

       • Accuracy (Acc.): the percentage of correct predictions
       • Miss Rate (Miss.): the percentage of missing predictions (e.g., "I don’t know", "I can’t
         answer...")
       • Hallucination Rate (Hall.): the percentage of incorrect predictions
       • Total Score (Scoreh ): sum of the scores across all predictions divided by total number of
         predictions. Score is defined as that for each predicted answer, 1 point if correct, 0 point if
         missing, and -1 point if incorrect. This will result in an additional penalty for a hallucinatory
         answer.

Following the conventions used in CRAG (Yang et al., 2024), we defined the Total Score as
                 Scoreh = 1.0 · Acc. + (−1.0) · Hall. + 0.0 · Miss. = Acc. − Hall.

4.3   E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS

We first evaluated the performance of the vanilla LLMs without RAG on the 1,255 sampled QA pairs.
Then we integrated the top sentences, which ranked and pruned web search results sentences into the
prompts as in-context learning augmented knowledge, with the same model configuration.

       • Common parameters used in the Retrieval Stage for all models:
           – Number of TopK closest sentences from full search results content per question = 10
           – max web search results length: 7500, to avoid exceeding token limitation for LLM
             models, especially when using non-pruned full documents
       • Models:
           – Vanilla Llama3 8B instruction fine-tuned: meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct
           – Vanilla Llama2 7B instruction fine tuned: meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf
           – Chatgpt-4-o
       • Models Params:
           – max_new_tokens = 1
           – Minimize Randomization, e.g. do_sample=False

4.4   R ESULTS

Experiment Results show that RAG with Pruned Web Search Contents improved the accuracy of the
three LLM models. The improvements are especially significant for Llama-2, for which the RAG
solution increased the accuracy rate from 25.34% to 52.03% in Table 1. The RAG solution also
shows accuracy improvement in Llama-3 and GPT-4o. The Vanilla versions in the table refers to the
basic version of the model without RAG.
The total score is also higher for models with RAG solution. We computed the total score based
on the number of correct, incorrect, missing questions in Table 1, and then generated the Table 2
to display the total score. The total score is defined as accuracy rate - hallucination rate, which is
explained in Section 4.2. The total score values the response with accurate answers, and penalize the
response with wrong answers. In this way, this metrics favors the solutions with answers "I don’t
know" or missing results, and penalizes the solutions with wrong answers.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  Accuracy Rate           Number of Questions
                                                                      Correct Incorrect Missing
 Llama2-7b - Vanilla                                    25.34%          318      234        703
 Llama2-7b - RAG                                        52.03%          653      510         92
 Llama3-8b - Vanilla                                    70.12%          880      375          0
 Llama3-8b - RAG                                        74.26%          932      323          0
 GPT-4o - Vanilla                                       87.57%         1099      141         15
 GPT-4o - RAG                                           88.68%         1112      130         13

                               Table 1: Accuracy Rate (1255 Samples)


                                            Score Breakdown
                          Accuracy Rate     Hallucination Rate      Missing Rate     Total Score
                                                                                     (Accuracy Rate
                                                                                     - Hallucination Rate)
 Llama2-7b - Vanilla          25.34%               18.65%              56.02%        6.69%
 Llama2-7b - RAG              52.03%               40.64%               7.33%        11.39%
 Llama3-8b - Vanilla          70.12%               29.88%                 0%         40.24%
 Llama3-8b - RAG              74.26%               25.74%                 0%         48.53%
 GPT-4o - Vanilla             87.57%               11.24%               1.20%        76.33%
 GPT-4o - RAG                 88.61%               10.36%               1.04%        78.25%

Table 2: Score Breakdown and Total Score for Benchmark Vanilla LLM Models (1255 Samples) 1



5    A NALYSIS

Through the EDU-RAG benchmark and the experiments, we can conduct analysis on the following
research questions (RQs):
RQ 1: Is this a valid benchmark to help evaluate the effectiveness of different RAG algorithms?
Yes. This is a valid benchmark to help evaluate RAG algorithms. The initial results successfully
demonstrated that the dataset is valid, and can be used for the community to test different models.
We also showed that a basic RAG algorithm with LLMs can improve the accuracy and total score
compared with basic LLMs.
RQ 2: Can RAG help improve the accuracy?
Yes. The accuracy of the RAG solutions with Llama2-7b, Llama3-8b and GPT-4o is better than their
basic LLM versions without RAG. For Llama2-7b, it shows 26.69% absolute level improvement. For
Llama3-8b, it shows 4.14% absolute level improvement. For GPT-4o, it shows 1.1% absolute level
improvement.
RQ 3: Can RAG help reduce the hallucination?
It depends. It reduced the hallucination rate of Llama3-8b from 29.88% to 25.74%, and GPT-4o
from 11.24% to 10.36%. For some baseline models with low hallucination rate, e.g. Llama2-7b with
18.65% hallucination rate, it reduced the hallucination rate to 40.64%. Part of the reason can be that
the RAG solution provided some irrelevant context, and it generated more incorrect answers. This
can also be optimized by improving the RAG solutions, e.g. apply more rigorous threshold on the
pruning algorithm. There are also opportunities for iterating on the RAG algorithms, if time allowed.


    1
      Results are stored in more than two decimal points, which could cause small differences if using the
three rates to calculate the scores. For example, when stored in 5-decimal, Llama3-8b RAG Accuracy Rate is
74.26295% (74.26% when rounded up) while Hallucination Rate is 25.73705% (25.74% when rounded up),
which will derive Total Score to be 48.52590% (48.53% when rounded up).


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6     C ONCLUSION
We introduced EDU-RAG, a RAG benchmark with web-enhanced content in the education domain.
This benchmark serves as a valuable resource for the community to evaluate different RAG algorithms
and is particularly beneficial for applications in the education domain, such as AI tutors.
We also evaluated the benchmark using basic RAG solutions with recent LLMs, including Llama2-7b,
Llama3-8b and GPT-4o. The preliminary results show that RAG can improve accuracy and help
AI tutors. It can also help reduce hallucination, and that requires more thoughtful designs, such as
handling the flow in pruning documents.
There are also many other exciting topics to explore in future work:

6.1   F UTURE W ORK
       • Fine-tuning Stage: Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) will be used to improve the model. In
         addition, we will construct random negative samples to address the hallucination problem.
           – SFT: Two types of fine-tuning models can be trained. The first type is to create prompts
             with only the question as input and construct the answer as output. The second type
             is to construct prompts with the question and the crawled web pages together as the
             input, and keep the answer as the output. The second type can be used to improve the
             model’s capability to understand web pages.
           – Negative Samples: Negative samples are essential for reducing the hallucination. It is
             better to answer "I don’t know", rather than a wrong answer. To enable this, we can
             randomly select irrelevant web pages and combine them with questions to formulate
             the input, and use "I don’t know" as the output, which is similar to the strategy used by
             Adobe (Sharma et al., 2024).
       • Web Content Handler: This stage can also be improved by leveraging other frameworks
         such as Scrapy. Scrapy is an extensible framework widely used in the research community.
         With preliminary tests, this can crawl more web pages. Due to time constraints, we did not
         test the LLMs with a larger dataset; however, we have already obtained a larger benchmark
         dataset.

7     E THICS S TATEMENT
       • Vulnerability and Safeguarding: Minors are more vulnerable to stimuli, misinformation,
         and potentially harmful content. In our case, we leveraged flagship LLM models and
         fetched web content via top Google Search results. Both are commercial tools built on
         curated content and through organic content filters. Additionally, we have limited the
         ability to respond to multiple-choice questions (max_token = 1) to mitigate output risks.
         For intentional misuse (e.g., inputting unsafe content via multi-choice format and using
         misleading questions to provoke risky responses), more formal methods can be employed.
         These include implementing content filtering for both input and output to reject abusive
         questions or fine-tuning with human feedback, particularly from diverse, inclusive, and
         Responsible AI datasets such as the Meta AI Safety Benchmark (Vidgen et al., 2024). For
         teen use cases, we can also leverage adversarial training and red-teaming to evaluate and
         enhance model robustness against possible misuse or abusive scenarios.
       • Academic Integrity: AI Tutors could be abused as cheating tools that provide unfair advan-
         tages to dishonest students and devalue the efforts of students who work hard to achieve
         success. This issue is especially concerning for minors. Our project aims more on the
         service-provider side to evaluate and achieve a high-performance Question Answering
         system that can derive the correct answer first, while in a future production phase in real
         customer-facing environment, the service-provider should enable Parent / Educator Control
         mechanisms, or product instruction such as learning intent and objective setting/monitoring.
       • Privacy and Data Security: In the real-world use case of AI Tutor tools, any data collected
         during sessions should be handled securely and anatomized to protect privacy. In the
         education domain, users are often minors, which imposes stricter requirements for the
         collection of personal information.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela.
  Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY,
  USA, 2020a. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.

Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, March 2023a. ISSN 1557-7341. doi: 10.1145/3571730. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3571730.

Xiao Yang, Kai Sun, Hao Xin, Yushi Sun, Nikita Bhalla, Xiangsen Chen, Sajal Choudhary,
  Rongze Daniel Gui, Ziran Will Jiang, Ziyu Jiang, Lingkun Kong, Brian Moran, Jiaqi Wang,
  Yifan Ethan Xu, An Yan, Chenyu Yang, Eting Yuan, Hanwen Zha, Nan Tang, Lei Chen, Nicolas
  Scheffer, Yue Liu, Nirav Shah, Rakesh Wanga, Anuj Kumar, Wen tau Yih, and Xin Luna Dong. Crag
 – comprehensive rag benchmark, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04744.

Kai Sun, Yifan Ethan Xu, Hanwen Zha, Yue Liu, and Xin Luna Dong. Head-to-tail: How knowledge-
  able are large language models (llms)? a.k.a. will llms replace knowledge graphs?, 2024.

Tu Vu, Mohit Iyyer, Xuezhi Wang, Noah Constant, Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Chris Tar, Yun-Hsuan Sung,
  Denny Zhou, Quoc Le, and Thang Luong. Freshllms: Refreshing large language models with
  search engine augmentation, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
  Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 9459–9474. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020b.

Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng
  Wang, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10997.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.

Xinbei Ma, Yeyun Gong, Pengcheng He, Hai Zhao, and Nan Duan. Query rewriting in retrieval-
  augmented large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pages 5303–5315, Singapore, December 2023. Association for
  Computational Linguistics.

Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in large language models.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Wenhao Yu, Dan Iter, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu, Mingxuan Ju, Soumya Sanyal, Chenguang Zhu,
 Michael Zeng, and Meng Jiang. Generate rather than retrieve: Large language models are strong
 context generators. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Minlie Huang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. Enhancing
  retrieval-augmented large language models with iterative retrieval-generation synergy. In Findings
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 9248–9274, Singapore,
  December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Xi Chen, Pat Verga, and William Cohen. MuRAG: Multimodal retrieval-
 augmented generator for open question answering over images and text. In Proceedings of the
 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5558–5570, Abu
 Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jinming Zhao, Gholamreza Haffari, and Ehsan Shareghi. Generating synthetic speech from Spo-
   kenVocab for speech translation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
   EACL 2023, pages 1975–1981, Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023. Association for Computational
   Linguistics.

Antoine Yang, Arsha Nagrani, Paul Hongsuck Seo, Antoine Miech, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Ivan Laptev,
 Josef Sivic, and Cordelia Schmid. Vid2seq: Large-scale pretraining of a visual language model for
  dense video captioning. 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
 (CVPR), pages 10714–10726, 2023.

Noor Nashid, Mifta Sintaha, and Ali Mesbah. Retrieval-based prompt selection for code-related
  few-shot learning. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering
 (ICSE), pages 2450–2462, 2023.

Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. Benchmarking large language models in
   retrieval-augmented generation. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38
   (16):17754–17762, Mar. 2024.

Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Alicia Parrish, Nitish Joshi, Nikita Nangia, Jason Phang, Angelica Chen,
  Vishakh Padmakumar, Johnny Ma, Jana Thompson, He He, and Samuel Bowman. QuALITY:
  Question answering with long input texts, yes! In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, pages 5336–5358, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics.

Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge,
  2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.05457.

Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA: A question
  answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4149–4158, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural Questions: A Benchmark for Question Answering Research. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:453–466, 08 2019.

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1601–
 1611, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pages 2383–2392, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association
  for Computational Linguistics.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
  Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answer-
  ing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-
  hop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th
  International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Barcelona, Spain (Online), December
  2020. International Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. MuSiQue: Multihop
  questions via single-hop question composition. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 10:539–554, 2022.
Pradeep Dasigi, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Arman Cohan, Noah A. Smith, and Matt Gardner. A dataset of
  information-seeking questions and answers anchored in research papers. In Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2021.
Timo Möller, Anthony Reina, Raghavan Jayakumar, and Malte Pietsch. COVID-QA: A question
  answering dataset for COVID-19. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on NLP for COVID-19 at
  ACL 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020.
Xidong Wang, Guiming Chen, Song Dingjie, Zhang Zhiyi, Zhihong Chen, Qingying Xiao, Junying
  Chen, Feng Jiang, Jianquan Li, Xiang Wan, Benyou Wang, and Haizhou Li. CMB: A comprehen-
  sive medical benchmark in Chinese. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pages 6184–6205, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Comput. Surv., 55(12), mar 2023b. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3571730. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/3571730.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio, editors, Proceedings of
  the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pages 3214–3252, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.229. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.
  229.
Ben Snyder, Marius Moisescu, and Muhammad Bilal Zafar. On early detection of hallucinations in
  factual question answering, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14183.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
  Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer El-Showk,
  Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bowman, Stanislav Fort,
  Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, Jackson Kernion, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas
  Joseph, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. Language models (mostly)
  know what they know, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05221.
Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an LLM knows when it’s lying. In The
 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=y2V6YgLaW7.
Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A. Smith. How language model
 hallucinations can snowball. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
 URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FPlaQyAGHu.
Aniruddha Kembhavi, Minjoon Seo, Dustin Schwenk, Jonghyun Choi, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi. Are you smarter than a sixth grader? textbook question answering for multimodal
  machine comprehension. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  recognition, pages 4999–5007, 2017.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2019. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:201646309.
Sanat Sharma, David Seunghyun Yoon, Franck Dernoncourt, Dewang Sultania, Karishma Bagga,
  Mengjiao Zhang, Trung Bui, and Varun Kotte. Retrieval augmented generation for domain-specific
  question answering, 2024.
Bertie Vidgen, Adarsh Agrawal, Ahmed M. Ahmed, Victor Akinwande, Namir Al-Nuaimi, Najla
  Alfaraj, Elie Alhajjar, Lora Aroyo, Trupti Bavalatti, Max Bartolo, Borhane Blili-Hamelin, Kurt
  Bollacker, Rishi Bomassani, Marisa Ferrara Boston, Siméon Campos, Kal Chakra, Canyu Chen,
  Cody Coleman, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Leon Derczynski, Debojyoti Dutta, Ian Eisenberg,
  James Ezick, Heather Frase, Brian Fuller, Ram Gandikota, Agasthya Gangavarapu, Ananya
  Gangavarapu, James Gealy, Rajat Ghosh, James Goel, Usman Gohar, Sujata Goswami, Scott A.
  Hale, Wiebke Hutiri, Joseph Marvin Imperial, Surgan Jandial, Nick Judd, Felix Juefei-Xu, Foutse
  Khomh, Bhavya Kailkhura, Hannah Rose Kirk, Kevin Klyman, Chris Knotz, Michael Kuchnik,
  Shachi H. Kumar, Srijan Kumar, Chris Lengerich, Bo Li, Zeyi Liao, Eileen Peters Long, Victor Lu,
  Sarah Luger, Yifan Mai, Priyanka Mary Mammen, Kelvin Manyeki, Sean McGregor, Virendra
  Mehta, Shafee Mohammed, Emanuel Moss, Lama Nachman, Dinesh Jinenhally Naganna, Amin
  Nikanjam, Besmira Nushi, Luis Oala, Iftach Orr, Alicia Parrish, Cigdem Patlak, William Pietri,
  Forough Poursabzi-Sangdeh, Eleonora Presani, Fabrizio Puletti, Paul Röttger, Saurav Sahay, Tim
  Santos, Nino Scherrer, Alice Schoenauer Sebag, Patrick Schramowski, Abolfazl Shahbazi, Vin
  Sharma, Xudong Shen, Vamsi Sistla, Leonard Tang, Davide Testuggine, Vithursan Thangarasa,
  Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Rebecca Weiss, Chris Welty, Tyler Wilbers, Adina Williams, Carole-Jean
  Wu, Poonam Yadav, Xianjun Yang, Yi Zeng, Wenhui Zhang, Fedor Zhdanov, Jiacheng Zhu, Percy
  Liang, Peter Mattson, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Introducing v0.5 of the ai safety benchmark from
  mlcommons, 2024.


8   A PPENDIX
Due to time limitations, we ran RAG based on 1,255 samples, while we have also run the benchmark
using Vanilla LLM models based on 2,512 samples, with results as below.

                                       Score Breakdown
                      Accuracy Rate    Hallucination Rate    Missing Rate    Total Score
        Llama2-7b        24.56%             18.75%             56.69%          5.81%
        Llama3-8b        70.06%             29.94%                0%          40.12%
        GPT-4o           89.41%              9.55%              1.04%         79.86%

Table 3: Total Score and Score Breakdown for Benchmark Vanilla LLM Models (2512 QA Samples)

               Average number of web pages retrieved        3.89
               for each question
               Average number characters of each ex-        8284.91
               tracted web page content

                             Table 4: Stats of Crawled Web Content


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Figure 4: TQA nonDiagramQuestion Raw JSON Example


                          Figure 5: Extracted Web Content Example


                                             14
