Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE H IDDEN C OST OF WAITING FOR ACCURATE
P REDICTIONS

                           Ali Shirali∗,1 , Ariel Procaccia†,2 , and Rediet Abebe†,3
                                        1
                                         University of California, Berkeley
                                               2
                                                 Harvard University
               3
                 ELLIS Institute, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, & Tübingen AI Center


                                                  A BSTRACT
             Algorithmic predictions are increasingly informing societal resource allocations
             by identifying individuals for targeting. Policymakers often build these systems
             with the assumption that by gathering more observations on individuals, they
             can improve predictive accuracy and, consequently, allocation efficiency. An
             overlooked yet consequential aspect of prediction-driven allocations is that of
             timing. The planner has to trade off relying on earlier and potentially noisier
             predictions to intervene before individuals experience undesirable outcomes, or
             they may wait to gather more observations to make more precise allocations. We
             examine this tension using a simple mathematical model, where the planner collects
             observations on individuals to improve predictions over time. We analyze both the
             ranking induced by these predictions and optimal resource allocation. We show
             that though individual prediction accuracy improves over time, counter-intuitively,
             the average ranking loss can worsen. As a result, the planner’s ability to improve
             social welfare can decline. We identify inequality as a driving factor behind
             this phenomenon. Our findings provide a nuanced perspective and challenge the
             conventional wisdom that it is preferable to wait for more accurate predictions to
             ensure the most efficient allocations.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Algorithmic predictions are playing a central role in societal resource allocation. Policymakers and
organizations are increasingly turning to algorithmically-driven systems in contexts where resources
are scarce in order to target resources with greater precision (Eubanks, 2018; Kleinberg et al., 2015;
Kube et al., 2023; Mashiat et al., 2024; Perdomo et al., 2023; Toros & Flaming, 2018). Underpinning
this growing reliance on predictions is the assumption that by gathering more observations about
individuals over time, we can improve prediction accuracy and, consequently, allocation efficiency.
In practice, decisions around the timing of predictions and how they inform allocations reveal
consequential trade-offs that the planner must navigate. On the one hand, the planner may wait
to collect extensive data to refine their predictions before intervening. On the other hand, they
can intervene early by relying on coarser data and noisier predictions. The potential advantage of
the latter is that, in a fixed-horizon setting where the planner wants to prevent individuals from
experiencing undesirable outcomes, the “window of opportunity” for this undesirable outcome to be
realized closes. Furthermore, the underlying population changes with time, as those at greatest risk
of experiencing such outcomes are more likely to “fail out” of the population early if they do not
receive resources (Bierman, 2002; Abebe et al., 2020; Salganik et al., 2020). These factors pull in
different directions, and it is not immediately apparent which factor dominates.
We examine this tension using a simple, versatile model where the planner predicts and intervenes
on a population over time. Modeling a generic resource allocation problem, we assume the planner
has a fixed budget of resources to prevent individuals from experiencing undesirable outcomes, such
as eviction, job loss, poor health, or dropping out of school (Mashiat et al., 2024; Perdomo et al.,
    ∗
        This work was conducted during a visit at Harvard University.
    †
        Alphabetical order.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023; Zezulka & Genin, 2024; Chan et al., 2012; Subbhuraam, 2021; Faria et al., 2017; Mac Iver
et al., 2019). At each time step, the planner collects observations about individuals to improve their
estimate of their underlying failure probability. The planner then uses the rankings induced by these
estimates to allocate resources. Specifically, we ask:
 1. Ranking: How does the ranking loss change as the planner collects more data, but some
    individuals fail out of the population?
 2. Allocation: For a given instance of this problem, what is the optimal time to allocate resources?
    When is early intervention justified?
We present our results for two allocation problems: First, in a stylized setting, the planner is tasked
with allocating all resources at once but can choose when to do so. We then use this as a building
block to study the case where the planner can allocate resources over time. For both the ranking
and allocation problems, we examine the role of inequality—as measured by the variance in the
underlying failure probabilities—and surface it as a driving factor behind the optimal solutions.
We show that although individual prediction accuracy improves with more observations, counter-
intuitively, this does not translate into improvements in the average ranking loss. To observe this,
we decompose ranking loss into two counteracting effects: one due to improvements in prediction
from additional observations and the second due to the change in population as individuals fail out
of the active pool. We identify fundamental statistics that drive these two effects. We show that the
change-in-population effect negatively impacts ranking performance and that this effect grows at
least proportionally to the variance in the failure probabilities.
We then address both instantiations of the resource allocation problem. For the setting where the
planner must allocate all resources simultaneously, we derive an upper bound on the optimal allocation
time. We explicitly identify the roles of inequality and budget in expediting or deferring the optimal
allocation time. We show that with high inequality or a large budget, allocating resources earlier
results in greater social welfare. For the setting where the planner can allocate the budget over time,
we design a provably optimal algorithm with a running time independent of the number of individuals.
Using this algorithm, we then demonstrate that the optimal solution can concentrate the allocation
around any time-point t, and it behaves consistently with our findings on one-time allocation.
Our results provide a nuanced perspective on the role of timing in prediction-driven allocations. In
settings where the planner observes and intervenes on a population over time, they must balance
the desire for more accurate predictions with the necessity for timely interventions. In the presence
of significant inequality within the population, more accurate predictions do not necessarily lead to
better ranking or improved allocations, providing a potential justification for early resource allocation.
For an extensive discussion on the related work and adjacent problem settings, refer to Appendix B.

2       M ODEL AND PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we first introduce the notations necessary to present the basics of our model. We
provide further notation, as needed, throughout the paper and summarize the key notations in Table 1.
We model the population over which the planner acts. We assume there is an initial population of
N individuals and consider a finite horizon setting where t ∈ [1, T ].1 Each individual i has some
failure probability pi ∈ [0, 1], which captures their likelihood of failing out of the population between
time steps. In the absence of intervention, this failure probability remains the same across time, and
failure events of different individuals are independent.2 Once an individual fails, they are no longer
in the active pool of the population. We denote this active pool at time t by At .

Prediction and ranking. At each time step t, the planner observes a signal oti from each active
individual i ∈ At . These signals are analogous to observing loan or rental payments in housing and
credit scoring, exam scores in education, and medical check-ups and tests in clinical settings. In our
working model, these signals are drawn independently from a Bernoulli process
                                                    oti ∼ Ber(p̃i ) ,                                              (1)
    1
        Though we primarily consider the finite horizon setting, the key insights hold in the infinite horizon setting.
    2
        If the problem has further structure, such as when students share a teacher, this assumption may not hold.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where p̃i is a function of pi . We drop the explicit dependence on pi from p̃(pi ) for ease of notation.
We assume that p̃ is an increasing function: The more likely an individual is to fail, the more likely we
are to observe signals indicating this possibility. An individual i will leave p̃i /pi positive observations
in expectation. Thus, a larger p̃ results in more observations from individuals before they fail out.
The planner is interested in the predictions as a means to rank and prioritize individuals. Given
observations drawn from Eq. (1) and a prior over the failure probability, we will examine how the
ranking risk of the Bayes’ optimal ranking, measured on the active population, changes over time.
This is the subject of Section 3.

Targeting and allocation. The planner has a budget B of resources, such as housing vouchers,
unemployment insurance, and preventive health screenings, to allocate to individuals in the active
pool. We assume that assigning a resource to an individual has a fixed unit cost. We consider two
common instantiations of allocation problems: We first study the one-time allocation problem, where
the planner is tasked with finding the optimal time t to allocate B. We then consider an over-time
allocation problem, where the planner aims to find the optimal distribution of the budget across time.
To measure the efficiency of allocations, we define by ut (p) the expected utility the planner gets
from intervening on an individual with failure probability p. The planner’s primary objective is to
maximize the utility over all treated individuals when there is no spillover effect. We assume that
ut (p) is non-increasing in t and non-decreasing in p, which captures the idea that the planner does
not get more utility from intervening on the same individual later or from intervening on a better-off
individual. We further assume that the utility function is concave in p, reflecting diminishing returns.
Without loss of generality, we let ut (0) = 0.
The utility framework we define above allows for significant generality. In particular, we note that
for any individual i, the utility the planner gets from intervening on i may depend on i’s unobserved
characteristics, but this does not affect our results. Further, we make basic assumptions on ut ,
allowing us to prove results in a general setting. To build intuition, at various points, we use a specific
example of utilities, defined below.
Example 2.1 (Fully effective treatment). Suppose that once an individual receives a resource, they do
not fail out of the population at subsequent time steps. The planner’s utility then equals
                                         ut (p) = 1 − (1 − p)T −t ,                                    (2)
i.e., allocating to individual has the same expected utility as the probability that this individual would
have failed by time T without this intervention.
For the allocation problems we consider, the planner uses the ranking induced by the predicted failure
rates. We find that these rankings, in and of themselves, are interesting objects of study as they reveal
complex trade-offs over time.

3    R ANKING OVER TIME
In this section, we exclusively focus on ranking, which will form the basis for our main results on
allocation presented in subsequent sections. We present our main ranking-related result separately
both because it helps build intuition for the delicate tradeoff a planner needs to consider for the
allocation problems, but also because it shows that these tradeoffs are present in other interventions
that leverage risk-based rankings.
Informally, we show that even though individual predictions may improve as more observations
become available over time, ranking quality can in fact decline. We demonstrate that inequality—as
defined by the variance in the failure probabilities—characterizes such settings. The intuition is as
follows: Although individual predictions improve over time, in high inequality settings, individuals
with high p (which were easier to distinguish from low p individuals based on coarse information)
are more likely to drop out earlier, leaving behind an active population that is harder to rank.

Ranking risk. We define ranking quality using ranking risk Rt at time t. We consider a common
notion of ranking risk based on pairwise ranking loss (Mohri, 2018). Given two individuals at time t,
the pairwise ranking problem predicts which individual has the higher failure probability based on
observations up to t. We assign a loss of zero if the prediction is correct and one otherwise.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We denote the number of positive observations from an active individual i up to time t by
                                                X ′
                                        yit :=     oti .                                                    (3)
                                                             t′ ∈[t]

Then ranking individuals based on their y t is Bayes optimal in terms of the zero-one pairwise ranking
loss.3 Formally, the zero-one risk of optimal (pairwise) ranking at time t is
                                  Rt = Prti,j yjt < yit | pj ≥ pi .

                                                                                                    (4)
Here, Prti,j (·) is the probability when we choose two active individuals from At independently.

Main result. We now present our main result on the dynamics of the optimal ranking risk. This
result relies on certain approximations of the ranking risk, which we will detail later in this section.
Theorem 3.1. The ranking risk of the optimal ranking at t can only improve in the next time step if
                                Vart [p]          1           Capprox.
                                    t    2
                                            − O √        <               ,                           (5)
                             (1 − E [p])           t          | {zt }
                            |            {z          }
                                    change-in-population effect        gain in observations

where we assume that the inverse of p̃(·) is O(1)-Lipschitz. The proof presents the exact form of O(1)
and Capprox. which we skip here for clarity of exposition.
See proof on page 29. The necessary condition stated in Eq. (5) highlights two key insights into
when ranking quality decreases over time. First, as t increases, the left-hand side—which measures
the change-in-population effect—increases, whereas the right-hand side—which measures the gain
in observations—decreases. Second, as either the mean or variance in failure probability increases,
it is again harder to satisfy Eq. (5). Combined, these insights highlight that later rankings are only
preferred under conditions where inequality and average failure probabilities are low.
We next discuss the main steps towards proving Theorem 3.1.

Approximating ranking risk. To approximate ranking risk, we recall observations are drawn
from Ber(p̃). Eq. (3) then implies y t ∼ Binomial(t, p̃). For analytic tractability, we approximate
this with the normal distribution N , with mean t · p̃ and variance t · σ̃ 2 . Here, σ̃ 2 := p̃ · (1 − p̃). The
independence of the draws in Eq. (4) implies
                                 yjt − yit                                 2
                                                                         σ̃ij
                                           (p̃i , p̃j ) ∼ N p̃j − p̃i ,        ,
                                     t                                     t
         2 :=
where σ̃ij      σ̃i2 + σ̃j2 . Denoting the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal
distribution with Φ(·), it is then straightforward to simplify Rt as
                                                 h       |p̃j − p̃i | √  i
                                     Rt ≈ Eti,j Φ −                    t .                                   (6)
                                                             σ̃ij
Note that the dependence of Rt on t appears in two places: inside Φ(·), which captures the effect of
gathering more observations over time, and Eti,j , which models a change-in-population effect.

Decomposing step-change in ranking risk. We denote the change in Rt in one time step by
∆Rt := Rt+1 − Rt . Using Eq. (6), we can decompose ∆Rt into two parts:
 • The change in Φ after one step, which we approximate by taking the derivative with respect to t.
 • The change of Eti,j after one step. To compute this, denote the distribution in failure probability
   of the population At by P t . Since an active individual at t with a failure probability of p survives
   until t + 1 with a probability of 1 − p, we can write
                                                      1−p   t
                                      P t+1 (p) =              P (p) ,                                (7)
                                                     1 − µt
   where µt := Et [p]. Using this, we can compute the expected change in population as follows:

                                   t+1
                                             Eti,j (1 − pi ) (1 − pj ) (·)
                                 Ei,j [·] =                                 .
                                                      (1 − µt )2
   3
       Refer to Proposition E.4 for a proof.


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                          1
Putting these two parts together, and approximating Φ(−x) with √2πx             exp(−x2 /2), the change in
ranking risk after one time step is
              "                                                                                           #
                   1         −(p̃ − p̃ )2  n σ̃             (1 − p   )(1 −  p   )        |p̃  −   p̃   | o
                                  j     i         ij               i          j             j        i
  ∆Rt = Eti,j √

                       exp           2    t                                       −1 −                      . (8)
                   2πt            2σ̃ij      |p̃j − p̃i |      (1 − µt )2                    2σ̃ij
Intuitively, we can think of the exponential multiplier as a kernel enforcing similarity of p̃i and p̃j .
Such a filter pushes ∆Rt towards positive values, which means that as the filter becomes stricter
for larger t, the effect of losing vulnerable individuals dominates the gain from collecting more
observations on the remaining population. We make a mild assumption here that there exists a
constant α ∈ (0, 1) bounded away from zero such that plugging exp(−x2 ) ≈ 1{exp(−x2 ) ≥ α}
into Eq. (8) does not change the value of ∆Rt . Then Capprox. := ln(1/α). The rest of the proof of
Theorem 3.1 is straightforward, which we leave in the appendix.

4       O NE - TIME ALLOCATION
In the previous section, we examined how ranking metrics evolve over time. In this section, we
explore how these dynamics impact the allocation problem driven by the ranking.
The allocation policy varies depending on when resources become available and any spending
restrictions in place. We assume a fixed budget for a specific population and explore two variations:
In the general case, the budget can be allocated flexibly over time. For example, funding for a student
cohort may be distributed across multiple years before graduation. In contrast, in the special case, the
budget must be spent all at once, often due to administrative constraints, and the question becomes:
when is the optimal time to allocate it? For example, cancer screenings may need to occur at a certain
age, or school empowerment programs may be restricted to a specific grade due to the high cost of
developing materials and training staff for multiple grades.
We first focus on the one-time allocation problem. We do so not only because it may represent a
real-world constrained allocation problem but also because it provides valuable intuition for the
more general variation of the problem. Importantly, strong theoretical results from this analysis offer
key insights into the timing, budget, and inequality dynamics that form the core of our contribution.
Informally, our main result states:
Theorem (Informal). For the one-time allocation problem, there exists a t∗ that is a fraction of the
horizon T , such that the planner can best optimize utility by allocating B before t∗ . This t∗ decreases,
favoring earlier allocations, when inequality in the failure probabilities is high or the budget is large.
To explicitly state this theorem, we need to introduce additional terminology, concepts, and definitions.
Formally, given a budget B, at a chosen time t, the planner ranks active individuals At in descending
order of their number of positive observations y t , and allocates resources to the first B of them.4
Denote the predicted ranking by injection rt : At → [N t ], where individual i with rt (i) = 1 is the
most eligible one. The total utility of allocating a budget B at time t is given by
                                               ut (pi ) · 1{rt (i) ≤ B} .
                                          X
                                  Wt =
                                            i∈At

Proving our results requires establishing an upper bound t∗ such that W t can increase over the next
steps only if t is less than t∗ . In other words, deferring allocation is only justifiable if we have not
reached this critical time. The results in this section show an intricate relationship between the timing
of prediction/allocation with the inequality of the initial population and scarcity of resources.
Before presenting our results in full generality, we first consider the fully effective treatment setting,
where the utility function follows Eq. (2). Although many real-world treatments may not be fully
effective, many are, in fact, sufficiently effective for this special case to serve as a useful approximation
for understanding their dynamics. For instance, consider housing vouchers or dropout prevention
programs, which have been found to be very effective.5 Due to its significance and analytical
tractability, we next present specific results for this case.
    4
    Proposition E.4 implies this is the Bayes optimal ranking in our setting.
    5
    For instance, Gubits et al. (2016) found “significant positive impacts ... in families offered a voucher, and
these impacts extended beyond housing stability.”


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   T HE FULLY EFFECTIVE TREATMENT SETTING

Recall from Example 2.1 that the utility function in the case of fully effective treatments follows
ut (p) = 1 − (1 − p)T −t . To state our results, we also need to define a measure of inequality:
Definition 4.1 (G-decaying distribution). We say distribution P over p is G-decaying for G ≥ 0 if
                                                P(p)   dP
                                         −G ·        ≤    ≤ 0.
                                                1−p    dp

Intuitively, G bounds the rate at which the distribution decreases. Smaller values of G correspond to
greater inequality (see Proposition E.10 for the relationship between G and Var[p]). For example,
if P(p) ∝ (1 − p)β−1 —the probability density function of a Beta(1, β) distribution—then P is
(β − 1)-decaying. Under this definition, the highest level of inequality in the population corresponds
to the uniform distribution, which is 0-decaying.
Recall that at each time step t, the planner observes ot ∼ Ber(p̃) from each active individual. To
simplify notation, we assume the following concave observation model:6
Assumption 4.2 (Observation model). We assume observations from an individual with failure
probability p are independently drawn from Ber(p̃), where p̃ = 1 − (1 − p)γ , and γ > 1.
Under these assumptions, we present a necessary condition for when waiting for additional observa-
tions can improve the allocation efficiency of fully effective treatments:
Theorem 4.3 (Conditions for fully effective treatment). Suppose treatments are fully effective and
the initial distribution over failure probabilities is G-decaying. The overall utility can improve after
time t only if t < t∗ , where
                                    G γ + γ −1

                            T                                          N
                      t∗ := +          +             +1     (γ + 1) ln( ) + 1 .
                             2       4       4                          B

See proof on page 29.
This theorem implies that we rarely need to go beyond the halfway point of the time horizon to
optimally allocate resources, and that this t∗ can be even smaller when we have high levels of
inequality (corresponding to smaller G) or a larger budget. We further illustrate the intuition behind
this theorem with an example in a simple setting in Appendix C. Combined, these results indicate that
high levels of inequality and scarcity of resources play an important and consistent role in determining
optimal allocation time—an insight we find carries over to more general settings.

4.2   T HE GENERAL CLASS OF UTILITY SETTING

We define the class of (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying utility functions below. The fully effective treatment setting
corresponds to a (1, 1)-decaying utility. Refer to Proposition E.11 for the proof and other examples.
Definition 4.4 ((λ1 , λ2 )-decaying utility). We say a utility function ut (p) is (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying for
positive λ1 and λ2 if at every t and p,
                        ut (p) − λ1 · p
           ut+1 (p) ≤                   ,                      (bounded decrease over time)
                              1−p
                          λ − ut (p)
                            2
           (ut )′ (p) ≤                 · (ut )′ (0) .         (bounded increase with p)
                              1−p
When there is no finite λ2 such that the second bound holds, we say that the utility is λ1 -decaying.

Our definition of (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying utility functions contains the essential elements to describe the
utility function’s behavior: a higher λ1 indicates a stronger decrease over time, while a higher λ2
signifies a faster increase with p. Our main result of this section states:
Theorem 4.5 (Conditions for a general class of utilities). For the general class of utilities, the overall
utility can improve after time t only if t < t∗ := (γ + 1) ln( NB ), or the following conditions hold:
   6
     We make the concavity assumption for ease of presentation, but as we discuss in the appendix, a weaker
version of our result holds for any Lipschitz concave p̃ with bounded curvature.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 1. When the utility function is (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying with λ1 ≥ λ2 ,
                                                             t − t∗

                           t+1 ′           λ1
                        (u ) (0) ≥                                     t∗ +1   .
                                           λ2 1 + (2 + γ + γ −1 + G) 2t−t ∗ +1



 2. When the utility function is (λ1 )-decaying,
                                                                    t − t∗

                                          (ut+1 )′ (0) ≥ λ1 ·                    .
                                                                    t∗ + 1
See proof on page 30.
This theorem shows that for a wide-range of settings, the optimal allocation can happen early: Our
assumptions about the concavity of the utility function and its zero value at p = 0 imply that
(ut+1 )′ (0) is a decreasing function of t. Conversely, regardless of whether the utility is (λ1 , λ2 )-
decaying or just λ1 -decaying, the right-hand side of the bounds increases with t. Determining the
timing of the optimal allocation is intertwined with the level of inequality and the budget. In particular,
consistent with the previous section, a higher inequality and larger budget favor earlier allocations.

5       OVER - TIME ALLOCATION
The one-time allocation problem presented in the previous section helps as a building block for a
more general setting, which we now consider. We study the problem of allocating a fixed budget
over time to maximize total utility. First, we discuss the complexity of the problem under a naive
optimization approach. Then, we characterize the optimal solution and present a method to find it
regardless of the number of individuals. Through semi-synthetic experiments, we demonstrate that
the optimal allocation follows a similar intuition to one-time allocation, where higher inequality or a
larger budget shifts the optimal allocation toward earlier times.

5.1       C HARACTERIZING THE OPTIMAL OVER - TIME ALLOCATION

We begin by describing a Markov decision process (MDP) that governs the allocation problem. Let
Atk denote the set of active individuals at time t who have k positive observations, i.e., y t = k. We
define the state at t by Nkt := |Atk |, for k ≤ t. An allocation policy specifies the individuals to treat
from Atk at each state. The policy, together with the current state and the prior distribution over p, is
sufficient to determine the distribution of the next state.
A naive approach to finding the optimal policy for the described MDP is as follows. Since individuals
with a higher y t yield a higher expected utility,7 the optimal allocation at every time t should treat
those with the highest y t . Given a budget of B, we   can specify a rollout of such a policy by the
budget spent at each time step, resulting in B+1T −1 possibilities. In the case of many agents, and
thus a large B, the MDP dynamic becomes almost deterministic,        and the optimal policy converges
to a single fixed rollout. However, iterating over all B+1

                                                          T −1   rollouts to find the optimal policy is
computationally infeasible. Next, we find a characterization of the optimal solution that significantly
cuts down our search space.
Theorem 5.1 (Optimal over-time allocation). The optimal over-time allocation in the limit of many
individuals follows a specific pattern: For a non-decreasing sequence q : [T ] → {0, 1, . . . , T }, there
exists a time step t̂ ∈ [T ] such that,
 • At t ̸= t̂, everyone with y t ≥ q(t) will be treated. At the next step, q(t + 1) ∈ {q(t), q(t) + 1}.
 • At t = t̂, everyone with y t > q(t) and some with y t = q(t) will be treated. At the next step,
   q(t + 1) ∈ {q(t) + 1, q(t) + 2}.
See proof on page 33.
This theorem narrows down the search space of possible policies to three parameters: t̂, q(·), and
what portion of At̂q(t̂) to treat. In particular, our search space no longer depends on the budget B or
the number of individuals.
    7
        Refer to Lemma E.5 for a formal proof.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2   A N ALGORITHM TO FIND THE OPTIMAL SOLUTION

In this section, we present an algorithm that uses Theorem 5.1 to find the optimal policy, ensuring that
its runtime does not scale with the number of individuals or the budget size. We build the algorithm
to do so in pieces. First, we show that we can iterate over the joint space of unspecified parameters in
O(T 3 · 2T −1 ) steps:
Lemma 5.2. By specifying the time step t̂ ∈ [T ], the initial value of the sequence q(·) from the set
of {0, 1, 2}, and a binary sequence of length T − 1, we can iterate over the joint space of unknown
parameters in Theorem 5.1 in O(T 3 · 2T −1 ) steps.

See proof on page 34.
This lemma utilizes the structure of sequence q(·) in Theorem 5.1 and reduces it to a binary sequence
given t̂. It also utilizes a linear structure of total utility to determine how many people to treat
from At̂q(t̂) . These are the first steps in Algorithm 1.
At the heart of Lemma 5.2 is Algorithm 2 that simulates a trajectory. This algorithm uses a backup
formula that updates Nkt based on Nkt−1 and Nk−1 t−1
                                                     . Algorithm 2 also requires calculating expectation
                        t   t
with respect to p ∼ P (· | y = k). In our simulation, this posterior has a closed form. However, in
general, since p is a bounded scalar, the posterior calculation can be well-approximated by a constant
number of operations.
Given an efficient way to iterate over the search space, we next show that Algorithm 1 can find the
optimal policy without increasing the run time:
Theorem 5.3. Algorithm 1 finds the optimal over-time allocation in O(T 3 · 2T ) steps.

See proof on page 34.
In real-world settings, time steps are typically on the scale of a month or a year. Therefore, T is
usually a small constant and the complexity of  Algorithm 1 as stated in Theorem 5.3 is manageable.
Compared to the naive iteration over B+1  T −1 possible trajectories, Algorithm 1’s complexity is
significantly reduced by dropping the dependency on the number of individuals and B. Powered by
this algorithm, we next visualize the optimal over-time allocation in semi-synthetic settings.

Algorithm 1 Optimal over-time allocation
 1: Uopt ← 0
 2: for t̂ = 1 to T , and q(·) ∈ valid sequences (as constructed in Lemma 5.2) do
         Simulate as At̂q(t̂) are all treated:
               t
 3:          {Nq(t) }Tt=1 ← S IMULATE T RAJ(1, {N01 , N11 }, q(·))
             Emax ← 1{q(1) = 0} · N11 + t=1 Nq(t)
                                          PT       t
 4:                                                                               ▷ maximum expenditure
         Simulate the difference as if no one in At̂q(t̂) was treated:
 5:               t
            {∆Nq(t)  }Tt=t̂ ← S IMULATE T RAJ(t̂, {0, . . . , 0, Nq(
                                                                   t̂
                                                                      t̂)
                                                                                           1
                                                                          , 0, . . . , 0}, q(·) + {(·) = t̂})
                       t̂
                              P  T         t
 6:         ∆E ← Nq(t̂) − t=t̂+1 ∆Nq(t)                            ▷ decrease from the max. expenditure
                                    t̂
         Find what proportion of Aq(t̂) to treat:
                       −B
 7:         ρ ← Emax∆E                                          ▷ proportion of At̂q(t̂) to be left untreated
 8:     if ρ > 1 or ρ < 0 then continue to the next possible q(·) end if

         Calculate the total utility:
 9:        for t = 1 to T and k = q(t) do Ukt ← Ep∼P t (·|yt =k) [ut (p)] end for
                             t̂
                                   U t̂ + t̸=t̂ (Nq(t)
                                                  t          t        t
                                                                          + 1{q(1) = 0} · N11 U11
                                          P
10:         U ← (1 − ρ) Nq(     t̂) q(t̂)
                                                       + ρ ∆Nq(t) ) Uq(t)

11:     if U > Uopt then Uopt ← U , qopt ← q, t̂opt ← t̂ end if                     ▷ check for optimality
12: end for
13: return Uopt , qopt , t̂opt



                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.3                             V ISUALIZING THE OPTIMAL SOLUTION

Algorithm 1 allows us to efficiently find the optimal over-time allocation. Using this algorithm, we
next examine the effect of inequality, as encoded in the prior distribution of p, and the budget size on
the optimal over-time allocation.
Our goal is to demonstrate that even in the simplest non-contrived settings, the tradeoff between
gaining more observations and losing vulnerable individuals strongly exists. Therefore, we make
minimal assumptions about the model: Suppose the treatments are fully effective, the observation
model is p̃ = p, and the prior over failure probabilities follows Beta(α, β). The beta distribution is a
common and expressive choice for modeling priors over [0, 1]-bounded random variables. It is also
the conjugate prior for the binomial distribution, which allows us to write the posterior distribution
over failure probability in closed form: P t (· | y t = k) = Beta(α + k, β + 2t − k).

Data and parameters estimation. To make our simulations more realistic, we choose the ini-
tial distribution to reflect real-world data. In particular, we use National Education Longitudinal
Study (NELS) of 1988, a longitudinal study with follow-ups at four points throughout the students’
education.8 In this data, failure corresponds to student dropout and is recorded.
We estimate the beta distribution parameters in the following manner. Let m0 and m1 be the
proportion of the initial pool of individuals who failed right before the first and second steps,
respectively. Assuming there has been no intervention at the first step, it follows
                                                                                √ from the central
                           α                 α(α+1)
limit theorem that m0 → α+β    and m1 → (α+β)(α+β+1)      at a fast rate of O(1/ N ). By solving for
α and β, we can accurately estimate the initial distribution as a Beta distribution. Our estimation
gives α = 0.028 and β = 0.35 for the case of NELS data. The mean of the estimated distribution
also aligns with the NELS-provided estimation of dropout probability, with both methods predicting
a dropout rate of around 7%.

Results. We first study the effect of budget size. Theorem 4.3 suggests that in case of one-time
allocation, the optimal allocation time shifts with ln( N
                                                        B ). Fig. 1 suggests that a similar trend holds
true in the case of over-time allocation: a larger budget favors earlier allocations.9

                      100                                         2                                100                                       2                                100                                        2

                      90                                          1.8                              90                                        1.8                              90                                         1.8

                      80                                          1.6                              80                                        1.6                              80                                         1.6
  % of budget spent


                                                                               % of budget spent


                                                                                                                                                          % of budget spent


                      70                                          1.4                              70                                        1.4                              70                                         1.4

                      60                                          1.2                              60                                        1.2                              60                                         1.2
                                                                        q(t)


                                                                                                                                                   q(t)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q(t)
                      50                                          1                                50                                        1                                50                                         1

                      40                                          0.8                              40                                        0.8                              40                                         0.8

                      30                                          0.6                              30                                        0.6                              30                                         0.6

                      20                                          0.4                              20                                        0.4                              20                                         0.4

                      10                                          0.2                              10                                        0.2                              10                                         0.2

                       0                                          0                                 0                                        0                                 0                                         0
                            0     1   2   3       4   5   6   7                                          0   1   2   3       4   5   6   7                                          0   1    2   3       4   5   6   7
                                              t                                                                          t                                                                           t
                                          B                                                                          B                                                                          B
                                      (a) N = 5%                                                                 (b) N = 10%                                                                (c) N = 20%

Figure 1: Optimal over-time allocation for three sizes of the budget and a fixed prior estimated from
NELS data. The orange curve depicts the optimal q(·) and the filled circle corresponds to t = t̂.

We next extend our analysis beyond the NELS data distribution to study the effect of initial distribution,
particularly inequality, on the optimal allocation. Theorem 4.3 suggests that greater inequality can
                                                                  B
further favor earlier allocation. To simulate this effect, we fix N at 10% and consider three priors with
differing tail decay. Fig. 2 indicates that as the prior approaches a uniform distribution, corresponding
to maximum inequality in terms of our definition of G-decaying distributions, optimal allocation
significantly favors earlier times.
These visualizations confirm that a similar intuition as the one-time allocation setting also appears in
the over-time allocation problem.
             8
   https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/nels88/
             9
   Code is available at
https://github.com/alishiraliGit/hidden-costs-of-waiting-for-accurate-predictions.


                                                                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        initial distribution


                                                                                                                                            initial distribution


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                initial distribution
                                                   0       0.2       0.4       0.6       0.8       1                                                                   0       0.2       0.4       0.6       0.8       1                                                                   0       0.2       0.4       0.6       0.8       1
                                                                           p                                                                                                                   p                                                                                                                   p

                        100                                                                                2                                100                                                                                2                                100                                                                                2
    % of budget spent


                                                                                                                        % of budget spent


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            % of budget spent
                             80                                                                                                                  80                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                           1.5                                                                                                                 1.5                                                                                                                 1.5

                             60                                                                                                                  60                                                                                                                  60


                                                                                                                 q(t)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q(t)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q(t)
                                                                                                           1                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                   1
                             40                                                                                                                  40                                                                                                                  40

                                                                                                           0.5                                                                                                                 0.5                                                                                                                 0.5
                             20                                                                                                                  20                                                                                                                  20


                                     0                                                                     0                                             0                                                                     0                                             0                                                                     0
                                               0       1         2     3       4     5         6       7                                                           0       1         2     3       4     5         6       7                                                           0       1         2     3       4     5         6       7
                                                                           t                                                                                                                   t                                                                                                                   t
                                               (a) Beta(α = 0.4, β = 1)                                                                                        (b) Beta(α = 0.2, β = 1)                                                                                                (c) Beta(α = 0.1, β = 1)

                                                                              B
Figure 2: Optimal over-time allocation for three different priors and a fixed N = 10%. The orange
curve depicts the optimal q(·) and the filled circle corresponds to t = t̂.


6                                      D ISCUSSION
Our work contributes a timing dimension to an emerging body of research on evaluating prediction-
driven allocation. Predictive systems are introduced with the promise of minimizing waste and
increasing efficiency. This existing predisposition, amplified further by the traditional focus on
maximizing predictive accuracy, encourages practices that favor waiting to collect more information
over acting early with noisier signals. Our study presents a simple model that challenges this practice.
Our work opens numerous lines of inquiry. For instance, we assume the planner has a fixed budget B,
corresponding to a fixed unit-cost intervention, that they can allocate all at once or over time. There
are various natural variations worth exploring. For instance, we could consider heterogeneity in cost
across time or different pi values. In the same spirit as Perdomo (2024), we can also consider trading
off this B with other interventions or parameters in the problem. We also think the tradeoffs between
acting early and waiting to reduce uncertainty extend beyond our welfare-maximizing framework. For
instance, future work could adapt our dynamic model to fairness-focused frameworks for studying
uncertainty, such as those developed by Singh et al. (2021), and explore whether information gains
consistently lead to improved outcomes.
We make generic assumptions about the failure probabilities and collection of observations. In settings
motivating our study, the failure probabilities change over time, favoring increasing inequality in the
absence of interventions. Likewise collecting observations for vulnerable individuals may be more
costly, contain less signal, or may otherwise be undesirable (Monteiro Paes et al., 2022). Another
general assumption we made is that, while individuals have heterogeneous values of p, we do not
account for variations in their initial conditions or “starting points.” Enriching the model we study to
include such insights would only further justify early interventions in the presence of high inequality,
though it would be interesting to examine the extent to which it does so. We should also point out
that we consider the allocation problem in an unconstrained setting to highlight the generality of
the tradeoffs. However, practical constraints can further limit the optimal allocation, in one way or
another.
Our work introduces a potential lens through which to examine tradeoffs incurred by waiting to
improve prediction accuracy. Our results, on their own, do not endorse early or late allocations for
any specific setting. Each policy problem should be examined empirically, and policymakers must
consider various community, policy, and practical considerations. Indeed, targeting as an effective
means of improving welfare—which has fueled the use of predictive systems—is, itself, an actively
debated policy concept (Shirali et al., 2024a). Nonetheless, we believe that the machine learning
community can contribute to discussions around how to best evaluate predictive systems in such
policy settings.


                                                                                                                                                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jackie Baek, Joshua Blumenstock, Kate Donahue, Avi Feller, Moritz Hardt, Michael I.
Jordan, and Jiduan Wu for their generous feedback and discussions. Abebe was partially supported
by the Andrew Carnegie Fellowship. Procaccia was partially supported by the National Science
Foundation under grants IIS-2147187 and IIS-2229881; by the Office of Naval Research under grants
N00014-24-1-2704 and N00014-25-1-2153; and by a grant from the Cooperative AI Foundation.

R EFERENCES
Rediet Abebe, Jon Kleinberg, and S Matthew Weinberg. Subsidy allocations in the presence of income
  shocks. In Proceedings of the 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7032–7039,
  2020.
Krishna Acharya, Eshwar Ram Arunachaleswaran, Sampath Kannan, Aaron Roth, and Juba Ziani.
  Wealth dynamics over generations: Analysis and interventions. In 2023 IEEE Conference on
  Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML), pp. 42–57. IEEE, 2023.
Shipra Agrawal and Nikhil Devanur. Linear contextual bandits with knapsacks. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Emily Aiken, Suzanne Bellue, Dean Karlan, Chris Udry, and Joshua E Blumenstock. Machine
 learning and phone data can improve targeting of humanitarian aid. Nature, 603(7903):864–870,
 2022.
Susan Athey. Beyond prediction: Using big data for policy problems. Science, 355(6324):483–485,
  2017.
Susan Athey and Stefan Wager. Policy learning with observational data. Econometrica, 89(1):
  133–161, 2021.
Mohammad Javad Azizi, Phebe Vayanos, Bryan Wilder, Eric Rice, and Milind Tambe. Designing
 fair, efficient, and interpretable policies for prioritizing homeless youth for housing resources. In
 Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research: 15th
 International Conference, CPAIOR 2018, Delft, The Netherlands, June 26–29, 2018, Proceedings
 15, pp. 35–51. Springer, 2018.
Chelsea Barabas, Madars Virza, Karthik Dinakar, Joichi Ito, and Jonathan Zittrain. Interventions over
  predictions: Reframing the ethical debate for actuarial risk assessment. In Proceedings of the 1st
  ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 62–76, 2018.
Debopam Bhattacharya and Pascaline Dupas. Inferring welfare maximizing treatment assignment
  under budget constraints. Journal of Econometrics, 167(1):168–196, 2012.
Karen Bierman. The implementation of the fast track program: An example of a large-scale prevention
  science efficacy trial. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 30:1–17, 2002.
Niclas Boehmer, Yash Nair, Sanket Shah, Lucas Janson, Aparna Taneja, and Milind Tambe. Eval-
  uating the effectiveness of index-based treatment allocation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11771,
  2024.
Carri W Chan, Vivek F Farias, Nicholas Bambos, and Gabriel J Escobar. Optimizing intensive care
  unit discharge decisions with patient readmissions. Operations research, 60(6):1323–1341, 2012.
Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F Katz. The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods
  on children: New evidence from the moving to opportunity experiment. American Economic
  Review, 106(4):855–902, 2016.
Xavier de Souza Briggs, Susan J Popkin, and John Goering. Moving to opportunity: The story of an
  American experiment to fight ghetto poverty. Oxford University Press, 2010.
Ellora Derenoncourt. Can you move to opportunity? Evidence from the great migration. American
  Economic Review, 112(2):369–408, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adam N Elmachtoub and Paul Grigas. Smart “predict, then optimize”. Management Science, 68(1):
  9–26, 2022.
Adam N Elmachtoub, Jason Cheuk Nam Liang, and Ryan McNellis. Decision trees for decision-
  making under the predict-then-optimize framework. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 2858–2867. PMLR, 2020.
Virginia Eubanks. Automating inequality: How high-tech tools profile, police, and punish the poor.
  St. Martin’s Press, 2018.
Ann-Marie Faria, Nicholas Sorensen, Jessica Heppen, Jill Bowdon, Suzanne Taylor, Ryan Eisner, and
  Shandu Foster. Getting students on track for graduation: Impacts of the early warning intervention
  and monitoring system after one year. Regional Educational Laboratory Midwest, 2017.
Lisa A Gennetian, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lawrence F Katz, Jeffrey R Kling, Matthew Sciandra, Jens
  Ludwig, Greg J Duncan, and Ronald C Kessler. The long-term effects of moving to opportunity on
  youth outcomes. Cityscape, pp. 137–167, 2012.
Daniel Gubits, Marybeth Shinn, Michelle Wood, Stephen Bell, Samuel Dastrup, Claudia Solari, Scott
  Brown, Debi McInnis, Tom McCall, and Utsav Kattel. Family options study: 3-year impacts of
  housing and services interventions for homeless families. Available at SSRN 3055295, 2016.
Moritz Hardt and Michael P Kim. Is your model predicting the past? In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM
 Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, pp. 1–8, 2023.
Hoda Heidari and Jon Kleinberg. Allocating opportunities in a dynamic model of intergenera-
  tional mobility. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
 Transparency, pp. 15–25, 2021.
Toru Kitagawa and Aleksey Tetenov. Who should be treated? Empirical welfare maximization
  methods for treatment choice. Econometrica, 86(2):591–616, 2018.
Jon Kleinberg, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Ziad Obermeyer. Prediction policy problems.
  American Economic Review, 105(5):491–495, 2015.
Amanda R Kube, Sanmay Das, and Patrick J Fowler. Fair and efficient allocation of scarce resources
 based on predicted outcomes: Implications for homeless service delivery. Journal of Artificial
 Intelligence Research, 76:1219–1245, 2023.
Nir Levine, Koby Crammer, and Shie Mannor. Rotting bandits. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017.
Karen Levy, Kyla E Chasalow, and Sarah Riley. Algorithms and decision-making in the public sector.
  Annual Review of Law and Social Science, 17:309–334, 2021.
Jens Ludwig, Jeffrey B Liebman, Jeffrey R Kling, Greg J Duncan, Lawrence F Katz, Ronald C
  Kessler, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. What can we learn about neighborhood effects from the moving
  to opportunity experiment? American Journal of Sociology, 114(1):144–188, 2008.
Jens Ludwig, Greg J Duncan, Lisa A Gennetian, Lawrence F Katz, Ronald C Kessler, Jeffrey R Kling,
  and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. Long-term neighborhood effects on low-income families: Evidence from
  moving to opportunity. American Economic Review, 103(3):226–231, 2013.
Martha Abele Mac Iver, Marc L Stein, Marcia H Davis, Robert W Balfanz, and Joanna Hornig Fox.
 An efficacy study of a ninth-grade early warning indicator intervention. Journal of Research on
 Educational Effectiveness, 12(3):363–390, 2019.
Tasfia Mashiat, Alex DiChristofano, Patrick J Fowler, and Sanmay Das. Beyond eviction prediction:
  Leveraging local spatiotemporal public records to inform action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16440,
  2024.
Aditya Mate, Bryan Wilder, Aparna Taneja, and Milind Tambe. Improved policy evaluation for
  randomized trials of algorithmic resource allocation. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 24198–24213. PMLR, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mehryar Mohri. Foundations of machine learning, 2018.
Lucas Monteiro Paes, Carol Long, Berk Ustun, and Flavio Calmon. On the epistemic limits of
  personalized prediction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:1979–1991,
  2022.
Ayan Mukhopadhyay and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. Prioritized allocation of emergency responders
  based on a continuous-time incident prediction model. In International Conference on Autonomous
  Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2017.
Ziad Obermeyer and Ezekiel J Emanuel. Predicting the future—big data, machine learning, and
  clinical medicine. The New England journal of medicine, 375(13):1216, 2016.
Juan Carlos Perdomo. The relative value of prediction in algorithmic decision making. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Juan Carlos Perdomo, Tolani Britton, Moritz Hardt, and Rediet Abebe. Difficult lessons on social
  prediction from Wisconsin public schools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06205, 2023.
Sina Rismanchian and Shayan Doroudi. Four interactions between ai and education: Broadening our
  perspective on what ai can offer education. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  in Education, pp. 1–12. Springer, 2023.
Matthew J Salganik, Ian Lundberg, Alexander T Kindel, Caitlin E Ahearn, Khaled Al-Ghoneim,
 Abdullah Almaatouq, Drew M Altschul, Jennie E Brand, Nicole Bohme Carnegie, Ryan James
 Compton, et al. Measuring the predictability of life outcomes with a scientific mass collaboration.
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(15):8398–8403, 2020.
Thomas M Shapiro. The hidden cost of being African American: How wealth perpetuates inequality.
  Oxford University Press, 2004.
Ali Shirali. Sequential nature of recommender systems disrupts the evaluation process. In Inter-
  national Workshop on Algorithmic Bias in Search and Recommendation, pp. 21–34. Springer,
  2022.
Ali Shirali, Rediet Abebe, and Moritz Hardt. Allocation requires prediction only if inequality is low.
  In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Ali Shirali, Alexander Schubert, and Ahmed Alaa. Pruning the way to reliable policies: A multi-
  objective deep q-learning approach to critical care. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
  Informatics, 2024b.
Ashudeep Singh, David Kempe, and Thorsten Joachims. Fairness in ranking under uncertainty.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11896–11908, 2021.
Aleksandrs Slivkins, Karthik Abinav Sankararaman, and Dylan J Foster. Contextual bandits with
  packing and covering constraints: A modular lagrangian approach via regression. In Proceedings
  of the 36th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4633–4656, 2023.
Nancy L Stokey. The Economics of Inaction: Stochastic Control models with fixed costs. Princeton
  University Press, 2008.
Vinithasree Subbhuraam (ed.). Predictive Analytics in Healthcare. IOP Publishing, 2021.
Halil Toros and Daniel Flaming. Prioritizing homeless assistance using predictive algorithms: an
  evidence-based approach. Cityscape, 20(1):117–146, 2018.
Angelina Wang, Sayash Kapoor, Solon Barocas, and Arvind Narayanan. Against predictive optimiza-
  tion: On the legitimacy of decision-making algorithms that optimize predictive accuracy. ACM
  Journal on Responsible Computing, 1(1):1–45, 2024.
Bryan Wilder and Pim Welle. Learning treatment effects while treating those in need. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.07596, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bryan Wilder, Bistra Dilkina, and Milind Tambe. Melding the data-decisions pipeline: Decision-
  focused learning for combinatorial optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 1658–1665, 2019.
Sebastian Zezulka and Konstantin Genin. From the fair distribution of predictions to the fair distribu-
  tion of social goods: Evaluating the impact of fair machine learning on long-term unemployment.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14438, 2024.
Helen Zhou, Audrey Huang, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, David Childers, and Zachary Lipton. Timing as
  an action: Learning when to observe and act. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 3979–3987. PMLR, 2024.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    N OTATIONAL CONVENTIONS
The variables related to an individual i are indexed with a subscript i. The variables related to time t
are indexed with a superscript t. The variables transformed with p̃(·) are denoted with a tilde.

 Symbol                    Notion
 t                         Time step which takes a value from 1 to T
 T                         Horizon
 pi                        Failure probability of individual i
 oti                       Binary observation from an active individual at time t
 ϵ                         Noise on observation model of Eq. (1)
 p̃                        p̃(p) := (1 − ϵ)f (p) + (1 − f (p))ϵ
                                                                                                                       ′
 yit                       Number of positive observations from an active individual i up to time t: yit := t′ ∈[t] oti
                                                                                                           P

 At                        Set of active individuals at time t
 Atk                       Set of active individuals at t with y t = k: Atk := {i | yit = k}
 It                        Set of individuals treated at t
 Ātk                      Atk excluding those who will be treated at t: Ātk := Atk \ I t
 N                         Number of initial individuals at time t = 1
 Nt                        Number of individuals who made it to time t: N t := |At |
 nt                        Proportion of initial individuals who made it to time t: nt := N t /N
 ntk                       ntk := |Atk |/N
 n̄tk                      n̄tk := |Ātk |/N
 P t (·)                   Posterior over p for an active individual at t
 Pkt = P t (· | y t = k)   Posterior over p given an individual has made it to t and y t = k
 Prt (·)                   Probability measure over active individuals at time t
 Prti,j (·)                Probability measure over two independent active individuals i and j at time t
 Prt (y t = k)             Probability that an active individual at t has y t = k
 Prt (y t = k | p)         Likelihood that an active individual with failure probability p shows y t = k
 Et [·]                    Expectation over active individuals at time t
 Etk [·]                   Expectation over active individuals at time t with y t = k
 Eti,j [·]                 Expectation over two independent active individuals i and j at time t
 µt                        Mean of failure probability at time t: µt := Et [p]
 µtk                       Mean of failure probability at time t given y t = k: µt := Etk [p]
 Vart [·]                  Variance under Prt (·)
 σ̃i2                      σ̃i2 := p̃i · (1 − p̃i )
    2                         2 := 2
 σ̃ij                      σ̃ij     σ̃i + σ̃j2
 G(·)                      Cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the standard normal distribution
 g(·)                      Probability density function (PDF) of the standard normal distribution

                                           Table 1: Glossary


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    R ELATED WORK

Prediction for allocation. Algorithmic predictions are increasingly employed to identify individuals
who are most in need of limited resources. In many of these applications, the timing of prediction
and allocation is of the utmost importance. Examples include directing assistance to tenants at
risk of eviction based on their predicted risk (Mashiat et al., 2024), using early warning systems to
identify students at risk of dropout (Faria et al., 2017; Mac Iver et al., 2019; Perdomo et al., 2023;
Rismanchian & Doroudi, 2023), prioritizing homelessness assistance while considering population
dynamics (Toros & Flaming, 2018; Azizi et al., 2018; Kube et al., 2023), making ICU discharge
decisions based on readmission or mortality probability (Chan et al., 2012; Shirali et al., 2024b), and
improved targeting of humanitarian aids (Aiken et al., 2022). For a discussion on the role of machine
learning in clinical medicine in particular, refer to Obermeyer & Emanuel (2016).
The adoption of predictive tools in resource allocation often comes with a promise that improvements
in prediction accuracy can transfer to the allocation setting. Recent critical studies, however, have
challenged this (Barabas et al., 2018; Shirali et al., 2024a; Perdomo, 2024). Our work gives a new
timing dimension to this problem where prediction improvement is entangled with the population
dynamics. Our work also emphasizes the role of inequality in this dynamic setting. In line with
Shirali et al. (2024a) we found inequality a determinant factor in deciding which form of allocation
works best in the interest of social welfare.
Welfare-maximizing treatment assignment under budget constraints is also a well-established topic
in economics (Bhattacharya & Dupas, 2012; Kitagawa & Tetenov, 2018). While much of the
literature focuses on estimating static heterogeneous treatment effects for a fixed population, we
extend this work by examining the problem’s dynamic aspects. Our model also bypasses the need to
estimate treatment effects in observational settings (Athey & Wager, 2021) by incorporating these
complexities into a general class of utility function and emphasizing the often-overlooked role of
timing in predictions and allocations.

Related problem settings. A related setting that introduces a similar tradeoff to ours is when
observations come at a cost (Stokey, 2008; Zhou et al., 2024). Our setting is distinct from this line
of research as in our model, the cost of additional observations arises naturally from the loss of
opportunity to intervene early, rather than being part of the modeling assumptions.
Our work is closely related to subsidy allocation in the presence of income shocks, as studied
by Abebe et al. (2020). Their model captures a more general dynamic where individuals fail
after experiencing potentially multiple shocks. Unlike Abebe et al. (2020), we do not assume a
full information setting. In a similar vein, our proposed dynamic is also related to the dynamic
models of opportunity allocation (Heidari & Kleinberg, 2021) and the dynamics of wealth across
generations (Acharya et al., 2023).
Generally, the best estimates of the treatment effect are obtained when the allocation is randomized.
This is often not the case when we need to learn while treating those in need (Wilder & Welle,
2024). The sample independence assumption is often violated in these settings (Shirali, 2022) and
recent works have proposed various estimators to improve the power of estimators (Mate et al., 2023;
Boehmer et al., 2024). Our model largely circumvents this complexity, as a simple ranking based on
available observations is always Bayes optimal.
Our discussion is related to decision-focused learning (Mukhopadhyay & Vorobeychik, 2017; Wilder
et al., 2019; Elmachtoub et al., 2020; Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2022) in the Operations Research
community, where predictions are informed by their downstream applications. In our work, we
employ a simplified observation model that allows us to consistently obtain a posterior distribution
over hidden variables. This approach circumvents the challenges that could arise from inaccurate or
biased predictions. There is also a direct connection between our Algorithm 1 and decision-focused
learning. If we consider prediction as the ranking of individuals at all time points, then this algorithm
effectively identifies the optimal prediction tailored for the subsequent allocation step.
Our over-time allocation is also related to multi-armed bandit problems with resource constraints
in addition to reward (or utility) generation (Agrawal & Devanur, 2016; Slivkins et al., 2023). In
particular, our model is most similar to the rotting bandit (Levine et al., 2017) where reward decreases
over time. Unlike the standard bandit problems, in our problem observations are available from all


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


individuals and not only those treated. The exploration/exploitation tradeoff then lies in waiting for
further information or treating those already estimated to be vulnerable.

Prediction and policy problems. Historically, policy planning has relied on aggregate data;
however, the promise of improved resource allocation, reduced costs, and more preventative in-
terventions has led to the widespread adoption of algorithmic systems on an individual basis in
governments (Athey, 2017; Levy et al., 2021). Our work contributes to this discussion, as our insights
have direct implications for policy planning in evolving social contexts.
While causal inference can inform policy-making, it is not always necessary (Kleinberg et al., 2015).
Our framework falls under the category of prediction policy problems where an accurate ranking
of individuals is sufficient for effective allocation. Related to this topic, Wang et al. (2024) raise
concerns about the legitimacy of decision-making based on predictive optimization.
The debate surrounding risk assessment tools has largely centered around their inherently predictive
nature. However, as emphasized by Barabas et al. (2018) in the context of the criminal justice system,
the focus of risk assessment should be on guiding interventions rather than merely making predictions.
Our research aligns with this perspective by studying prediction not as an isolated task but as an
integral part of the resource allocation process.

The long-lasting effect of interventions. The Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment, spon-
sored by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, exemplifies an early intervention
aimed at improving life outcomes by providing low-income families with children living in disad-
vantaged urban public housing the opportunity to relocate to less distressed private-market housing
communities (de Souza Briggs et al., 2010; Ludwig et al., 2008; Gennetian et al., 2012; Ludwig et al.,
2013; Chetty et al., 2016). The mixed findings of the MTO experiment across different age groups
and the contrast between interim and long-term analyses highlight the crucial role that timing and the
considered time horizon play in determining intervention’s effect.
The MTO experiment also shows early interventions and environmental factors can have a long-
lasting influence. In our model, we consider the extreme case of this when individuals subject to
intervention are no longer vulnerable at any future time point. Hardt & Kim (2023) discuss how these
long-lasting effects inform future predictions.
Shapiro (2004) argues that initial differences, rather than wage disparities, are the primary drivers
of persistent inequality in the United States. Consistently, Derenoncourt (2022) show that while
moving to areas with better economic opportunities theoretically provided improved prospects, local
responses counteracted many of the potential benefits. Such complexities are all abstracted into the
probability of failure in our model. While this abstraction helps us focus on specific aspects, we
acknowledge that it does not capture the full range of dynamics in the real world.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    A N ILLUSTRATION OF TRADEOFFS IN ONE - TIME ALLOCATION
To further illustrate why the budget and inequality are key factors in determining the cost of waiting
for accurate predictions in one-time allocation, we present the following example.
Suppose initially, P 1 = Beta(1, G + 1). This ensures that P 1 is G-decaying according to Defini-
tion 4.1. Consider the problem of whether postponing the allocation from t = 1 to t + 1 = 2 is
beneficial, or equivalently, whether ∆W t := W t+1 − W t > 0. For simplicity of the illustration, we
assume p̃ = p and fully effective treatments.
Denoting the set of active individuals at t with y t = k by Atk and Nkt := |Atk |, a direct calculation
gives
                         G+1                                                             1
N01 = N E[1 − p̃] = N        ,                                      N11 = N E[p̃] = N       ,
                         G+2                                                            G+2
                                               2(G + 1)                                                2
N12 = N E[(1 − p)(1 − p̃)p̃] = N                           ,        N22 = N E[(1 − p)p̃2 ] = N                  .
                                            (G + 2)(G + 3)                                       (G + 2)(G + 3)
Note that N11 > N22 and N11 < N12 + N22 .
Lemma E.5 implies that the optimal allocation at t, should treat those who have higher y t . Therefore,
in our example, assuming B < N11 , the optimal allocation at t = 1 only treats those in A11 . Similarly,
at t + 1 = 2, it first treats those in A22 and then A21 . So, defining Ukt := Ep∼P t (·|yt =k) [ut (p)], for
B < N11 , it is straightforward to obtain
                                  B (U22 − U11 ) ,                      B ≤ N22 ,

                            t
                       ∆W =
                                  −B (U1 − U1 ) + N2 (U2 − U1 ) , B > N22 .
                                          1     2       2   2      1


Lemma E.5 implies U11 ≥ U12 . Therefore, increasing the budget after N22 can only decrease ∆W t
and favors earlier allocations. The effect of inequality is also well-captured
                                                                               in U22 − U11 . A direct
calculation shows sign(U2 − U1 ) = sign (G + 1)(T − 4) − 6 . Hence, ∆W > 0 necessitates
                           2     1


                                                         6
                                                 G>         − 1.
                                                       T −4
In other words, higher inequality, reflected in smaller values of G, can render postponing allocation
from t to t + 1 unjustifiable.
We illustrate the effect of budget and inequality by simulating one-time allocation for T = 6
and N = 10000 in Fig. 3. Consistent with the theory, a high inequality corresponding to G ≤ 2 can
make W t+1 ≤ W t . Even when this is not the case, a high budget can still favor earlier allocation.
                                        4

                                        2

                                        0

                                       -2
                               "W t


                                       -4

                                       -6        0
                                                 G=3
                                       -8
                                                 G=2
                                      -10        G=1
                                                 G=0
                                      -12
                                            0    1      2           3     4     5
                                                            B
                                                            N (%)


      Figure 3: Illustration of the effect of the budget and inequality on one-time allocation.


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    S UPPLEMENTARY ALGORITHMS

Algorithm 2 Simulate trajectory
 1: inputs:
 2:   t0 : starting time of simulation
 3:   {Nkt0 }tk=0
               0
                   : number of individuals with y t0 = k for k = 0, . . . , t0
 4:   q : [T ] → {0, 1, . . . , T }: a valid non-decreasing sequence according to Theorem 5.1
 5: output:
          t
 6:   {Nq(t)  }Tt=t0 : number of individuals reaching y t = q(t) who are not yet treated, for t ≥ t0
 7: function S IMULATE T RAJ(t0 , {Nkt0 }tk=0  0
                                                  , q(·))
 8:    for t = t0 + 1 to T do
 9:         for k = 0 to t do
                 Find the number of untreated individuals from the previous step:
                       N k ← Nkt−1 · 1{k < q(t − 1)}, N k−1 ← Nk−1             · 1{k − 1 < q(t − 1)}
                         t−1                                    t−1        t−1
10:
                 Backup formula:
                                  t−1
                       Nkt ← N k · Ep∼P t−1 (·|yt−1 =k) (1 − p)(1 − p̃)

11:                              t−1
                           + N k−1 · Ep∼P t−1 (·|yt−1 =k−1) (1 − p) p̃
12:         end for
13:    end for
                     t
14:    return {Nq(t)     }Tt=t0
15: end function


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     S UPPLEMENTARY STATEMENTS
E.1   G ENERAL STATEMENTS

Lemma E.1. Suppose f : [0, 1] → R is a non-decreasing function of p. Consider two probability
                                        P(p)
density functions P and Q such that Q(p)     is a non-decreasing continuous function of p. Then, we
have EP [f (p)] ≥ EQ [g(p)]. As a direct implication of this lemma, the sign of inequality flips if
either f or the density ratio is non-increasing.

                         P(p)          R1            R1
Proof. Define σ(p) := Q(p)    . Since 0 Q(p) dp = 0 Q(p) σ(p) dp = 1, and σ is continuous, there
should exist a critical value p∗ such that σ(p) ≥ 1 for p ≥ p∗ , and σ(p) ≤ 1 for p < p∗ . Using this
critical value to decompose the expectations and the fact that f (·) is non-decreasing, we obtain
                             Z 1
  EP [f (p)] − EQ [f (p)] =       f (p) Q(p) (σ(p) − 1) dp
                               0
                              Z 1                                 Z p∗
                          =         f (p) Q(p) (σ(p) − 1) dp −           f (p) Q(p) (1 − σ(p)) dp
                               p∗                                  0
                                        Z 1                                  Z p∗
                                    ∗                                    ∗
                          ≥ f (p )            Q(p) (σ(p) − 1) dp − f (p )           Q(p) (1 − σ(p)) dp = 0 .
                                         p∗                                   0



Lemma
R∞      E.2. Consider two non-increasing functions a : R → [0, 1] and b : R → [0, 1]. If
 −∞
    b(x) dx is finite and non-zero, the following inequality always holds:
     Z ∞                 Z ∞                     Z ∞                       Z ∞
           b(x)2 dx ·           a(x) b(x) dx ≥            a(x)2 b(x)2 dx ·     b(x) dx . (9)
         −∞                   −∞                             −∞                           −∞


Proof. Define the difference between the left-hand side and the right-hand side of the inequality given
in Eq. (9) as ∆. For simplicity, consider integrals as a discrete sum with a step size of δ. Increasing
the value of a(x′ ) would change the value of ∆ by
                                     Z ∞                               Z ∞
                 1 d∆             ′             2            ′     ′ 2
                           = b(x ) ·       b(x) dx − 2a(x ) b(x ) ·          b(x) dx .
                 δ da(x′ )             −∞                               −∞

This implies that for any x′ such that b(x′ ) > 0, increasing a(x′ ) will decrease ∆ if and only if
                                                     R∞        2
                                       ′     ′     1 −∞ b(x) dx
                                   a(x ) b(x ) >      R∞             .
                                                   2 −∞ b(x) dx
Since both a and b are non-increasing non-negative functions, their multiplication is also a non-
increasing non-negative function. Therefore, increasing a(x′ ) will decrease ∆ if and only if x′ is
larger than a critical value x∗ . The non-increasing constraint on a then implies that for a fixed b, the
minimum value of ∆ corresponds to a constant function a(x) = a0 . In this case,
                                            ∞                 Z ∞
                                             Z
                         ∆ = a0 − a20 ·           b(x)2 dx ·          b(x) dx
                                                   −∞                  −∞

For a0 ∈ [0, 1], the above equation is always greater than or equal to zero, which completes the
proof.

E.2   S TATEMENTS ABOUT THE OPTIMALITY OF RANKING

Lemma E.3 (Bayes optimal ranking). Consider a statistical model P = {pθ : θ ∈ Θ = [a, b]}
that induces a family of continuous probability distributions over a sample space X . Assume
P has a univariant sufficient statistics T : X → R. Consider samples drawn independently
from two probability distributions with distinct parameters: X1 ∼ pθ1 , X2 ∼ pθ2 . For a ranking
function δ : X × X → {−1, 1}, define the ranking loss as
                      loss((θ1 , θ2 ); δ(x1 , x2 )) := 1{δ(x1 , x2 )(θ2 − θ1 ) < 0} .


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consider Θ1 and Θ2 independently drawn from a prior P over Θ. If for any θ2 ≥ θ1 ,
                T (x2 ) ≥ T (x1 ) ⇐⇒ pθ1 (x1 ) pθ2 (x2 ) ≥ pθ1 (x2 ) pθ2 (x1 ) , a.e. ,      (10)
                                                                                        ∗
then for any choice of P that has no point mass, the Bayes optimal ranking rule is δ (x1 , x2 ) =
χ{T (x2 ) ≥ T (x1 )}.

Proof. For Θ1 and Θ2 independently drawn from P, the Bayes risk of ranking is
                                     h                                      i
                R(P ⊗2 ; δ) = EΘ1 ∼P EX1 ∼pΘ1 loss((Θ1 , Θ2 ); δ(X1 , X2 )) .

                                        Θ2 ∼P     X2 ∼pΘ2
The independence also allows us to decompose the posterior over Θ1 and Θ2 given X1 = x1
and X2 = x2 as P(Θ1 | x1 ) P(Θ2 | x2 ). It is well-known that the minimizer of the Bayes risk is
δ ∗ (x1 , x2 ) = arg min R(P ⊗2 ; δ) ∈ arg min EΘ1 ∼P(·|x1 ) loss((Θ1 , Θ2 ); δ) | X1 = x1 , X2 = x2 .

                  δ(·,·)                   δ∈{−1,1}       Θ2 ∼P(·|x2 )
Plugging the ranking loss into this, we can further simplify the conditional expectation and obtain
       δ ∗ (x1 , x2 ) ∈ arg min EΘ1 ∼P(·|x1 ) loss((Θ1 , Θ2 ); δ) | x1 , x2

                            δ∈{−1,1}   Θ2 ∼P(·|x2 )
                                   1+δ                          1−δ
                        = arg min      Pr(Θ1 > Θ2 | x1 , x2 ) +     Pr(Θ1 ≤ Θ2 | x1 , x2 )
                          δ∈{−1,1}   2                           2

                        = arg min δ Pr(Θ1 > Θ2 | x1 , x2 ) − Pr(Θ1 ≤ Θ2 | x1 , x2 )
                            δ∈{−1,1}

                  = sign Pr(Θ1 ≤ Θ2 | x1 , x2 ) − Pr(Θ1 > Θ2 | x1 , x2 ) .
Now, using a change of variable trick and the Bayes’ rule, we have
     Pr(Θ1 ≤ Θ2 | x1 , x2 ) − Pr(Θ1 > Θ2 | x1 , x2 )
           Z b Z θ2                                   Z b Z θ1
        =           P(θ1 | x1 ) P(θ2 | x2 ) dθ1 dθ2 −          P(θ1 | x1 ) P(θ2 | x2 ) dθ2 dθ1
              a     a                                              a     a
             Z b Z θ2

         =                  P(θ1 | x1 ) P(θ2 | x2 ) − P(θ2 | x1 ) P(θ1 | x2 ) dθ1 dθ2
              a     a
             Z b Z θ2
                       P(θ1 ) P(θ2 )
         =                            pθ1 (x1 ) pθ2 (x2 ) − pθ1 (x2 ) pθ2 (x1 ) dθ1 dθ2 ,
             a    a     Z(x1 , x2 )
where Z(x1 , x2 ) is the partition function. The integral bound enforces θ2 ≥ θ1 . Then if the condition
of Eq. (10) holds, we can conclude

         sign Pr(Θ1 ≤ Θ2 | x1 , x2 ) − Pr(Θ1 > Θ2 | x1 , x2 ) = sign(T (x2 ) − T (x1 )) .


Proposition E.4. Consider     the observation model o ∼ Ber(p̃), where p̃(·) is a non-decreasing
function. Define y t = t′ ∈[t] ot . For any prior P over p that has no point mass, ranking individuals
                       P

based on their y t is Bayes optimal.

Proof. At any time t, define the statistical model P = pθ = (Ber(p̃(θ)))⊗t : θ ∈ [0, 1] where we

can think of the model parameter θ as the failure probability p. All the observations from individual i
until t can be interpreted as a sample from a model in P : X = [o1 , . . . , ot ] ∼ pθ . Then, it is
                                                                           t           t
straightforward to see y t is a sufficient statistic for P and pθ (x) = θ̃y (1 − θ̃)t−y . The increasing
property of p̃ also implies that θ2 ≥ θ1 ⇐⇒ θ̃2 ≥ θ̃1 .
For θ2 ≥ θ1 , plugging pθ into the condition of Eq. (10) gives
                                                            θ̃ 1 − θ̃  y2t −y1t
                                                              2       1
             pθ1 (x1 ) pθ2 (x2 ) ≥ pθ1 (x2 ) pθ2 (x1 ) ⇐⇒                       ≥ 1,    a.e.
                                                            θ̃1 1 − θ̃2
Since for 1 > θ̃2 ≥ θ̃1 > 0, we have θ̃θ̃2 1− θ̃1
                                           1−θ̃
                                                  ≥ 1, we can conclude
                                             1        2

                        pθ1 (x1 ) pθ2 (x2 ) ≥ pθ1 (x2 ) pθ2 (x1 ) ⇐⇒ y2t ≥ y1t , a.e.
Therefore, P meets the sufficient condition given in Eq. (10) of Lemma E.3, and ranking based on its
sufficient statistic y t is Bayes optimal.


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3   S TATEMENTS ABOUT THE EFFECT OF ONE MORE OBSERVATION OR ONE MORE TIME STEP

Lemma E.5 (Expected utility is monotone in the number of positive observations and time). For any
utility function ut (p) that is non-decreasing in p, we have
                                       Etk+1 [ut (p)] ≥ Etk [ut (p)] ,
for every k < t. If the utility is also non-increasing in t, we have
                                      Etk [ut (p)] ≥ Et+1
                                                      k [u
                                                          t+1
                                                              (p)] ,
for every k ≤ t. Here, Etk denotes expectation with respect to p ∼ Pkt = P t (· | y t = k).

Proof. We first prove the monotonicity in k. The likelihood Prt (y t = k | p) has a closed-form of
 t k
              t−k
 k p̃ (1 − p̃)    . Using this, we have
                          t
                         Pk+1 (p)   Prt (y t = k + 1 | p)     p̃   t−k
                            t     ∝      t t              =              .
                          Pk (p)     Pr (y = k | p)         1 − p̃ k + 1
This is a non-decreasing continuous function of p̃ and, consequently, of p, for every k < t. Since the
utility function is also non-decreasing in p, Lemma E.1 proves the monotonicity in k.
We next prove the monotonicity in t. Using the Bayes rule and the update rule of Eq. (7), we have
             Pkt (p)     P t (p) Prt (y t = k | p)        1   Prt (y t = k | p)
             t+1     ∝ t+1        t+1 t+1             ∝                             .
            Pk (p)    P (p) Pr (y            = k | p)   1 − p Prt+1 (y t+1 = k | p)
Plugging the closed-form expression of likelihoods into this, we obtain
                                       Pkt (p)         1
                                       t+1     ∝                 .
                                      Pk (p)     (1 − p)(1 − p̃)
Again, this is a non-decreasing continuous function of p̃ and, consequently, of p, for every k < t.
Since the utility function is also non-decreasing in p, Lemma E.1 implies Etk [ut (p)] ≥ Et+1 t
                                                                                          k [u (p)].
Using the fact that the utility is also non-increasing in t, completes the proof.
Lemma E.6 (A positive draw from Ber(p) is more informative than Ber(p̃)). Consider the ob-
servation model o ∼ Ber(p̃), where p̃(p) is a concave function with p̃(0) = 0 and p̃(1) = 1.
Let z ∼ Ber(p) be a random draw from an individual with failure probability p. For any utility
function ut (p) non-increasing in t and non-decreasing in p, we have
                                 Etk [ut (p) | z = 1] ≥ Et+1
                                                         k+1 [u
                                                               t+1
                                                                   (p)] ,                              (11)
for every k ≤ t. Here, Etk [·] denotes expectation with respect to p ∼ Pkt = P t (· | y t = k).

Proof. Expanding the left-hand side of Eq. (11), we have

                t t                  Etk Pr(z = 1 | p) · ut (p)    Etk [p · ut (p)]
               Ek [u (p) | z = 1] =                              =                  .
                                                                        Etk [p]

                                         Etk Pr(z = 1 | p)
On the other, expanding the right-hand side of Eq. (11) using the updating rule of P t+1 (p) ∝
P t (p)(1 − p) from Eq. (7), we have
                               Et+1 [p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k · ut+1 (p)]   Etk [(1 − p)p̃ · ut+1 (p)]
           Et+1
            k+1 [u
                  t+1
                      (p)] =                                       =                            .
                                   Et+1 [p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k ]               Etk [(1 − p)p̃]
Define g(p) := (1 − p)p̃. We argue that g(p) is concave on [0, 1]. To see this, observe that
g ′′ (p) = −2p̃′ + (1 − p)p̃′′ . The concavity of p̃ implies p̃′′ ≤ 0. Then, given that p̃(0) = 0,
p̃(1) = 1, and the range of p̃ is within [0, 1], it follows that p̃′ ≤ 0. Thus, we can conclude g ′′ (p) ≤ 0
for p ∈ [0, 1]. A direct consequence of the concavity of g is that g ′ (p)(0 − p) ≥ g(0) − g(p) = −g(p).
A straightforward integration then shows that for arbitrary p2 ≥ p1 > 0,
                                              p2   g(p2 )
                                                 ≥        .                                            (12)
                                              p1   g(p1 )

                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This inequality will allow us to further bound Et+1
                                                  k+1 [u
                                                        t+1
                                                             (p)] as follows. Using ut+1 (p) ≤ ut (p), the
difference of the expanded sides of Eq. (11) can be bounded by

                                Etk (p1 g(p2 ) − p2 g(p1 )) · ut+1 (p1 )
                                                                           ,
                                            Etk [p1 · g(p2 )]
where p1 and p2 are two independent draws from Pkt . Using symmetry and the fact that the distribution
has no point mass, we can write the numerator as
               Etk (p1 g(p2 ) − p2 g(p1 )) · ut+1 (p1 ) · 1{p2 ≥ p1 } + 1{p2 < p1 }


                = Etk (p1 g(p2 ) − p2 g(p1 ))(ut+1 (p1 ) − ut+1 (p2 )) · 1{p2 ≥ p1 } .


Then the fact that utility is non-increasing in p and Eq. (12) imply the numerator is non-negative.
This completes the proof.
Lemma E.7. Consider the observation model o ∼ Ber(p̃). Define µtk := Etk [p] and s̃tk := Etk [(1 −
p)p̃], where Etk [·] denotes expectation with respect to p ∼ Pkt = P t (· | y t = k). For any arbitrary
function f : [0, 1] → R, the following identities hold:
                                            Etk [(1 − p)(1 − p̃) · f (p)]
                              Et+1
                               k [f (p)] =                                ,
                                                    1 − µtk − s̃tk
                                             1 t
                              Et+1
                               k+1 [f (p)] = t Ek [(1 − p)p̃ · f (p)] .
                                            s̃k

Proof. Using the updating rule of P t+1 (p) ∝ P t (p)(1 − p) from Eq. (7), we have
                   Et+1 [f (p) · p̃k (1 − p̃)t+1−k ]   Et [(1 − p)(1 − p̃) · f (p) · p̃k (1 − p̃)t−k ]
     Et+1
      k [f (p)] =                                    =
                      Et+1 [p̃k (1 − p̃)t+1−k ]            Et [(1 − p)(1 − p̃) · p̃k (1 − p̃)t−k ]
                    t
                   E [(1 − p)(1 − p̃) · f (p)]
                  = k                            .
                          1 − µtk − s̃tk
Using the same techniques, we also obtain
                      Et+1 [f (p) · p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k ]   Et [(1 − p)p̃ · f (p) · p̃k (1 − p̃)t−k ]
        Et+1
         k+1 [f (p)] =      t+1   k+1          t−k
                                                        =
                          E [p̃       (1 − p̃) ]              Et [(1 − p)p̃ · p̃k (1 − p̃)t−k ]
                       1
                     = t Etk [(1 − p)p̃ · f (p)] .
                      s̃k


Lemma E.8 (Bounding the effect of one more positive observation on expected utility). Consider
the observation model o ∼ Ber(p̃), where p̃(p) is a concave function with p̃(0) = 0 and p̃(1) = 1.
Define Ukt := Etk [ut (p)] and µtk := Etk [p] as the expected utility and the expected failure probability
of an active individual at time t who has k positive observations. For any concave (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying
Lu (t)-Lipschitz utility function ut , we have

                      t+1                                            µt+1    t+1
                                                                      k+1 − µk
                     Uk+1 − Ukt+1 ≤ Lu (t + 1) · (λ2 − Ukt+1 ) ·                     .
                                                                        1 − µt+1
                                                                             k


Proof. Denote the cumulative distribution function corresponding to Pkt by Fkt . The concavity of p̃
and its boundary values imply p̃(p) is non-decreasing in p. Then, a straightforward argument shows
Fkt+1 (p) ≤ Fk+1
               t+1
                   (p). Let π : [0, 1] → [0, 1] be the optimal transport map from Pkt+1 to Pk+1
                                                                                            t+1
                                                                                                . The
definition of π implies
                             t+1
                                  − Ukt+1 = Et+1
                                                      t+1
                                                     u (π(p)) − ut+1 (p) .

                           Uk+1                 k

Using the concavity of the utility function, we can upper bound the above by
                           t+1
                                                   t+1 ′
                                − Ukt+1 ≤ Et+1

                         Uk+1                 k   (u ) (p) · (π(p) − p) .


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our observation that Fkt+1 (p) ≤ Fk+1
                                  t+1
                                      (p) implies that π(p) ≥ p. In other words, the optimal map
                                                                    p̃ P t+1
                                                             t+1 ∝ 1−p̃ is an increasing function
must always shift the mass to the right. Furthermore, since Pk+1
                                                                         k
of p̃ (and therefore p), it follows that π(p) − p is non-decreasing in p. The concavity of utility also
implies that (ut+1 )′ (p) is non-increasing. Then, Chebyshev’s sum inequality allows us to bound
  t+1
Uk+1   − Ukt+1 as the product of two terms:
   t+1                 t+1 ′                             t+1 ′
  Uk+1 − Ukt+1 ≤ Et+1
                  k [(u   ) (p)] · Et+1             t+1
                                    k [π(p) − p] = Ek [(u   ) (p)] · (µt+1    t+1
                                                                       k+1 − µk ) . (13)

Since the utility is concave, (ut+1 )′ is non-increasing. This enables us to apply Chebyshev’s sum
inequality, allowing us to write
                            t+1 ′                       t+1 ′
                     Et+1
                      k [(u    ) (p) · (1 − p)] ≥ Et+1
                                                   k [(u   ) (p)] · (1 − µt+1
                                                                          k ),

which gives an upper bound on Et+1
                               k [(u
                                    t+1 ′
                                       ) (p)]. Now, since the utility function is (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying,
we have
                    t+1 ′          Et+1
                                    k [(u
                                          t+1 ′
                                              ) (p) · (1 − p)]
              Et+1
               k [(u   ) (p)] ≤
                                           1 − µt+1
                                                  k

                                   Et+1 Lu (t + 1) · (λ2 − ut+1 (p)) · p̃k (1 − p̃)t+1−k
                                 ≤
                                          Et+1 p̃k (1 − p̃)t+1−k · (1 − µt+1

                                                                             k )
                                                λ2 − Ukt+1
                                 = Lu (t + 1)              .
                                                 1 − µt+1
                                                      k

Plugging this into Eq. (13) completes the proof.
Lemma E.9 (Bounding the effect of one more observation and one more time step on expected failure
probability). Consider the observation model o ∼ Ber(p̃), where p̃(p) = 1 − (1 − p)γ and γ > 1.
Suppose the initial distribution P 1 is G-decaying. For any k < t, the following inequalities hold:
        µtk+1 ≥ µt+1
                 k+1 ,                                                         (effect of one more time step)
                                                              −1
                                       1    2+γ+γ                  + G
µt+1    t+1
 k+1 − µk   ≤ µt+1       t+1
               k+1 (1 − µk+1 )            +                   . (effect of one more observation)
                                      k+1   γ (t − k) + t + 1

Proof. The proof of the effect of one additional time step is straightforward: Starting from the
definition of µtk+1 and using the updating rule P t+1 (p) ∝ P t (p)(1 − p) from Eq. (7), we have

                          Et [p · p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k−1 ]   Et+1
                                                           k+1 [p · (1 − p)
                                                                           −1
                                                                              (1 − p̃)−1 ]
                µtk+1 =                                 =                                  .
                           Et [p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k−1 ]       Et+1
                                                             k+1 [(1 − p)
                                                                          −1 (1 − p̃)−1 ]


Then, since (1 − p̃) is non-increasing in p, a direct application of Lemma E.1 gives µt+1
                                                                                      k   ≥ µt+1
                                                                                             k+1 .

In the second part, we prove the effect of one more observation. We start by writing µt+1
                                                                                      k   as
                                                         d
          t+1 Et+1 [p · p̃k (1 − p̃)t+1−k ]   Et+1 [p · dp (p̃k+1 ) · (1 − p̃)t−k · (1 − p)]
         µk =                               =          d
                                                                                             .                (14)
               Et+1 [p̃k (1 − p̃)t+1−k ]       Et+1 [ dp (p̃k+1 ) · (1 − p̃)t−k · (1 − p)]
                                   1−p̃
Here, we used the identity p̃′ = γ 1−p  . Using integration by parts, we can write the numerator as
             d k+1                                                                         1
 Et+1 [p ·       (p̃ ) · (1 − p̃)t−k · (1 − p)] = p · p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k · P t+1 (p)(1 − p)
             dp̃                                                                           0
                                                  Z 1
                                                −      p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k · P t+1 (p)(1 − p) dp
                                                     0
                                                                Z 1
                                                + γ (t − k)            p · p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k · P t+1 (p) dp
                                                                   0
                                                    Z 1
                                                                                    d
                                                          p · p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k ·      P t+1 (p)(1 − p) dp .

                                                −
                                                     0                              dp


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  1−p̃
Here, we again applied the identity p̃′ = γ 1−p          to arrive at the third term. The first term is zero. We
next simplify and bound the last term. Using the updating rule P t+1 (p) ∝ P t (p)(1 − p) from Eq. (7)
we can write
                                                            P 1 (p)(1 − p)t+1
                                 P t+1 (p)(1 − p) =                              ,
                                                                   Z t+1
          t+1
where Z       is a normalizing constant. Taking the derivative with respect to p and simplifying
equations, we obtain
                    d                                                      (P 1 )′ (p)(1 − p)t
                        P t+1 (p)(1 − p) = −(t + 1)P t+1 (p) +

                                                                                               .
                   dp                                                              Z t+1
Since P 1 is G-decaying, we have
                                                d
                −(t + 1 + G)P t+1 (p) ≤               P t+1 (p)(1 − p) ≤ −(t + 1)P t+1 (p) .

                                               dp
Using these bounds in the expansion via integration by parts and simplifying the integrals as expecta-
tions, we can impose the following bounds:
                                          d k+1
(γ (t−k)+t+2) µt+1               t+1
                    k+1 −1 ≤ Ek+1 [p·         (p̃      )·(1−p̃)t−k ·(1−p)] ≤ (γ (t−k)+t+G+2) µt+1        k+1 −1 .
                                          dp̃
Using similar arguments, we can also derive the following bounds:
                                     d k+1
       γ (t − k) + t + 1 ≤ Et+1k+1 [     (p̃      ) · (1 − p̃)t−k · (1 − p)] ≤ γ (t − k) + t + G + 1 .
                                     dp̃
Plugging these bounds into Eq. (14), we obtain
            (γ (t − k) + t + 2) µt+1
                                   k+1 − 1                     (γ (t − k) + t + G + 2) µt+1  k+1 − 1
                                                ≤ µt+1 k    ≤                                        .       (15)
                γ (t − k) + t + G + 1                                    γ (t − k) + t + 1
Using the lower bound from Eq. (15), after a straightforward calculation, we obtain
                     µt+1
                      k+1 − µk
                               t+1
                                                          1             h 1              G     i
                    t+1         t+1 ≤ γ (t − k) + t + G + 1                t+1 +           t+1 .             (16)
                  µk+1 (1 − µk+1 )                                        µk+1       1 − µk+1
One can verify that the maximum of the terms inside the brackets occurs only when µt+1  k+1 reaches its
                                                                    t+1
smallest or largest values. Here, we only present the case where µk+1 takes its smallest value, but a
similar bound will hold when it takes its largest value. Therefore, the last missing piece of the proof
is a lower bound on µt+1
                       k+1 . Using the upper bound from Eq. (15), we have
                                                       1 − (G + 1)µt+1
                                                                     k+1
                                   µt+1    t+1
                                    k+1 ≥ µk   +                         .
                                                       γ (t − k) + t + 1
Repetitively applying the above operation yields
                        k+1                                   k+1
                        X               1                     X             µt+1
                                                                              k′
       µt+1
         k+1 ≥ µ t+1
                 0   +               ′) + γ + t + 1
                                                    − (G + 1)              ′) + γ + t + 1
                                                                                          .
                         ′
                            γ (t − k                           ′
                                                                  γ (t − k
                          k =1                                         k =1
An implication of Lemma E.1 is µt+1        t+1
                                   k′ ≤ µk′ +1 . We also know µ0
                                                                t+1
                                                                    ≥ 0. Using these, we can obtain
the lower bound
                                                     S
                                       µt+1
                                        k+1 ≥                ,
                                               1 + (G + 1)S
           Pk+1
where S = k′ =1 (γ (t − k ′ ) + γ + t + 1)−1 . Using the naive bound S ≥ γt+t+1
                                                                             k+1
                                                                                   , we can further
               t+1
lower bound µk+1 as
                                                   k+1
                               µt+1
                                k+1 ≥                                .
                                        γt + t + 1 + (k + 1)(G + 1)
Plugging this into Eq. (16) gives
        µt+1
         k+1 − µk
                  t+1
                            γt + t + 1 + (k + 1)(G + 1) h 1                   1            i
       t+1         t+1 ≤        γ (t − k) + t + G + 1
                                                                 +
                                                           k + 1 γt + t + 1 + (k + 1)G
                                                                                             .
      µk+1 (1 − µk+1 )
Without further ado, using k ≤ t and simplifying the equations complete the proof:
                           µt+1
                            k+1 − µk
                                    t+1
                                               1       2 + γ + γ −1 + G
                          t+1        t+1 ≤ k + 1 + γ (t − k) + t + 1 .
                         µk+1 (1 − µk+1 )



                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4     OTHER STATEMENTS

Proposition E.10. Suppose the distribution P over p is G-decaying according to Definition 4.1. This
guarantees
                                                         1
                                       µ := E[p] ≥ µ :=     ,
                                                       2+G
                                                         2µ
                                 σ 2 := Var[p] ≥ σ 2 :=       − µ2 .
                                                        3+G
            dµ             2
Note that dG < 0 and ∂σ
                     ∂G < 0. The above inequalities are tight for P = Beta(1, 1 + G).

Proof. Using G-decaying property of P and integrating by parts, we obtain
                     Z 1
                                        1 1
                                          Z
                                                        dP
                µ=       p P(p) dp ≥ −         (1 − p)p     dp
                      0                 G   0           dp
                                        1                1    1   d(1 − p)p
                                   = − (1 − p)pP(p) + E
                                        G                0    G        dp
                                      1 − 2µ
                                   =          .
                                        G
                                       1
Rearranging the terms proves µ ≥ µ := 2+G .
Similarly, using the G-decaying property of P and integrating by parts again, we have
                              Z 1
                                                  1 1
                                                    Z
                                                                  dP
         σ 2 + µ2 = E[p2 ] =      p2 P(p) dp ≥ −       (1 − p)p2      dp
                               0                  G  0            dp
                                                  1                1    1   d(1 − p)p2
                                             = − (1 − p)p2 P(p) + E
                                                  G                0    G         dp
                                                2µ − 3E[p2 ]
                                             =               .
                                                     G
Rearranging the terms, we obtain
                                                    2µ
                                         E[p2 ] ≥       .
                                                  3+G
                           2µ
This implies σ 2 ≥ σ 2 := 3+G  − µ2 .
Proposition E.11. The following notions of utility fit into our definition of (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying utilities:
 1. If the treatment is fully effective, the utility function is (1, 1)-decaying.
 2. If the treatment succeeds with probability c and otherwise fails the individual, as in the case of a
    risky medical procedure, the utility function is (c, c)-decaying.
 3. If the treatment succeeds with probability α and otherwise has no effect, the utility function is
    (α, 1)-decaying.
 4. If the treatment reduced   failure probability from p to p/γ for γ > 1, the utility function is
     (1 − γ −1 )T −t , 1 -decaying.



Proof. The proof follows by plugging ut (p) of each case into Definition 4.4:
 1. In case of fully effective treatments, ut (p) = 1 − (1 − p)T −t . The decrease in utility over time is
                                         ut (p) − ut+1 (p) (1 − p) = p .
      Therefore, λ1 ≤ 1. The increase in utility with p is
                                     (ut )′ (p)
                           (1 − p)              + ut (p) = (1 − p)T −t + ut (p) = 1 .
                                     (ut )′ (0)
      So, λ2 ≥ 1. Putting these together, ut (p) is (1, 1)-decaying.


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 2. When treatment succeeds with probability c and fails otherwise, ut (p) = c − (1 − p)T −t . The
    decrease in utility over time is
                                       ut (p) − ut+1 (p) (1 − p) = c p .
    Therefore, λ1 ≤ c. The increase in utility with p is
                                    (ut )′ (p)
                          (1 − p)              + ut (p) = (1 − p)T −t + ut (p) = c .
                                    (ut )′ (0)

    Hence, λ2 ≥ c. Putting these together, ut (p) is (c, c)-decaying.
 3. When treatment succeeds with probability α and has no effect otherwise, ut (p) = α + (1 −
    α)(1 − p)T −t − (1 − p)T −t = α − α (1 − p)T −t . The decrease in utility over time is

                            ut (p) − ut+1 (p) (1 − p) = α − α (1 − p) = α p .
    So, λ1 ≤ α. The increase in utility with p is bounded by
                     (ut )′ (p)
           (1 − p)              + ut (p) = (1 − p)T −t + ut (p) = (1 − α)(1 − p)T −t + α ≤ 1 .
                     (ut )′ (0)

    Hence, λ2 ≥ 1. Putting these together, ut (p) is (α, 1)-decaying.
 4. In case treatment reduces p to p/γ, we have ut (p) = (1 − p/γ)T −t − (1 − p)T −t . The decrease
    in utility over time is bounded by

              ut (p) − ut+1 (p) (1 − p) = (1 − p/γ)T −t − (1 − p)(1 − p/γ)T −t−1
                                          = (1 − p/γ)T −t−1 (1 − 1/γ) p ≥ (1 − 1/γ)T −t p .

    Hence, λ1 ≤ (1 − γ −1 )T −t . The increase in utility with p is bounded by

                     (ut )′ (p)
             (1 − p)             + ut (p)
                     (ut )′ (0)
                         (1 − p)T −t−1 − γ1 (1 − p/γ)T −t−1
            = (1 − p)                                         + (1 − p/γ)T −t − (1 − p)T −t
                                         1 − 1/γ
                            T −t
                1
                                 − (1 − p/γ)T −t−1 1/γ − p/γ − (1 − 1/γ)(1 − p/γ)

                γ (1 − p)
            =
                                                   1 − 1/γ
                1           T −t    1           T −t
                γ (1 −  p)       −  γ (1 − p/γ)
            =                                        + (1 − p/γ)T −t−1 ≤ 1 .
                               1 − 1/γ

    So, λ2 ≥ 1. Putting these together, ut (p) is (1 − γ −1 )T −t , 1 -decaying.


Lemma E.12. Consider the observation model o ∼ Ber(p̃), where p̃(p) = 1 − (1 − p)γ and γ > 1.
Suppose the initial distribution P 1 is non-increasing. Let lt be the smallest yit such that individual i
would be treated at t given a budget of B to be spent at t. We have
                                                             N
                                         lt ≤ (γ + 1) · ln      .
                                                             B

Proof. For notational brevity, let k = lt . Define the complementary cumulative distribution function
(CCDF) of a binomial random variable by
                                            t
                                            X  t k′              ′
                               b(k, t) :=        ′
                                                   p̃ (1 − p̃)t−k .
                                          ′
                                               k
                                           k =k+1


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that b(·, ·) implicitly depends on p, which we have omitted from the notation for brevity. The
following identity will be proved to be useful:
                 t                                              t−1
 db(k, t)      X        t     ′    k′ −1           t−k′
                                                               X       t                    ′           ′
          =               ′
                             k · p̃       (1 − p̃)        −              ′
                                                                            (t − k ′ ) · p̃k (1 − p̃)t−k −1
    dp̃                 k                                              k
            k′ =k+1                                          k′ =k+1
                            t−1
                            X         t                     ′                ′
          = t · p̃t−1 +                ′
                                           (k ′ − tp̃) · p̃k −1 (1 − p̃)t−k −1
                                     k
                         k′ =k+1
                                t−1                                                   t−1
                                X         t − 1 k′ −1               t−k′ −1
                                                                                      X         t k′             ′
          = t · p̃ t−1
                       +t·                 ′−1
                                                   p̃      (1 − p̃)          −t·                 ′
                                                                                                   p̃ (1 − p̃)t−k −1
                              ′
                                         k                                          ′
                                                                                               k
                                 k =k+1                                               k =k+1

                      t−1       t                                  t
                                     · b(k − 1, t − 1) − p̃t−1 −        b(k, t) − p̃t

             = t · p̃      +
                              1 − p̃                             1 − p̃
                   t
             =            · b(k − 1, t − 1) − b(k, t) .
                 1 − p̃
Intuitively, the above identity relates the derivative of the CCDF with respect to p̃ to its finite difference
across time. The CCDF is also related to the number of individuals with y t > k. Denoting the
number of individuals with y t = k ′ by Nkt ′ , we can write:
                                               t
                                               X
                                                       Nkt ′ = N t · Et [b(k, t)] .
                                             k′ =k+1

Using the two identities presented above, we have
      t−1
      X                     t
                            X
             Nkt−1
                ′  −                Nkt ′ = N t−1 · Et−1 [b(k − 1, t − 1)] − N t · Et [b(k, t)]
     k′ =k                k′ =k+1
                                                                       1                       db(k, t)
                        = N t−1 · Et−1 [b(k, t)] − N t · Et [b(k, t)] + N t−1 · Et−1 [(1 − p̃)          ].
                                                                       t                         dp̃
Now, applying the updating rule P t+1 (p) ∝ P t (p)(1 − p) from Eq. (7), we obtain
             t−1                t
             X                  X                              p            1           1 − p̃   db(k, t)
                     Nkt−1
                        ′  −             Nkt ′ = N t · Et [       b(k, t)] + N t · Et [                   ]
                                                              1−p           t           1−p        dp̃
             k′ =k             k′ =k+1
                                                  1 t t             db(k, t)
                                              ≥     N · E [(1 − p̃)          ].                                (17)
                                                  t                   dp̃
Using integration by parts, we can expand the expectation:
                                                        1
                                                           Z 1
                    db(k, t)                                             d et
       Et [(1 − p̃)            et (p̃)(1 − p̃) · b(k, t) −

                             ]=P                               b(k, t) ·     P (p̃)(1 − p̃) dp̃ .
                      dp̃                               0   0            dp̃
Here, Pe denotes the distribution over p̃. For k < t, the first term above is zero. To bound the second
                            t
                et (p̃) = P (p)                              ′      1−p̃

term, note that P           p̃′ . Then, using the identity p̃ = γ 1−p , we have

                            d et                  1 d                      t et
                                                         P t (p)(1 − p) ≤ − P

                                P (p̃)(1 − p̃) =     ′
                                                                                (p̃) .
                            dp̃                  γ p̃ dp                   γ
We used (P t )′ (p) ≤ 0 to arrive at the above inequality. Plugging this into Eq. (17) and doing a
straightforward calculation, we obtain
                                                 t−1          t
                                             γ   X t−1        X
                                                     Nk ′ ≥     Nkt ′ .
                                            γ+1 ′           ′
                                                     k =k             k =k+1

By repetitively applying such inequalities, we have
                                                          t−k             t
                                               γ  k X t     X
                                                      Nk′ ≥   Nkt ′ .
                                              γ+1   ′       ′
                                                          k =0          k =k


                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since the last individual who is treated at t has y t = k, the right-hand side is lower bounded by B.
The sum in the left-hand side is also bounded by the total number of initial individuals. These yield
the following bound on k:
                                                  ln( N
                                                      B)
                                         k≤                  .
                                               ln(1 + γ −1 )
                   x
Using ln(1 + x) ≥ 1+x completes the proof.

F    M ISSING PROOFS

Proof of Theorem 3.1. Using the step function approximation, the exponential multiplier in Eq. (8)
is only non-zero if                               r
                                   |p̃j − p̃i |     2 ln(1/α)
                                                ≤             .
                                       σ̃ij              t
This implies the following lower bound on ∆Rt :
          s                                                          r               r
                   1            h (1 − p )(1 − p )    |p̃j − p̃i |     2 ln(1/α) i     ln(1/α)
      t                      t          i       j
  ∆R ≥                   · Ei,j             t 2
                                                   −1              ≤               −           .
              4π ln(1/α)             (1 − µ )             σ̃ij              t            4πt2

Suppose p̃−1 (·) is L−1 -Lipschitz continuous. Using this and σ̃ij2
                                                                      ≤ 1/2, we can further bound ∆Rt
by
                                                              q
                                                         L−1     2 ln(1/α)
                 s                                                                  r
           t             1          t
                                      h (1 − p)(1 − p −  1−2ϵ         t    )    i      ln(1/α)
       ∆R ≥                     ·E                                           −1 −
                    4π ln(1/α)                     (1 − µt )2                             4πt2
                                                            q
                                                       L−1    2 ln(1/α)
                                  Vart [p] − (1 − µt ) 1−2ϵ
                 s                                                           r
                         1                                          t          ln(1/α)
              =                 ·                      t 2
                                                                         −              .
                    4π ln(1/α)                  (1 − µ )                         4πt2

The ranking improves over time when ∆Rt < 0. In this case, it is necessary for the lower bound
presented above to be negative as well. This completes the proof with Capprox. = ln(1/α).

Proof of Theorem 4.3. We build on the more general results of Theorem 4.5. First, observe from
Proposition E.11 that the fully effective treatment corresponds to a (1, 1)-decaying utility function.
                                                                         t+1 ′
Define twarm−up := (γ + 1) ln( N   B ). Plugging λ1 = λ2 = 1 and (u         ) (0) = T − t − 1 into
Theorem 4.5, we have
                                                   t − twarm−up
                               T − (t + 1) ≥            twarm−up +1   .                          (18)
                                                1 + C 2t−t warm−up +1


Here, we summarized 2 + γ + γ −1 + G into C. Consider two cases depending on whether t is less
than or larger than tc := (T + twarm−up − 1)/2. When t ≥ tc , we can relax the right-hand side of
Eq. (18) by
                                                t − twarm−up
                                  T − (t + 1) ≥               .
                                                  1 + C k+1
                                                         T
Simplifying this bound through a straightforward calculation, we get
                                        T + (twarm−up + 1)(C + 1)
                              t+1≤
                                          2 + (twarm−up + 1) C
                                                             T
                                        T   (twarm−up + 1)( C2 + 1)
                                    =     +
                                        2    2 + (twarm−up + 1) C
                                                                T
                                        T                  1 C
                                    ≤     + (twarm−up + 1)( + ) .
                                        2                  2 4
Therefore, we can conclude, either t < tc or the above bound should hold. Since the above bound is
larger than tc , this is the looser bound. Setting this to t∗ completes the proof.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Theorem 4.5. We use the following shorthands and notation throughout the proof. Let
Nkt := |Atk | where Atk is the    set of active   individuals at t with y t = k. In the limit of many
                             t t k
individuals, Nk = N · E [ k p̃ (1 − p̃) ]. Denote the posterior over p given y t = k by Pkt . The
                 t      t                    t−k

Bayes’ rule implies Pkt (p) ∝ P t (p) p̃k (1 − p̃)t−k . Denote the expectation over individuals in Atk
by Etk [·]. In the limit of many individuals, Etk [·] = Ep∼Pkt ,o∼Ber(p̃) [·]. We use the shorthand Ukt to
denote Etk [ut (p)] and µtk to denote Etk [p] and s̃tk to denote Etk [(1 − p)p̃].
Assuming the prior over p has no point mass, Proposition E.4 implies ranking individuals in descend-
ing order of y t is optimal. Therefore, given a budget of B, the optimal planner sorts individuals in
descending order of y t and allocates to the top B. Let lt be the lowest y t of an individual that has
received the allocation.
Suppose at time t, we have lt = k. Then B > Ntt implies k < t. We argue that postponing the
allocation from time t to time t + 1 can only increase overall utility if lt+1 is either k or k + 1:
 • We first rule out lt+1 > k + 1. If lt+1 > k + 1, only individuals with y t+1 > k + 1 can be
   treated. This will be a subset of the individuals that could be treated at t. In particular, individuals
   with y t = k will not be eligible at t + 1. Therefore, the whole budget has not been spent which
   violates the optimality of allocation at t + 1.
 • We next rule out lt+1 < k. The key observation is Lemma E.6, which states that the expected
   utility of an individual with y t = k who fails at the next step is higher than that of an individual
   with y t+1 = k + 1. In other words, failing provides a stronger signal than o regarding the
   individual’s likelihood of failure. Formally, when lt+1 < k, everyone who was eligible for
   treatment at time t and survived to t + 1 remains eligible. The individuals who failed during this
   transition are replaced by new individuals with y t+1 ≤ k + 1. In the best case, the expected utility
                                     t+1
   from each new individual is Uk+1      . However, Lemma E.6 suggests that the expected utility of
                                                      t+1
   those who failed and were replaced is at least Uk+1    . Therefore, postponing allocation cannot be
   justified.
In the remainder of the proof, we derive an upper bound on ∆W t := W t+1 − W t when lt+1
is either k or k + 1. We will then further simplify this bound to obtain sufficient conditions for
∆W t ≤ 0.
 • We first examine the case where lt+1 = k. Suppose at time t, we are able to treat ∆t individuals
   from Atk . This number changes to ∆t+1 at time t + 1. The change in total utility after postponing
   allocation for one step can be written as
                                       t+1
                                       X                           t
                                                                   X
     ∆W t = W t+1 − W t = ∆t+1 Ukt+1 +     Nkt+1
                                              ′  U t+1
                                                   k′   −  ∆ t t
                                                              Uk +   Nkt ′ Ukt ′ .
                                                   k′ =k+1                                     k′ =k+1

   From Atk , a ratio of µtk fail and a ratio of s̃tk proceed to the next step while revealing one more
   positive observation. This allows us to relate Nkt+1  ′  with Nkt ′ and Nkt ′ −1 for k ′ ≥ 1:

                              Nkt+1
                                 ′  = Nkt ′ (1 − µtk′ − s̃tk′ ) + Nkt ′ −1 s̃tk′ −1 .                              (19)
   Plugging this into W t+1 , we obtain
                                    t
                                    X                                           t+1
                                                                                X
         W t+1 = ∆t+1 Ukt+1 +               Nkt ′ (1 − µtk′ − s̃tk′ )Ukt+1
                                                                        ′  +             Nkt ′ −1 s̃tk′ −1 Ukt+1
                                                                                                              ′

                                  k′ =k+1                                      k′ =k+1
                                                     t
                                                     X
                = ∆t+1 Ukt+1 + Nkt s̃tk Uk+1
                                         t+1
                                                             Nkt ′ (1 − µtk′ − s̃tk′ )Ukt+1 + s̃tk′ Ukt+1

                                             +                                           ′             ′ +1 .

                                                   k′ =k+1

   The summand above can be significantly simplified. Using Lemma E.7 with f = ut+1 , we have
                      (1 − µtk′ − s̃tk′ )Ukt+1
                                            ′  + s̃tk′ Ukt+1      t
                                                          ′ +1 = Ek ′ [(1 − p) · u
                                                                                  t+1
                                                                                      (p)] .
   Since the utility is (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying, we can upper bound the above by
                      Etk′ [(1 − p) · ut+1 (p)] ≤ Etk′ [ut (p) − λ1 p] = Ukt ′ − λ1 µtk′ .                         (20)


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Plugging this into W t+1 allows us to upper bound ∆W t :
                                                                                  t
                                                                                  X
                  ∆W t ≤ ∆t+1 Ukt+1 − ∆t Ukt + Nkt s̃tk Uk+1
                                                         t+1
                                                             − λ1                        Nkt ′ µtk′ .              (21)
                                                                               k′ =k+1

   Spending a fixed budget requires
                                                t
                                                X                    t+1
                                                                     X
                             ∆t+1 = ∆t +                Nkt ′ −             Nkt+1
                                                                               ′  .
                                              k′ =k+1             k′ =k+1

   Using Eq. (19) and performing a straightforward calculation, we can simplify ∆t+1 as
                                                             t
                                                             X
                               ∆t+1 = ∆t − Nkt s̃tk +                  Nkt ′ µtk′ .                                (22)
                                                            k′ =k+1

   Plugging this into Eq. (21), we obtain
                                                                           t
                                                                           X
      ∆W t ≤ −∆t (Ukt − Ukt+1 ) + Nkt s̃tk (Uk+1
                                             t+1
                                                 − Ukt+1 ) −                      Nkt ′ µtk′ (λ1 − Ukt+1 ) .

                                                                                                                   (23)
                                                                        k=k+1

                                                                                                            P t+1 (p)
  For a utility function non-increasing in time, we have Ukt+1 ≤ Et+1     t
                                                                      k [u (p)]. Since Pkt (p) ∝
                                                                                         k


  (1 − p)(1 − p̃) is continuous and decreasing in p, for a utility function non-decreasing in p,
  Lemma E.1 implies Et+1     t          t t          t
                        k [u (p)] ≤ Ek [u (p)] = Uk . Therefore, we can conclude the upper bound
  of Eq. (23) is decreasing in ∆ . Thus, we can further upper bound ∆W t by finding an upper
                                 t

  bound on ∆t . Since lt+1 = k, it is necessary to have ∆t+1 ≥ 0. Using Eq. (22), this will impose
  an upper bound on ∆t :
                                                    X t
                                   ∆t ≥ Nkt s̃tk −       Nkt ′ µtk′ .
                                                        k′ =k+1
   Plugging this into Eq. (23), we have
                                                            t
                                                            X
                                       t+1
                     ∆W t ≤ Nkt s̃tk (Uk+1 − Ukt ) −                 Nkt ′ µtk′ (λ1 − Ukt ) .

                                                                                                                   (24)
                                                           k=k+1


 • We next consider the case of lt+1 = k + 1. We follow steps similar to those in the previous case.
   The change in total utility after postponing allocation for one step is
                                                          t+1
                                                          X
                                             t+1    t+1
               ∆W t = W t+1 − W t = (∆t+1 − Nk+1 ) Uk+1 +     Nkt+1
                                                                 ′  Ukt+1
                                                                       ′

                                                                             k′ =k+1
                                                         t
                                                         X
                                      − ∆t Ukt +                  Nkt ′ Ukt ′ .
                                                      k′ =k+1

   Plugging Nkt+1
               ′  expansion from Eq. (19) into W t+1 , we obtain
                                          t
                                          X                                              t+1
                                                                                         X
                    t+1    t+1
   W t+1 = (∆t+1 − Nk+1 ) Uk+1 +                Nkt ′ (1 − µtk′ − s̃tk′ )Ukt+1
                                                                            ′  +                Nkt ′ −1 s̃tk′ −1 Ukt+1
                                                                                                                     ′

                                      k′ =k+1                                         k′ =k+1
                                                          t
                                                          X
                    t+1    t+1             t+1
         = (∆t+1 − Nk+1        + Nkt s̃tk Uk+1                     Nkt ′ (1 − µtk′ − s̃tk′ )Ukt+1 + s̃tk′ Ukt+1

                        ) Uk+1                 +                                               ′             ′ +1 .

                                                         k′ =k+1

   As we showed in the previous case, the summand above can be bounded by Ukt ′ − λ1 µtk′ . Plugging
   this into W t+1 allows us to upper bound ∆W t :
                                                                                         t
                                                                                         X
                             t+1    t+1                      t+1
             ∆W t ≤ (∆t+1 − Nk+1 ) Uk+1 − ∆t Ukt + Nkt s̃tk Uk+1 − λ1                            Nkt ′ µtk′ .      (25)
                                                                                      k′ =k+1


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Spending a fixed budget requires
                                                            t+1
                                                            X                    t
                                                                                 X
                                           t+1
                             ∆t = (∆t+1 − Nk+1 )+                  Nkt+1
                                                                      ′  −              Nkt ′ .
                                                         k′ =k+1             k′ =k+1

   Using Eq. (19) and performing a straightforward calculation, we can simplify ∆t+1 as
                                                                         t
                                                                         X
                                             t+1
                               ∆t = (∆t+1 − Nk+1 ) + Nkt s̃tk −                  Nkt ′ µtk′ .
                                                                       k′ =k+1
   Plugging this into Eq. (25), we obtain
                                                                                      t
                                                                                      X
          t       t+1                 t+1                t+1
                      − ∆t+1 )(Ukt − Uk+1 ) + Nkt s̃tk (Uk+1 − Ukt ) −                          Nkt ′ µtk′ (λ1 − Ukt ) .

     ∆W       ≤ (Nk+1
                                                                                    k=k+1
                                                        t+1
   We argue postponing allocation is only justified if Uk+1 > Ukt . Otherwise, the eligible individuals
                    t
   with the lowest y at the previous step already have higher expected utility than the newly
   eligible individuals at t + 1. This implies that the above upper bound is increasing in ∆t+1 . The
                                                      t+1
   largest ∆t+1 happens when ∆t+1 approaches Nk+1         . The reader can already verify this will lead
   to the same bound as the previous case (Eq. (24)).
Before proceeding to analyze the upper bound of Eq. (24), we make one more observation. Recall
that in Eq. (20) we used (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying property of the utility function. However, Lemma E.6
implies another complementary bound of this quantity:
                 Etk′ [(1 − p) · ut+1 (p)] ≤ Ukt ′ − Etk′ [p · ut+1 (p)] ≤ Ukt ′ − Ukt+1    t
                                                                                      ′ +1 µk ′ .

Comparing this with the bound in Eq. (20), we observe that any result involving λ1 can always be
                                 t+1
updated by substituting λ1 with Uk+1 . Such an update to Eq. (24) results in
                                                    t
                                                    X
                                                                          t+1
                              ∆W t ≤ (Nkt s̃tk −            Nkt ′ µtk′ )(Uk+1 − Ukt ) .
                                                   k=k+1
                                             t+1
Recall that deferring allocation requires Uk+1    > Ukt . The above equation further implies that
  t t
         Pt          t t
Nk s̃k ≥ k=k+1 Nk′ µk′ is also necessary. Now, looking back at Eq. (24), we can conclude that
under these necessary conditions, the upper bound is decreasing in Ukt . Hence, decreasing Ukt to Ukt+1
can only increase the bound:
                                                               t
                                                               X
                                          t+1
                         t
                             ≤ Nkt s̃tk (Uk+1 − Ukt+1 ) −            Nkt ′ µtk′ (λ1 − Ukt+1 ) .

                   ∆W                                                                                                (26)
                                                             k=k+1
We will use this inequality as a basis for the remainder of the proof.
The following identity will be useful:

                      t t       t
                     Nk s̃k =     N t · Et [(1 − p)p̃ · p̃k (1 − p̃)t−k ]
                                k

                                t                                         k + 1   t+1
                            =     N t+1 · Et+1 [p̃k+1 (1 − p̃)t−k ] =            N     .             (27)
                                k                                          t + 1 k+1
                                                              1−p

Here, we used the updating rule P t+1 (p) = P t (p) 1−µ          t    from Eq. (7). Eq. (27) implies that
individuals with y t = k who survive to the next step while showing one more positive observation,
                    t+1                                             t+1
form k+1                                                                               t
        t+1 of Nk+1 . So we can conclude that the rest of Nk+1 comes from Nk+1 . Therefore, we
have
                                           t       t − k   t+1
                                        Nk+1   ≥             N      .                                (28)
                                                   t + 1 k+1
Plugging this and Eq. (27) into Eq. (26), we obtain
                            t+1 k + 1
                                       h t+1                    t−k  t                     i
               ∆W t ≤ Nk+1              (Uk+1 − Ukt+1 ) −                µk+1 (λ1 − Ukt+1 ) .        (29)
                                t+1                             k+1
In the rest of the proof, we consider two cases where the utility function is either (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying
or just λ1 -decaying.


                                                       32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             t+1
The case of (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying utility. The difference (Uk+1     − Ukt+1 ) in Eq. (29) captures the
effect of one more observation on the expected utility. For a (λ1 , λ2 )-decaying utility, Lemma E.8
upper bounds this effect by
                                                                         µt+1    t+1
                                                                          k+1 − µk
                      t+1
                     Uk+1 − Ukt+1 ≤ (ut+1 )′ (0) · (λ2 − Ukt+1 ) ·                     .
                                                                            1 − µt+1
                                                                                 k

Here, we used (ut+1 )′ (0) in place of the Lipschitz constant of ut+1 in the lemma because the utility
function is concave. Plugging this into Eq. (29) and using the assumption that λ1 ≥ λ2 , we obtain
                                                                     t+1
                              h               λ1 t − k   µtk+1 (1 − µk ) i
                      ∆W t ≤ C (ut+1 )′ (0) −                              .
                                              λ2 k + 1 µt+1 k+1 − µk
                                                                    t+1


Here, we summarized all the terms multiplying before the bracket as a constant C, since these terms
do not affect the sign of ∆W t . It is straightforward to verify µtk+1 ≥ µt+1      t+1
                                                                          k+1 and µk   ≤ µt+1
                                                                                          k+1 . Then,
for γ > 1, Lemma E.9 yields
                            h                   λ1                t−k              i
                  ∆W t ≤ C (ut+1 )′ (0) −                                     k+1
                                                                                     .           (30)
                                                λ2 1 + (2 + γ + γ −1 + G) 2t−k+1
The upper bound of Eq. (30) is increasing in k. Therefore, the last missing piece of the proof is an
upper bound on k. Lemma E.12 provides such an upper bound and completes this part of the proof.

The case of λ1 -decaying utility. As we discussed above, decreasing Ukt in Eq. (24) can only
increase the bound. Setting Ukt then gives
                                                            t
                                                            X
                                   t               t+1
                                       ≤ Nkt s̃tk Uk+1             Nkt ′ µtk′ λ1 .

                              ∆W                       −
                                                           k=k+1

Plugging Eq. (28) into this, we obtain
                                 t+1         k + 1  h t+1   t−k  t     i
                         ∆W t ≤ Nk+1                 Uk+1 −     µk+1 λ1 .                              (31)
                                             t+1            k+1
Concavity of the utility function and its zero value at p = 0 imply
                                         t+1
                                        Uk+1 ≤ (ut+1 )′ (0) · µt+1
                                                               k+1 .

Plugging this into Eq. (31), we have
                                        h               t−k  i
                                ∆W t ≤ C (ut+1 )′ (0) −     λ1 ,
                                                        k+1
where all the factors outside of the brackets are summarized in C. Using the upper bound on k from
Lemma E.12 completes this part of the proof.

Extending to all future times. As the final remark of the proof, note that the upper bounds provided
in all cases are shrinking with t. Therefore, if ∆W t ≤ 0, then postponing allocation to any future
time cannot be justified.

Proof of Theorem 5.1. Consider N individuals initially at time t = 1. Denote the subset of At
with y t = k by Atk . Define ntk := |Atk |/N . Denote the set of individuals treated at t by I t . Excluding
I t from Atk , denote the remaining by Ātk := At \ I t , and define n̄tk := |Ātk |/N . In the limit of
N → ∞, we can treat ntk and n̄tk as continuous variables taking any value in [0, 1].
Step 1. The following property of the problem dynamics allows us to infer whether Atk is empty or
not based on the previous step.
Lemma F.1. Defining n̄t−1 = 0, at any time t and for any k, we have
                                nt+1
                                 k   > 0 ⇐⇒ n̄tk > 0 or n̄tk−1 > 0 .

See proof on page 35.


                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 2. Consider two active individuals i and j at time t. If yit > yjt , for any utility function non-
decreasing in p, Lemma E.5 implies treating i yields more utility than j in expectation. Therefore,
the optimal allocation at any point should not target individuals with lower y t while there are active
individuals with a higher y t .
Step 3. We show that, except for the first time step, at each time t on the optimal path, the treated
individuals at t should have similar values of y t .
Lemma F.2. For At ̸= ∅ and t ≥ 2 on the optimal path, for any i, j ∈ I t , we should have yit = yjt =
max {i′ | i′ ∈ At }.

See proof on page 35.
Step 4. When an individual i with yit = k ≥ 1 is treated at t, not only is Atk non-empty, but Atk−1 is
also non-empty.
Lemma F.3. For k ≥ 1, if there exists i ∈ I t on the optimal path such that yit = k, then ntk−1 > 0.

See proof on page 35.
Step 5. Using the structure imposed on the optimal solution in the previous steps, we next restrict
I t+1 based on I t .
Lemma F.4. Suppose At ̸= ∅ and let k = max{yit | i ∈ At }. On the optimal path,
 • If I t = Atk , either I t+1 ⊆ At+1
                                  k   or I t+1 = At+1
                                                  k+1 = ∅.

 • If I t ⊂ Atk , either I t+1 ⊆ At+1
                                  k+1 or I
                                           t+1
                                               = At+1
                                                  k+2 = ∅.


See proof on page 35.
Step 6. Except for one time step, at every t on the optimal path, either I t = ∅ or I t treats everyone
with y t ≥ k for some k. If there were two time steps t and t′ violating this, because of the linearity
                                          ′
of the expected utility in |I t | and |I t |, optimally, one would become zero or treat everyone above a
cutoff. This and Lemma F.4 complete the proof.



Proof of Lemma 5.2. We first iterate over two of the three unspecified parameters, t̂ and q(·) in
Theorem 5.1. There are T possibilities for t̂. A valid sequence q(·) can then be determined by
specifying q(1) and a binary sequence of length T − 1. The tth binary value in this sequence
determines whether q(t + 1) − q(t) will be: 0 or 1 if t ̸= t̂, or 1 or 2 if t = t̂. Since the maximum y t
at each time t is t, it is straightforward to verify that for any sequence that starts with q(1) > 2, there
exists another sequence with q(1) ≤ 2 that treats similar individuals. Therefore, there are effectively
only three choices for q(1). Together, iterating over these parameters requires 3 T · 2T −1 steps.
Given t̂ and a valid sequence q(·), there remains to determine the allocation at t̂ based on the available
budget. Let ρ denote the proportion of At̂q(t̂) who are not treated. One can verify that for a fixed t̂
and q(·), both the spending and the expected total utility are linear in ρ. Therefore, to find ρ, we only
need to simulate an allocation for two distinct values of ρ. We then use these two points to identify
the linear relationships and determine the optimal ρ under the budget constraint. In Algorithm 1, we
perform this by simulating the trajectories for ρ = 0 and ρ = 1, which takes O(T 2 ) operations. So,
overall, we require O(T 3 · 2T −1 ) operations to iterate over all rollouts.

Proof of Theorem 5.3. While iterating the search space through Lemma 5.2, we can store the
number of individuals from Atk treated at each t and k. Then there remains to calculate Ukt :=
Ep∼P t (·|yt =k) [ut (p)]. Assuming the expectation under posterior distribution can be calculated ef-
ficiently in constant steps, we can calculate the total utility of an instance in O(T 2 ). Since this is
happening in the same loop of iteration as Lemma 5.2, it does not add to the asymptotic complexity
of the algorithm.


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma F.1. For k ≥ 1, At+1 k   will consist of those in Ātk who survive and have ot+1 = 0,
or those in Āk−1 who survive and have ot+1 = 1:
              t


                    nt+1  = n̄tk Etk (1 − p)(1 − p̃) + n̄tk−1 Etk−1 (1 − p) p̃ .

                     k

Here, Etk denotes expectation with respect to p ∼ Pkt = P t (· | y t = k). We implicitly used the fact
that the targeting cannot distinguish people with the same y t . The same update rule works for k = 0
if we set n̄t−1 = 0. One can also verify that since the prior over p has no point mass, the expectations
above are non-zero. This completes the proof.

Proof of Lemma F.2. The proof is by contradiction with optimality and has multiple steps:
 • Let k = max {yit | i ∈ At }. Since ntk+1 = 0, Lemma F.1 requires n̄t−1      t−1
                                                                       k+1 = n̄k   = 0. On the
                       t                                t−1    t−1
   other hand, when nk > 0, Lemma F.1 requires either n̄k or n̄k−1 to be non-zero. Since we just
   argued n̄t−1
            k   = 0, it is required to have n̄t−1
                                              k−1 > 0.

 • Since n̄t−1                               t
           k−1 > 0, Lemma F.1 implies nk−1 > 0. Then Step 2 requires that if I contains
                                                                                       t
                               t                                          t           t
   individuals with different y , there should be two individuals i, j ∈ I such that yi = k and
   yjt = k − 1.

 • Consider the following tie-breaking when treating individuals with a similar y t : Assign a random
   priority value zi1 ∈ [0, 1) to each individual i in the initial pool. At time t, update the priority
   value by zit = zit−1 + oti 2t−1 . If any two individuals are at a tie to receive the treatment, choose
   the one with the lowest priority value. This tie-breaking does not change the optimality of an
   allocation rule.
 • So far we showed n̄t−1                                                     t−1
                           k−1 > 0, i.e., there exist some individuals in Ak−1 left untreated at t − 1, but
                         t
   there exists j ∈ Ak−1 who is treated at t. We argue this is suboptimal as the budget to treat j
   could have been spent earlier to treat those in At−1   k−1 , yielding higher utility. To see this, consider a
   counterfactual allocation rule that treats one more individual from At−1     k−1 at t − 1, to be referred to
   as individual j ′ . This individual has either failed or made it to t. If failed, Lemma E.6 implies
   that the counterfactual treatment could be more effective. If j ′ is active at t, she will either have
   yjt ′ = k or yjt ′ = k − 1. If yjt ′ = k, then she is treated with others in Atk . If yjt ′ = k − 1, still j ′ is
   treated. This is because j ′ maintains the lowest priority value among Atk−1 by the construction of
   the priority values. Since j ′ is treated in any case if she makes it to t, she could be treated earlier
   at t − 1. This could yield a higher or similar utility as ut is non-increasing in t. This contradiction
   shows yit = yjt = k.



Proof of Lemma F.3. The proof is obvious for t = 1 since k can only be 1 and unless the budget is
excessively large to treat everyone, we have n10 > 0. For t ≥ 2, Lemma F.2 requires ntk > 0 and
ntk+1 = 0. Then Lemma F.1 implies n̄t−1
                                      k   = 0 and n̄t−1          t
                                                    k−1 > 0, so nk−1 > 0.


Proof of Lemma F.4. We first prove the first part the lemma. If I t = Atk , there are two possibilities
for k. If k = 0, then Ātk = ∅ and Step 2 implies no one is left untreated at t. So, I t+1 = At+1
                                                                                               k+1 =
At+1 = ∅. If k ≥ 1, then Lemma F.3 implies ntk−1 > 0. Then Ikt = Atk implies n̄tk−1 > 0 and
n̄tk = 0. Applying Lemma F.1 gives nt+1k    > 0 and nt+1
                                                      k+1 = 0. Therefore, using Lemma F.2, treated
                                         t+1
individuals at t + 1 should be among Ak or no one will be treated.
We next prove the second part of the lemma. If I t ⊂ Atk , we have n̄tk > 0 and ntk+1 = n̄tk+1 = 0.
Then Lemma F.1 implies nt+1             t+1
                          k+1 > 0 and nk+2 = 0. Therefore, using Lemma F.2, treated individuals
                           t+1
at t + 1 should be among Ak+1 or no one will be treated.


                                                        35
