Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I2VC ONTROL -C AMERA : P RECISE V IDEO C AMERA
C ONTROL WITH A DJUSTABLE M OTION S TRENGTH
       Wanquan Feng1          Jiawei Liu1 Pengqi Tu1 Tianhao Qi1,2 Mingzhen Sun1,3
               Tianxiang Ma1 Songtao Zhao1 Siyu Zhou1 Qian He1
        1
          ByteDance China 2 University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
               3
                 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)



                                             A BSTRACT
         Video generation technologies are developing rapidly and have broad potential
         applications. Among these technologies, camera control is crucial for generating
         professional-quality videos that accurately meet user expectations. However, ex-
         isting camera control methods still suffer from several limitations, including con-
         trol precision and the neglect of the control for subject motion dynamics. In this
         work, we propose I2VControl-Camera, a novel camera control method that sig-
         nificantly enhances controllability while providing adjustability over the strength
         of subject motion. To improve control precision, we employ point trajectory in
         the camera coordinate system instead of only extrinsic matrix information as our
         control signal. To accurately control and adjust the strength of subject motion,
         we explicitly model the higher-order components of the video trajectory expan-
         sion, not merely the linear terms, and design an operator that effectively repre-
         sents the motion strength. We use an adapter architecture that is independent of
         the base model structure. Experiments on static and dynamic scenes show that
         our framework outperformances previous methods both quantitatively and quali-
         tatively. Project page: https://wanquanf.github.io/I2VControlCamera.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Video generation technologies are explored to synthesize dynamic and coherent visual content, con-
ditioned on various modalities including text (Blattmann et al., 2023c; Wang et al., 2024a; Gupta
et al., 2023) and images (Blattmann et al., 2023b; Feng et al., 2024). Video generation has broad
application potential across various fields, such as entertainment, social media, and film production.
Motion controllability is crucial for ensuring that generated videos accurately meet user expecta-
tions, with camera control being one of the most important aspects. Camera control is the process
of adjusting the position, angle, and motion of a camera, resulting in changes to the composition,
perspective, and dynamic effects of a video. This technique is essential for generating professional-
quality videos, as it influences the attention of viewers and enhances the expressiveness of scenes.
Although precise camera control is crucial for producing high-quality videos, existing methods still
face challenges. The first challenge pertains to the precision and stability of control. The lack of pre-
cision would result in an inaccurate reflection of the user control intention, significantly degrading
user satisfaction. The second challenge is ensuring the natural dynamics of the subjects themselves,
independent of camera movements. Similar to the challenges in multi-view (Mildenhall et al., 2020;
Kerbl et al., 2023) and 3D geometric algorithms (Wang et al., 2021), where static scenes are much
easier to handle than dynamic ones (Pumarola et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2022), generating plausible
dynamics in videos proves to be more complex than managing static elements.
While AnimateDiff (Guo et al., 2024b) utilizes LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) strategy for controlling cam-
era movements, the motion-LoRAs are confined to a limited set of fixed movement modes, lacking
flexibility, and it only allows for coarse control, thus failing to provide precise scale adjustments.
A direct and intuitive approach allowing for arbitrary camera movements is embedding the camera
pose matrix, as in MotionCtrl (Wang et al., 2023). However, this method results in sparse input sig-
nals that heavily rely on the training set distribution, which leads to poor generalization capability.
Consequently, it may inadequately respond to less common camera parameters within the training


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      ……
              Dolly out


       Tilt down

         ……

       Rotate clockwise

         ……

       Pan right + Move left
               ⇔


             Surround


Figure 1: We propose I2VControl-Camera, a novel camera control method for image-to-video
generation, offering high control precision and adjustable motion strength.
dataset, and thus hinders precise control over the motion’s amplitude. Although CameraCtrl (He
et al., 2024) attempts to mitigate this sparsity issue by employing Plücker embeddings (Sitzmann
et al., 2021), this parameterization lacks information of the input image, and it actually does not
offer any additional information compared to the camera matrix used in MotionCtrl. Another nat-
ural strategy is novel view synthesis, which uses 3D implicit representations that can be rendered
from arbitrary views, such as Cat3D (Gao* et al., 2024). Unfortunately, this strategy cannot support
subject motion well, thus undermining the core goal of creating dynamic video content.
In this paper, we propose I2VControl-Camera, a camera control method (some examples shown
in Fig. 1) to surmount these prevalent issues in image-to-video generation, enhancing the control
precision and adding control over the dynamic strength of subject motion in video output. To en-
sure control precision and stability, we use point trajectories in the camera coordinate system as
our control signals, instead of extrinsic matrix. From the point trajectory function, we extract the
linear term to serve as a proxy for camera control, ensuring high precision, stability and user friend-
liness. To control the motion strength, we further represent object motions with higher-order terms
in the trajectory function and explicitly model the degree of dynamics. Specifically, we employ the
derivative of the high-order terms to compute the motion speed of each point and integrate them
in the image domain to obtain the entire motion strength as the control input of the network. This
approach allows us to accurately gauge and adjust the amplitude of subject motion dynamics.
We construct training data from regular RGB videos registering 3D tracking information and motion
mask for them. Our approach features an adapter architecture that remains agnostic to the under-
lying base model structure. Experimentally, we conduct experiments in both static and dynamic
scenes. For static scenes, we can set the motion strength to zero, resulting in significantly higher
precision than previous methods. In dynamic scenes, we can configure a higher motion strength,
which allows for both high control precision and vivid subject motion. Our approach outperforms
previous methods both quantitatively and qualitatively. In summary, our contributions include:

       • We explicitly model decoupled motion representations: 3D rigid point trajectories and mo-
         tion strength for camera and subject motion controls.
       • We propose a data pipeline to construct training control signals from RGB videos.
       • For both static and dynamic scenes, our method outperformances previous methods both
         quantitatively and qualitatively.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   T EXT TO V IDEO S YNTHESIS

Text-to-video generation requires models to synthesize realistic videos based on given textual de-
scriptions. Recent progress in diffusion models has boosted the quality of T2V generation to an


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


unprecedented degree, achieving both impressive visual quality and surprising text-video consis-
tency (Brooks et al., 2024; Blattmann et al., 2023b). Image Video (Ho et al., 2022) cascaded mul-
tiple video generation and super-resolution diffusion models to generate long and high-resolution
videos from textual descriptions. Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2022) extended a diffusion-based
T2I model to T2V in a spatiotemporal factorized manner. Based on the successful experiences of
image generation methods, several works (Wang et al., 2024a; Girdhar et al., 2023; Mei & Patel,
2023) performed T2V by first generating images from texts and then synthesizing videos based on
images. EMU VIDEO (Girdhar et al., 2023) introduced adjusted noise schedules and a multi-stage
training strategy for high-quality video generation. To reduce the computational complexity of video
generation, other works (Blattmann et al., 2023c; He et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023; Gupta et al., 2023)
explored different designs of video auto-encoders, which can map a high-dimensional video into a
low-dimensional latent space. LVDM (He et al., 2022) compressed videos from both the spatial and
temporal dimensions, obtaining a low-dimensional 3D latent for each video. In addition, Lumiere
(Bar-Tal et al., 2024) and Latte (Ma et al., 2024) explored different 3D model structures. Recently,
Sora (Brooks et al., 2024) showed the power of DiT (Peebles & Xie, 2022) in T2V task.

2.2   I MAGE TO V IDEO S YNTHESIS

Image-to-video task aims to generate videos with a static image as the condition. One classic strat-
egy is integrating CLIP embeddings of the static image into DPMs. For instance, VideoCrafter1
(Chen et al., 2023a) and I2V-Adapter (Guo et al., 2024a) utilized a dual cross-attention layer, similar
to the IP-Adapter (Ye et al., 2023), to fuse these embeddings effectively. However, due to the no-
torious issue of CLIP image encoders losing fine-grained details, subsequent works (Hu, 2024; Wei
et al., 2024) have proposed using more expressive image encoders to capture finer image features.
In addition, another strategy is to expand the input channels of DPMs to concatenate noisy frames
and the static image. Notable works in this category include SEINE (Chen et al., 2023b), Pixel-
Dance (Zeng et al., 2024), AnimateAnything (Dai et al., 2023), and PIA (Zhang et al., 2024), which
have demonstrated superior results by enhancing the input channels to integrate image information
more effectively. Finally, methods such as DynamiCrafter (Xing et al., 2023), I2VGen-XL (Zhang
et al., 2023), and SVD (Blattmann et al., 2023a) combined channel concatenation and attention
mechanisms to simultaneously inject image features, aiming to achieve consistency in both global
semantics and fine-grained details. This dual approach ensured that the generated videos maintained
a high level of fidelity to the original static images while introducing realistic and coherent motion.

2.3   V IDEO C AMERA C ONTROL

While methods aiming to control video foundation models continue to emerge, relatively few works
explore how to manipulate camera motions in generated videos. AnimateDiff (Guo et al., 2024b)
employed temporal motion LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) trained on video datasets with similar camera
motions, where one single trained LoRA can control a specific type of camera motion. MotionC-
trl (Wang et al., 2023) proposed to employ an adaptor structure to encode the extrinsic matrix of
each frame into the temporal attention layers. Further, CamereCtrl (He et al., 2024) utilized the
Plücker embedding to improve the controllability. Camtrol (Hou et al., 2024) proposed a simple
training-free method to directly render static point cloud to multiview frames and construct the final
output video in a video-to-video manner. CamCo (Xu et al., 2024) integrated an epipolar attention
module in each attention block that enforces epipolar constraints to the feature maps, which keeps
3D-consistent well but causes small motion dynamic. In our work, we propose a method that can
enhance the precision of camera control and add the control over subject motion strength.

3     M ETHOD

3.1   V IDEO R EPRESENTATION AND N OTATIONS

In this section, we introduce the video representation and notation used in this paper. First, we
stipulate that the coordinates of all points we study are in the camera coordinate system. Although
both the camera and the captured scene may move, we transfer all dynamics to the camera coordinate
system, as in Fig. 2. Intuitively, the entire 3D world can be divided into the the static part and the
dynamic part, where the static part corresponds to a linear motion in the camera coordinate system.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                     Coordinate
                                                                      System


                                                                …
                            Lift to 3D                               Transform


                                                            …
                                                    …            Camera
                   Initial Camera                                                             Initial Camera
                                                                Movement
         Input Image                        Point Cloud                           Point Trajectory
Figure 2: We lift the input image from 2D to 3D as a RGBD point cloud. When the camera moves,
the 3D points can be considered as moving in the camera coordinate system. Then we project them
onto 2D according to current camera pose to obtain the 2D point trajectory.

Consider a dynamic sequence F(p, λ):
                             F(p, λ) : R3 × [0, Λ] → R3 , s.t. F(p, 0) = p                                (1)
where λ ∈ [0, Λ] represents a time moment during the video, and p ∈ R3 denotes a point of the entire
3D world. Notice that we specifically enforce F(p, 0) = p, to ensure that F accurately defines the
3D motion trajectory originating from the first frame. Considering the physical properties of the
macroscopic world, it is reasonable to consider F as a smooth mapping function. Naturally, we can
assert that for any given λ ∈ [0, Λ], there exist unique Rλ ∈ R3×3 and tλ ∈ R3 such that:
                                    F(p, λ) = Rλ · F(p, 0) + tλ + o(p),                                   (2)
where o(p) denotes an infinitesimal of higher order than p. To simply prove it, we only need to
perform a Maclaurin expansion of F(p, λ) and F(p, 0) at p = 0:
                              F(p, λ) = F(0, λ) + JF (0, λ) · p + o(p),                                   (3)
                              F(p, 0) = F(0, 0) + JF (0, 0) · p + o(p),                                   (4)
where JF denotes the Jacobian matrix, representing the gradient for vector-valued functions. Sub-
tracting the two equations and performing a simple calculation yields:
                F(p, λ) = (I + JF (0, λ) − JF (0, 0)) · F(p, 0) + F(0, λ) + o(p).                         (5)
Evidently, we can define:
                            Rλ ≜ I + JF (0, λ) − JF (0, 0), tλ ≜ F(0, λ),                                 (6)
Subsequently, we further denote:
                         G(p, λ) ≜ F(p, λ) − (Rλ · F(p, 0) + tλ ) = o(p),                                 (7)
which actually represents the extent of nonlinearity, being a higher-order infinitesimal with respect
to p than the linear term. Up to now, we have introduced the variables (Rλ , tλ , G(p, λ)) to facilitate
our forthcoming discussion on video camera control.

3.2   C ONTROL S IGNAL C ONSTRUCTION

While the most intuitive method is to directly employ Rλ and tλ as the control signals, we aim to
overcome the previously mentioned challenges of controllability and subject motion. Denote the
region of 3D points captured by the first frame as Ω ⊆ R3 . We compute the linear translation for Ω
and project it to 2D, which defines a point trajectory on the camera plane:
                                      Tλ = Π(Rλ · Ω + tλ ), λ ∈ [0, Λ]                                    (8)
where Π is the projection operation. Compared to Rλ and tλ , Tλ offers a denser representation,
thereby providing enhanced controllability and stability.
However, at the same time, this could further inhibit the motion of the nonlinear parts, which is
undesirable. To address this issue, we proceed to model the motion of the nonlinear parts (dynamic
regions in the world system) as well. Considering that we have already defined the variable G(p, λ)
to measure the extent of nonlinearity, we employ its first-order derivative with respect to time λ to
quantify the degree of motion dynamics at time moment λ. In our generative tasks, we cannot control


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the motion of every individual point, so we instead resort to a secondary strategy. We integrate the
L2 norm of the first-order derivative (physically represents the motion speed of the point, as shown
in Fig.3) across the entire domain Ω, to characterize an overall measure of motion strength:
                                                      s
                       Z                           Z                 T
                    1        ∂G(p, λ)          1          ∂G(p, λ)         ∂G(p, λ)
           mλ =            ∥          ∥2 dp =                           ·              dp         (9)
                   |Ω| Ω       ∂λ             |Ω| Ω           ∂λ              ∂λ
Up to this point, we have fully defined the inputs of our camera control framework, (Tλ , mλ ), where
the former enhances controllability and stability, and the latter effectively represents the extent of
motion dynamics, thus fulfilling the original intent of our designed method.
In addition, we discuss some properties for the control signals. As
discussed in Sec. 3.1, Ω can be divided into a static part and a dy-          Motion Vector
namic part, which we can denote as ΩS and ΩD respectively. No-
tably, ΩS corresponds to the linear motion within the camera sys-           Point
tem. In fact, we have:
                                                                                Speed
             F(p, λ) ≡ Rλ · F(p, 0) + tλ , ∀p ∈ ΩS .             (10)           Value

In other words, G(p, λ) ≡ 0 on ΩS . According to Eq. 10, if we can
obtain the partition Ω = ΩS ⊔ ΩD , we can calculate (Tλ , mλ ) by Figure 3: Illustration of mo-
simply linear fitting the point trajectory function F(p, λ).       tion strength (speed value).

3.3   DATA P IPELINE

In Sec. 3.2, we theoretically analyzed how to derive the input signal (Tλ , mλ ) for camera control.
In this section, we show how to compute them for the real-world video data Vgt . For the real-world
video, the timesteps is a discrete sequence λ ∈ [0, T ]∩Z, where λ represents the timestep index. The
region captured by the first frame can be organized on H × W pixels, denoted as Ω = {pij }H,W   i,j=1 .
Further, we divide the whole point set {pij }H,W
                                              i,j=1 into the static part and the dynamic part:

                                    Ω = {pij }H,W
                                              i,j=1 = ΩS ⊔ ΩD ,                                   (11)
where ΩS denotes the static part, and ΩD denotes the dynamic part. Different from the theoretical
analysis discussed in above sections, there are several major gaps between real-world RGB video
data and the continous trajectory function:
• Lack of 3D Information: Real-world video data only contains 2D pixels without 3D information.
• Lack of Temporal Correspondence: The raw video data does not explicitly involve the informa-
tion about the temporal movement of dense points as described by the continous trajectory function.
• Lack of dynamic/static partition: In real-world video data, discerning which regions are dynamic
and which are static remains ambiguous, especially when the camera itself is also mobile. This
introduces a coupling between the movement of objects and the motion of the camera.
To address the first issue, we employ metric depth estimation method, Unidepth (Piccinelli et al.,
2024), to bridge the gap between 2D and 3D data representation. For the second issue, we utilize
a tracking method, SpatialTracker (Xiao et al., 2024), to establish pixel correspondence between
consecutive frames, so that we can obtain the discrete trajectory (still denoted as F(p, λ) for ease of
reading). For the third issue, we need to extract ΩS , ΩD ⊆ Ω from Ω. A key insight lies in Eq. 10,
which means the trajectory on ΩS can be linearly fitted well. We solve this problem in a iterative
manner, as described in Alg. 1.
Iteratively, we fit the trajectory and extract the well-fitted region as the updated static region ΩS ,
while the remaining part is the dynamic part ΩD . Once we obtain the result ΩS and ΩD , like in each
iteration, we can final compute (Rλ , tλ ) by addressing a nonlinear least squares problem using the
L-BFGS (Liu & Nocedal, 1989) algorithm:
                      (Rλ , tλ ) = arg min∥Π(F(ΩS , λ)) − Π(R · ΩS + t)∥2 .                       (12)
                                     R,t

Then, Tλ can be calculated according to Eq. 8.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Data: Whole region Ω, point trajectory F(p, λ), tolerable error ϵ, acceptable ratio α,
        maximum iterations Nmax
  Result: The static region ΩS and the dynamic region ΩD
  initialization: n ← 0, ΩS ← Ω, ΩD ← ∅;
  while n < Nmax do
       for each λ ∈ [0, T ] do
           Solve with L-BFGS: (Rλ , tλ ) = arg min∥Π(F(ΩS , λ)) − Π(R · ΩS + t)∥2 ;
                                                R,t
      end
                                      T
                                           ∥Π(F(p, λ)) − Π(Rλ · p + tλ )∥2 ;
                                      P
      Compute: ϵmax = maxp∈ΩS
                                     λ=0
      if ϵmax < ϵ then
          stop (solution found);
      else
                            T
                               ∥Π(F(p, λ)) − Π(Rλ · p + tλ )∥2 < α · (ϵmax + ϵ)};
                            P
          ΩS ← {p ∈ Ω |
                           λ=0
        if ΩS = Ω then
            stop (solution found);
        end
     end
     ΩD = Ω \ Ω S ;
     n ← n + 1;
  end
      Algorithm 1: Static and dynamic region extraction based on trajectory analysis

For the motion strength, we empoly the difference between adjacent frames to replace the first-order
derivative of G(p, λ). Specifically, we calculate:
                            
                            
                            0
                            
                                                                   if λ = 0,
                     mλ =            H,W                                                        (13)
                                1
                                      P
                                         ∥G(p, λ) − G(p, λ − 1)∥2 if λ > 0.
                            
                            
                             HW
                            
                                   i,j=1

Thus, we can calculate the required control signals (Tλ , mλ ) from any raw RGB video, which allows
us to train the model with a vast array of easy-acquired RGB video data.

3.4   N ETWORK , T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

To ensure our method remains compatible with rapidly evolving base models, we have implemented
an adaptive structure. Our network design is illustrated in Fig. 4. Starting from the original control
signal, our adapter network generates a control feature that can be integrated into any diffusion
process, thereby allowing adaptation to various video generation base frameworks.
Considering that Tλ is a 4-dim tensor with shape (T, 2, H, W ) and mλ is a 2-dim tensor with
shape (T, 1), we use a tiling method to expand mλ to the same shape as Tλ , and then concatenate
them along the channel dimension to finally obtain a (T, 3, H, W )-shaped tensor as the input of the
network. As shown in Fig. 4 (layers marked with flame are our adaptive layers), we first employ
several convolutional layers to convert the input to the same size as the tokens used in the diffusion
process. We then concatenate the features with the tokens before computing self-attention. After
the self-attention computation, we restore the original shape by removing the additional parts added
during concatenation, similar to Hu (2024).
During the training phase, we merely incorporate the insertion of the control signal, while all other
training strategies remain unchanged. We adopt the same loss function and the same scheduler, with
the sole modification being the introduction of the control signal condition. During testing, we first
employ Unidepth (Piccinelli et al., 2024) to lift the input image into a RGBD point cloud. When the
user moves the camera, we convert it as the transformation of 3D points in the camera coordinate
systemcan according to the camera poses. We finally project the transformed 3D points of each


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


frame onto camera plane to compute the 2D trajectory, as shown in Fig. 2. Additionally, the user
can provide a scalar value for the motion strength control. As a result, this conforms to the training
paradigm and produces suitable camera movement effects. When the motion strength is set small,
nearly static camera movements can be achieved, whereas a significant motion strength allows for
more pronounced dynamics of the subject.


4     E XPERIMENTS
                                                           User Input Controls            Temporal Self-Attention
In this section, we show our experiments. Sec. 4.1
introduces our implementation details and experi-
ment settings. Sec. 4.2 shows the results and some       Motion            Point                    Tokens
                                                         Strength        Trajectory
properties of our method. In Sec. 4.3, we compare
our method with previous baseline methods.                                                Adaptive Self-Attention
                                                                     C
                                                                                                         C

4.1   S ETTINGS                                             Conv Layers               Control Tokens         Tokens
                                                                                       (𝐵, 𝑇, 𝐶, 𝐻, 𝑊)
Implementation details. We employ a Image-
                                                                    Trainable             Temporal Self-Attention
to-Video version of Magicvideo-V2 (Wang et al.,
2024b) as our base model, where we set the frame                    Frozen
                                                                                                    Tokens
number as 24 and the resolution as 704 × 448. We
use 16 NVIDIA A100 GPUs to train them with a
batch size 1 per GPU for 20K steps, taking about 36      Figure 4: The adaptive network structure.
hours. During training, we fix the parameters of the
base model and only train our adapter part.
Datasets. Although previous methods trained on the
RealEstate10K (Zhou et al., 2018) dataset for train-
ing, we do not choose it as our training set because the videos in this dataset are all nearly static
scenes with very limited dynamic motion of objects, which is conflict with our goal of achieving
controllable motion dynamics. Therefore, we collect a dataset of 30K video clips as our training
set, which contains not only camera movements but also natural motion. For validaition, we choose
two testing sets. The first testing set comprises 500 random static scene clips from RealEstate10K,
where each clip only extracts the initial frames according to the generated frame number. To enrich
the testing set, we randomly substitute the camera movements in half of these clips with one of eight
basic camera movements (as in MotionCtrl (Wang et al., 2023)): pan left, pan right, pan up, pan
down, zoom in, zoom out, anticlockwise rotation, and clockwise rotation. The second testing set
consists of 480 samples generated by text-to-image model that feature movable objects including
humans and animals, each equipped one of the basic camera movements.
Metrics. To comprehensively evaluate the quality of the results generated by our method and to
facilitate a fair comparison with existing techniques, we employ the same metrics as in CameraC-
trl (He et al., 2024): Rotational Error (RotErr), Translational Error (TransErr) and Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) (Seitzer, 2020). To compute FID, we randomly select 2000 video frames
from WebVid (Bain et al., 2021). As for the calculation of RotErr and TransErr, we refer to
the formula in CameraCtrl (He et al., 2024). Furthermore, as our method supports adjusting the
motion dynamics, we design a metric to measure the motion dynamics in the generated videos, too.
Specifically, we employ the open source RAFT (Teed & Deng, 2020) optical flow model to calcu-
late a motion score, denoted as MSC. Specifically, we use optical flow to establish a correspondence
relationship between any two adjacent frames, then perform 2D rigid alignment between adjacent
frames (to appropriately remove the optical flow caused by camera movement), and compute the
average of the L2 alignment errors as the metric MSC.


4.2   V ISUALIZATION R ESULTS

In this section, we show the visualization results of our method, demonstrating both pixel-level
controllability and the motion strength adjustment. Due to the format of the paper, the results shown
below are all in frame-by-frame image format. Please see our project page for video results.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

             Time


GT Preview
Ours


                                            ( motion strength = 0 )
GT Preview
Ours


                                           ( motion strength = 600 )


Figure 5: Visualization of our pixel-level controllability. The figure presents two samples: the top
one demonstrates a pan-left camera movement, while the bottom one shows the camera sliding to
the right. For each sample, we show a preview (directly render the RGBD point cloud on to 2D plane
according to the extrinsic matrix) and our generated result. We can see that the generated result can
almost follow the control signal at the pixel level (can be seen in the green boxes) even when there
exists movable object (the cat in the red box).


4.2.1          P IXEL - LEVEL C ONTROLLABILITY
We demonstrate comprehensive pixel-level user controllability in our approach, as illustrated in
Fig. 5. Initially, we estimate the metric depth from the input image, and then directly manipulate
the RGBD point cloud with control signals to render a preview image. This provides users with
an immediate and intuitive visual feedback, labeled as “Preview” in the figure. Below the direct
rendering results, we display the outputs generated by our framework. As observed, the camera
pose in the generated results is largely consistent with the preview, indicating that our control system
achieves precise pixel-level control. In the first sample, where we set the motion strength to 0, the
fox remains static, and the entire image aligns perfectly with the preview. In the second sample,
with the motion strength set to 600, the cat is able to walk on the floor. Despite the movement
of cat, the camera positioning remains consistent with the preview across all static elements, such
as the fireplace. These examples underscore the ability of our framework to maintain pixel-level
alignment regardless of the motion strength. This high level of controllability ensures that users
can interactively and effortlessly tailor their visual outputs with exceptional precision, epitomizing
a truly user-friendly experience.

4.2.2          M OTION S TRENGTH A DJUSTMENT
In Fig. 6, we illustrate the effects of varying motion strength values on the same input image with
consistent camera movements. When the motion strength is 0, the image content appears almost
stationary. Conversely, as the motion strength is increased, the main objects within the scenes begin
to exhibit motion. For instance, in the first example, the camera performs a pan-right movement,
shifting the entire scene to the left. At a motion strength of 0, the polar bear remains static, moving
uniformly with the background. However, increasing the motion strength allows the bear to move
independently, walking naturally and vividly across the frame, giving an impression of freedom and
animation. In the second example, with the camera moving downward, the scene seems to ascend.
With motion strength as 0, the astronaut stands still, anchored to the ground. Increasing the motion
strength causes the astronaut to walk toward the camera, thereby enhancing the dynamic interaction
and realism within the scene. The third example features the camera rotating counterclockwise,
which results in the scene rotating clockwise. Here, a motion strength of 0 keeps the wolf stationary.
Yet, upon intensifying the motion strength, the wolf begins to run, infusing the scene with action


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Motion Strength = 0   Motion Strength = 600   Motion Strength = 0   Motion Strength = 600   Motion Strength = 0   Motion Strength = 600


Time


Figure 6: Results under different motion strength values. We test the same camera control signal
with different motion strength value. When the motion strength is set as 0, the entire scene is nearly
static even when there are movable objects in the figure (polar bear, astronaut, wolf); when the
motion strength is large, the main objects moves obviously.


and enlivening the overall visualization. These demonstrations confirm the efficacy of our controlled
motion strength system, showcasing its capability to customize dynamic behaviors in accordance
with the desired camera movements and scene compositions.

4.3     C OMPARISONS

In this section, we compare our results with previous baselines: MotionCtrl (Wang et al., 2023) and
CameraCtrl (He et al., 2024). It is important to note that the original MotionCtrl and CameraCtrl
differ significantly from our training configurations, including differences in the base model, training
set, image resolution, and even the number of frames. Fortunately, they both employ an adapter
architecture, allowing their designs to be adaptable to various base models. Therefore, to ensure
a fair comparison, we choose to retrain MotionCtrl and CameraCtrl using the same experimental
settings and base model (Magicvideo-V2) as ours. In the subsequent text of this section, whenever
we refer to MotionCtrl and CameraCtrl, we are referring to the version that have been retrained
by us. Considering that the motion-LoRA of AnimateDiff only supports a limited number of fixed
camera movement patterns, we excluded it from our comparison.

4.3.1       C OMPARISON ON R EAL E STATE 10K DATASET
We compare our method with MotionCtrl and CameraCtrl on the RealEstate10K dataset. Consider-
ing that data in this dataset are nearly all static scenes, we set our motion strength to 0. Quantitative
comparisons are presented in Tab. 1. Our method significantly outperforms the previous methods
in both RotErr and TransErr, consistent with the pixel-level precision control observed in Sec-
tion 4.2.1. For a qualitative comparison, refer to the left sample in Fig. 7. While our results are
largely consistent with the preview, the outputs from CameraCtrl and MotionCtrl exhibit noticeable
deviations. The results from MotionCtrl has the right trend but with some extra zoom-in, while
CameraCtrl, although correct in the direction of camera movement, applies excessive movement
amplitude, resulting in a failure to align at the pixel level with the ground truth. It can be seen that
our method is closest to the preview image, which is consistent with the conclusion of quantita-
tive comparison, further confirming the superiority of our controllability. Our results also show the
smallest values in terms of FID and MSC, indicating that our method not only produces the highest
quality of generated images but also maintains the static nature in static scenes.

4.3.2       C OMPARISON ON DATASET OF M OVABLE O BJECTS .
We also evaluate our method against MotionCtrl and CameraCtrl on the movable object dataset.
Considering it contains movable objects, we experimented with several motion strength values: 0,
200, 400, 600. Quantitative comparisons are presented in Tab. 2. Our method performs best in both


                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     Time


    GT Preview    Ours     MotionCtrl   CameraCtrl          GT Preview    Ours    MotionCtrl   CameraCtrl


Figure 7: Qualitative comparison with previous methods. By comparing the preview with the gen-
erated results of different methods, we can see that our control precision is the best.
                         Table 1: Comparison on the RealEstate10k dataset.
              Methods    RotErr↓           TransErr↓             FID↓            MSC↓
            MotionCtrl   2.66              12.70                 164.62          13.71
            CameraCtrl   1.26              21.60                 156.69          15.52
               Ours-0    0.53              9.72                  155.01          12.93

                         Table 2: Comparison on the movable object dataset.
              Methods    RotErr↓           TransErr↓             FID↓            MSC ↓ ↑
            MotionCtrl   2.10              8.08                  98.54           42.28
            CameraCtrl   1.56              11.32                 99.59           32.69
               Ours-0    0.76              6.97                  100.36          18.96
             Ours-200    1.03              7.53                  93.28           38.23
             Ours-400    1.12              7.23                  91.93           47.13
             Ours-600    1.18              8.16                  91.86           47.70
RotErr and TransErr. Although Ours-200, Ours-400 and Ours-600 perform slightly worse on
these two metrics than Ours-0, they are still better than the comparison methods. Ours-600 achieves
the best FID and thus the best image quality. The FID of Ours-0 is slightly higher than that of the
other settings. A possible reason for this could be that the movable objects are forcibly held static,
resulting in unnatural and insufficiently diverse frames, while diversity is crucial for FID. For MSC,
our smallest value (Ours-0) is lower than the comparing methods, and our largest value (ours-600)
is higher than the comparing methods, which proves our adjustable motion strength control abality
again. Qualitative comparison is shown on the right sample in Fig. 7, where only our method is
pixel-level aligned with the ground truth.

5      C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced I2VControl-Camera, a precise camera control method designed to en-
hance the controllability of video generation while maintaining a robust range of subject motion. We
successfully addressed the challenge of control stability by employing point trajectories in the cam-
era coordinate system, rather than relying on extrinsic matrices. Additionally, our approach involved
modeling higher-order components of video trajectory expansion, enabling the network to precisely
perceive and adjust the amplitude of subject motion dynamics. Our method demonstrated superior
performance over previous methods in both quantitative and qualitative assessments. Looking for-
ward, possible future work includes extending our framework to include more control modalities,
such as drag and motion brush controls. These enhancements will allow for even more detailed and
varied manipulations of video content, enabling creators to achieve a wider range of visual effects
and further personalize their video productions.

R EFERENCES
Max Bain, Arsha Nagrani, Gül Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. Frozen in time: A joint video and
 image encoder for end-to-end retrieval. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  2021.

Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat,
 Junhwa Hur, Yuanzhen Li, Tomer Michaeli, et al. Lumiere: A space-time diffusion model for
 video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12945, 2024.

Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
  Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling
  latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023a.

Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
  Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling
  latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023b.

Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 22563–22575, 2023c.

Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe
  Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh. Video
  generation models as world simulators. 2024. URL https://openai.com/research/
  video-generation-models-as-world-simulators.

Hongrui Cai, Wanquan Feng, Xuetao Feng, Yan Wang, and Juyong Zhang. Neural surface recon-
  struction of dynamic scenes with monocular rgb-d camera. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Haoxin Chen, Menghan Xia, Yingqing He, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoshu Yang, Jinbo Xing,
  Yaofang Liu, Qifeng Chen, Xintao Wang, et al. Videocrafter1: Open diffusion models for high-
  quality video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19512, 2023a.

Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Lingjun Zhang, Shaobin Zhuang, Xin Ma, Jiashuo Yu, Yali Wang,
  Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Seine: Short-to-long video diffusion model for generative
  transition and prediction. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023b.

Zuozhuo Dai, Zhenghao Zhang, Yao Yao, Bingxue Qiu, Siyu Zhu, Long Qin, and Weizhi Wang.
  Animateanything: Fine-grained open domain image animation with motion guidance. arXiv e-
  prints, pp. arXiv–2311, 2023.

Wanquan Feng, Tianhao Qi, Jiawei Liu, Mingzhen Sun, Pengqi Tu, Tianxiang Ma, Fei Dai, Songtao
 Zhao, Siyu Zhou, and Qian He. I2vcontrol: Disentangled and unified video motion synthesis
 control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17765, 2024.

Ruiqi Gao*, Aleksander Holynski*, Philipp Henzler, Arthur Brussee, Ricardo Martin-Brualla,
  Pratul P. Srinivasan, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Poole*. Cat3d: Create anything in 3d with
  multi-view diffusion models. arXiv, 2024.

Rohit Girdhar, Mannat Singh, Andrew Brown, Quentin Duval, Samaneh Azadi, Sai Saketh Ramb-
  hatla, Akbar Shah, Xi Yin, Devi Parikh, and Ishan Misra. Emu video: Factorizing text-to-video
  generation by explicit image conditioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10709, 2023.

Xun Guo, Mingwu Zheng, Liang Hou, Yuan Gao, Yufan Deng, Pengfei Wan, Di Zhang, Yufan Liu,
  Weiming Hu, Zhengjun Zha, et al. I2v-adapter: A general image-to-video adapter for diffusion
  models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, pp. 1–12, 2024a.

Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh
  Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image dif-
  fusion models without specific tuning. International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Agrim Gupta, Lijun Yu, Kihyuk Sohn, Xiuye Gu, Meera Hahn, Li Fei-Fei, Irfan Essa, Lu Jiang,
  and José Lezama. Photorealistic video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.06662, 2023.
Hao He, Yinghao Xu, Yuwei Guo, Gordon Wetzstein, Bo Dai, Hongsheng Li, and Ceyuan
  Yang. Cameractrl: Enabling camera control for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.02101, 2024.
Yingqing He, Tianyu Yang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen. Latent video diffusion
  models for high-fidelity long video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13221, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Chen Hou, Guoqiang Wei, Yan Zeng, and Zhibo Chen. Training-free camera control for video
  generation. CoRR, abs/2406.10126, 2024.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Li Hu. Animate anyone: Consistent and controllable image-to-video synthesis for character anima-
  tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 8153–8163, 2024.
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splat-
  ting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2023.
Dong C. Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale optimization.
  Math. Program., 1989.
Xin Ma, Yaohui Wang, Gengyun Jia, Xinyuan Chen, Ziwei Liu, Yuan-Fang Li, Cunjian Chen,
  and Yu Qiao. Latte: Latent diffusion transformer for video generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.03048, 2024.
Kangfu Mei and Vishal Patel. Vidm: Video implicit diffusion models. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37, pp. 9117–9125, 2023.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2212.09748, 2022.
Luigi Piccinelli, Yung-Hsu Yang, Christos Sakaridis, Mattia Segu, Siyuan Li, Luc Van Gool, and
  Fisher Yu. UniDepth: Universal monocular metric depth estimation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural
  radiance fields for dynamic scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13961, 2020.
Maximilian Seitzer. pytorch-fid: FID Score for PyTorch. https://github.com/mseitzer/
 pytorch-fid, August 2020. Version 0.3.0.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
Vincent Sitzmann, Semon Rezchikov, Bill Freeman, Josh Tenenbaum, and Frédo Durand. Light
  field networks: Neural scene representations with single-evaluation rendering. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, 2021.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. RAFT: recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In Andrea
  Vedaldi, Horst Bischof, Thomas Brox, and Jan-Michael Frahm (eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV
  2020 - 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23-28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, 2020.
Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus:
  Learning neural implicit surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction. NeurIPS,
  2021.
Weimin Wang, Jiawei Liu, Zhijie Lin, Jiangqiao Yan, Shuo Chen, Chetwin Low, Tuyen Hoang,
 Jie Wu, Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, et al. Magicvideo-v2: Multi-stage high-aesthetic video
 generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04468, 2024a.
Weimin Wang, Jiawei Liu, Zhijie Lin, Jiangqiao Yan, Shuo Chen, Chetwin Low, Tuyen Hoang,
 Jie Wu, Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, et al. Magicvideo-v2: Multi-stage high-aesthetic video
 generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04468, 2024b.
Zhouxia Wang, Ziyang Yuan, Xintao Wang, Tianshui Chen, Menghan Xia, Ping Luo, and Yin Shan.
  Motionctrl: A unified and flexible motion controller for video generation. 2023.
Yujie Wei, Shiwei Zhang, Zhiwu Qing, Hangjie Yuan, Zhiheng Liu, Yu Liu, Yingya Zhang, Jingren
  Zhou, and Hongming Shan. Dreamvideo: Composing your dream videos with customized sub-
  ject and motion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 6537–6549, 2024.
Yuxi Xiao, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Nan Xue, Sida Peng, Yujun Shen, and Xiaowei Zhou.
  Spatialtracker: Tracking any 2d pixels in 3d space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Jinbo Xing, Menghan Xia, Yong Zhang, Haoxin Chen, Xintao Wang, Tien-Tsin Wong, and Ying
   Shan. Dynamicrafter: Animating open-domain images with video diffusion priors. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2310.12190, 2023.
Dejia Xu, Weili Nie, Chao Liu, Sifei Liu, Jan Kautz, Zhangyang Wang, and Arash Vahdat. Camco:
  Camera-controllable 3d-consistent image-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02509,
  2024.
Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt
  adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721, 2023.
Sihyun Yu, Kihyuk Sohn, Subin Kim, and Jinwoo Shin. Video probabilistic diffusion models in
  projected latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 18456–18466, 2023.
Yan Zeng, Guoqiang Wei, Jiani Zheng, Jiaxin Zou, Yang Wei, Yuchen Zhang, and Hang Li. Make
  pixels dance: High-dynamic video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8850–8860, 2024.
Shiwei Zhang, Jiayu Wang, Yingya Zhang, Kang Zhao, Hangjie Yuan, Zhiwu Qin, Xiang Wang,
  Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. I2vgen-xl: High-quality image-to-video synthesis via cascaded
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04145, 2023.
Yiming Zhang, Zhening Xing, Yanhong Zeng, Youqing Fang, and Kai Chen. Pia: Your personal-
  ized image animator via plug-and-play modules in text-to-image models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7747–7756, 2024.
Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. Stereo magnification:
  learning view synthesis using multiplane images. ACM Trans. Graph., 2018.


                                               13
