Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D E LLM A : D ECISION M AKING U NDER U NCERTAINTY
WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Ollie Liu∗ , Deqing Fu∗, Dani Yogatama, Willie Neiswanger
 Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science
 University of Southern California
 me@ollieliu.com, {deqingfu, yogatama, neiswang}@usc.edu


                                              A BSTRACT
            The potential of large language models (LLMs) as decision support tools is in-
            creasingly being explored in fields such as business, engineering, and medicine,
            which often face challenging tasks of decision-making under uncertainty. In this
            paper, we show that directly prompting LLMs on these types of decision-making
            problems can yield poor results, especially as the problem complexity increases.
            To aid in these tasks, we propose DeLLMa (Decision-making Large Language
            Model assistant), a framework designed to enhance decision-making accuracy
            in uncertain environments. DeLLMa involves a multi-step reasoning procedure
            that integrates recent best practices in scaling inference-time reasoning, drawing
            upon principles from decision theory and utility theory, to provide an accurate and
            human-auditable decision-making process. We validate our procedure on multiple
            realistic decision-making environments, demonstrating that DeLLMa can consis-
            tently enhance the decision-making performance of leading language models, and
            achieve up to a 40% increase in accuracy over competing methods. Additionally,
            we show how performance improves when scaling compute at test time, and carry
            out human evaluations to benchmark components of DeLLMa.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) are rapidly gaining traction across many domains due to their po-
tential for automating and enhancing a broad spectrum of tasks (Bommasani et al., 2021; Bubeck
et al., 2023). One important potential use is in decision making under uncertainty, i.e., deciding
which action to take given some set of possibilities, properly factoring in user goals and uncer-
tainty about the world. The ability to make good decisions under uncertainty holds broad relevance
across high-stakes tasks in fields such as business, marketing, medicine, aeronautics, and logistics
(Kochenderfer, 2015; Peterson, 2017)—and its value is not limited to organization-level decisions
but extends to aiding individuals in making informed choices as well. The ability of LLMs to analyze
large quantities of data makes them potentially well-suited for sophisticated decision support tools,
and ensuring that these models give accurate, context-aware recommendations could significantly
augment human decision-making capabilities.
However, optimal decision making under uncertainty is often challenging. For humans, there exist
frameworks from decision theory and utility theory (developed in fields such as economics, statis-
tics, and philosophy) to provide a structured approach for better decision-making (Von Neumann &
Morgenstern, 1944; Luce & Raiffa, 1989; Berger, 2013). Research has consistently demonstrated
that without these frameworks, human decision-making can often be highly irrational, swayed by
biases and incomplete information (Bazerman & Moore, 2012). Similarly, making decisions with
LLMs faces its own set of challenges. Issues include the tendency to fixate on specific explanations
or information without adequately balancing all evidence, and the inability to effectively handle
uncertainty, manage biases, or align with a user’s goals and utilities (Ferrara, 2023; Benary et al.,
2023). Our paper presents experiments that exemplify these issues.
Furthermore, beyond merely making rational decisions, it is crucial to understand why an LLM made
a particular decision. This aids in building trust in the decision, assessing its quality, and improving
any components that may lead to suboptimal outcomes. The ability to explain decisions and verify
    ∗
        Equal Contribution. Project website and code available at https://dellma.github.io/.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


decision-making quality—which we refer to as human auditability—is essential for the practical
application of LLMs to aid decision making in many real problems (Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023).
In this paper, our goal is to develop a framework that enables LLMs to make better decisions under
uncertainty. Our aim is not only to enhance decision-making accuracy but also to allow human users
to understand the rationale behind each decision. Drawing inspiration from prior work on multi-
step reasoning like Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) and Tree-of-Thoughts (ToT) (Yao
et al., 2023), in which compute is scaled at inference time, we design a procedure based on classical
decision theory, originally designed for rational decision making under uncertainty by humans. Our
approach involves three key steps: first, identify and forecast pertinent unknown variables given in-
context information; second, elicit a utility function that aligns with the user’s goals; and finally, use
this utility function to identify the decision that maximizes expected utility. We call our proposed
framework DeLLMa, short for Decision-making Large Language Model assistant.
We evaluate DeLLMa on real decision-making scenarios in agriculture and finance, and compare it
against existing strategies for LLM decision-making, including zero-shot (direct) prompting, self-
consistency (Wang et al., 2022), and CoT approaches. We find that DeLLMa significantly enhances
decision-making accuracy, with improvements of up to a 40% increase in accuracy, particularly as
the complexity and number of potential actions increases. Additionally, DeLLMa can consistently
enhance performance across a variety of leading language models, and its structure allows us to
understand the rationale behind each decision. In full, our contributions are:
    • We introduce DeLLMa, a method for human-auditable LLM decision making under uncertainty,
      employing a multi-step reasoning process at inference time based on classical decision theory.
    • We evaluate components of DeLLMa, including the calibration of its state forecasting approach
      and a human agreement study to assess its utility elicitation method.
    • On realistic decision-making environments, we show that DeLLMa gives up to a 40% improve-
      ment in decision-making accuracy over competing methods, and yields consistent improvements
      when deployed across multiple leading LLMs.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Exemplified by OpenAI o1 (OpenAI, 2024), a combination of recent advances in scaling inference-
time reasoning—such as task decomposition and structured search—has brought forth superhuman
performances on deterministic reasoning tasks (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021); but we
nonetheless find that they are insufficient for decision-making under uncertainty. DeLLMa offers a
specialized inference-time solution that scales favorbly with parallel sampling (Snell et al., 2024),
a key ingredient for performant utility elicitation and decision optimization. Below, we summarize
prior works pertaining to the DeLLMa framework.
LLMs for Decision Making. Prior works have leveraged LLMs for optimizing blackbox functions
(Yang et al., 2023; Nie et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2024). These settings involve methods that make
a substantial number of low-cost decisions (which do not incur a high price for suboptimality).
Instead, we focus on single-step expensive decisions, particularly in the prescence of uncertainty,
with a focus on the optimality of decisions. Additionally, a number of applied domains that involve
decision making have started to explore LLM-based methods, such as in supply chain optimization
(Li et al., 2023), medicine and health (Benary et al., 2023), and automated driving (Mao et al., 2023).
Uncertainty in LLMs. LLMs, without proper calibration, can be overly confident in their re-
sponses (Si et al., 2022). Such pitfalls make them unlikely to make reliable decisions under un-
certainty. Prior work has aimed to solve this issue; one line of research involves asking LLMs for
their own confidence, with or without additional finetuning (Kadavath et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022;
Mielke et al., 2022; Chen & Mueller, 2023; Tian et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2024).
Referring to (Baan et al., 2023) for a detailed survey, many recent advances (Lin et al., 2023; Feng
et al., 2025; Falck et al.; Wong et al., 2023) adopt a Bayesian inference framework to quantify and
reason with uncertainties in LLMs. Other works have shown that tool usage (Ren et al., 2023),
retrieval augmentation (Halawi et al., 2024), and model ensemble (Schoenegger et al., 2024) can
improve calibration and forecasting capabilities of LLMs. Our framework can take advantage of
these advances in LLM-based forecasting for improved decision making.
Inference-time Reasoning in LLMs. Many recent works have leveraged inference time compute
to extend the computational power of language models (Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023; Sun et al.,


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Goal                      Actions     Context                  Forecast                         Elicit           LLM
                                                                            Unknowns                           Utility         Decision
    I’m a farmer in California
    planning what fruit to plant next                                                                     Maximize revenue ⇒
    year. I would like to maximize my                                                                      U: ΘxA→ℝ
    revenue with 10 acres of land.
                                                                    Climate, Price, Supply Chain, etc.
    Which fruit should I grow?


    I’m an investor planning which
    stock to buy on 2023-12-01. I        $GOOGL      $GOOGL                                                Largest return ⇒
    want the largest return by the end   $NVDA        $NVDA                                                 U: ΘxA→ℝ
    of the month. I have $10,000.                                   Prices, Regulations, Releases, etc.
                                         $AMZN                                                            $GOOGL $NVDA
    Which stock should I buy?
                                                        $AMZN
                                                                                                                     $AMZN     $NVDA


                  The decision problem is given as a prompt.            DeLLMa maximizes the expected utility to make a decision.

Figure 1: Given a decision problem and contextual information as a prompt, DeLLMa (decision-
making LLM assistant) maximizes an expected utility to select an available action. We illustrate the
key steps of DeLLMa on decision-making tasks in agriculture planning (top) and finance (bottom).

2024). These can be categorized into three main approaches: (1) instructing the model to generate
intermediate reasoning traces (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022; Zhuang et al.,
2023; Ye et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024), (2) decomposing a complex reasoning
problem into tangible components (Zhou et al., 2022; Radhakrishnan et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023;
OpenAI, 2024), and most recently (3) scaling the number of parallel samples to be postprocessed
into a final solution (Wang et al., 2022; Snell et al., 2024; Brown et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2024).

3        M ETHODS
Preliminaries. Suppose that a decision maker needs to make a choice between a set of options to
achieve some goal—i.e., has a decision problem. We begin by formalizing such a decision prob-
lem, and afterwards describe how we approach decision making with LLMs. There are three main
components to the decision problems that we will describe: actions, states, and utilities.
First, the actions are the possible options that a decision maker wishes to choose between. We use
A to denote the space of actions, and a ∈ A for a single action. Second, the set of unknown states
of nature are denoted Θ. In our formulation, we define a state θ ∈ Θ to be any latent variable whose
true value is unknown, yet affects outcomes relevant to the decision maker’s goals. To perform
optimal decision making, one must act while accounting for uncertainty over these unknown states.
The third component involves the decision maker’s preferences for different possible outcomes. We
formalize our framework for decision making under uncertainty using utility theory, which can be
viewed as “modeling the preferences of an agent as a real-valued function over uncertain outcomes”
(Kochenderfer et al., 2022; Schoemaker, 1982; Fishburn, 1968). A key element is the utility function
(in some formulations, this is instead given in terms of a loss function L). The utility function,
denoted U : Θ × A → R, assigns a scalar value to any state and action (θ, a) ∈ Θ × A. Intuitively,
a higher utility means that the state-action pair yields a more-preferable outcome for the user.
The goal of the decision maker will be to choose a final decision a∗ ∈ A, which yields the highest
possible utility, while accounting for uncertainty in the unknown states θ.

Decision Making with LLMs: Setup and Current Approaches. We first describe the setting
in which we intend our framework to operate. Suppose a human wishes to use this LLM assistant
to help make a decision. They begin by describing a decision problem via a user prompt P. We
formalize a user prompt as a triplet P = (G, A, C), which includes: a natural language description
of the user’s goal G, a list of n actions A = (a1 , . . . , an ), and a passage of contextual information
C, which might be, e.g., pages from a report, or a text-based representation of historical data.
Referring to the agriculture planning decision problem in Figure 1 as a running example, the goal G
is for a farmer to maximize their revenue in the forthcoming year; the action set A lists the possible
produce the farmer is considering planting (e.g., apples, avocados, pears); and the context C consists
of historical summaries of agricultural yields or information about the climate around the farm.
It is tempting to delegate such decision-making to LLMs with direct prompting. However, we
observe that responses from conventional approaches, such as Self-Consistency and CoT, do not
adequately balance available evidence, handle uncertain information, or align with user preferences;
we show in Sec. 4 that these methods perform poorly, especially with increasing numbers of actions.

                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DeLLMa: Decision-Making LLM Assistant. To help encourage improved decisions under un-
certainty, we propose a framework that guides an LLM to follow the scaffolding of classical decision
theory. By restricting LLMs to this scaffold we can also explicitly see components of the decision-
making process—e.g., predictions of unknown states and utility function values—which provides
human-auditability, allowing a user to identify why a given decision was made by the model.
In our initial formalization of this framework, we restrict ourselves to a slightly curtailed class of
problems, and thus make a few simplifying assumptions. For example, we have assumed above
that there are a discrete, enumerable set of n possible actions, i.e., A = (a1 , . . . , an ). We will also
assume there is a discrete set of m possible states, Θ = (θ1 , . . . , θm ), though m may be quite large.
Our framework will use an LLM to produce a belief distribution over the unknown states, given the
input context C. We view this as a posterior belief distribution over the states, which we denote by
π(θ | C). Implicitly, we are assuming that the LLM implies a prior belief distribution π(θ), given
only the model weights or training data.
Our framework will also elicit a utility function, based in part on the description of the user’s goals
G ∈ P. This utility function assigns a scalar value to any state-action pair (θ, a). We denote this
utility function as U (θ, a). Given these, the expected utility under our LLM of taking an action a,
given some additional context C, can be written
                                                        X
                          UC (a) = Eπ(θ|C) [U (θ, a)] =      π(θ | C)U (θ, a).                      (1)
                                                             θ∈Θ

Then, following the expected utility principle for rational decision making (Machina, 1987; Peterson,
2017), we select the Bayes-optimal decision a∗ , which maximizes the expected utility, written
                                         a∗ = arg maxa∈A Uc (a).                                              (2)
We call our framework DeLLMa, short for Decision-making Large Language Model assistant.
DeLLMa carries out this sequence of four steps—state enumeration, state forecasting, utility elici-
tation, and expected utility maximization. A full description of DeLLMa is shown in the box below.
In the following sections we give details on our specific implementation of each of these four steps.

  D E LLM A : AN A SSISTANT FOR LLM D ECISION M AKING U NDER U NCERTAINTY
  Input: Prompt P = (G, A, C) consisting of a user’s goal G, actions A = (a1 , . . . , an ), and context C.

   1. State Enumeration: Produce a list of m states Θ = (θ1 , . . . , θm ), which are unknown quantities
      whose values are predicted to influence the user’s goal G.                           ▷ Section 3.1.

   2. State Forecasting: For each state θj , produce a probabilitic forecast π(θj | C), which describes the
      probability of different values of this state given context C.                         ▷ Section 3.2.

   3. Utility Function Elicitation: Produce a utility function U : (θj , ai ) → R, which assigns a scalar
      value to each state-action pair (θj , ai ), based on the user’s goal G.             ▷ Section 3.3.

   4. Expected Utility Maximization: For each action ai , compute the expected utility UC (ai ) =
      Eπ(θ|C) [U (θ, ai )], and return the decision a∗ = arg maxi∈{1,...,n} UC (ai ). ▷ Section 3.4.



3.1   S TATE E NUMERATION
As an initial demonstration of DeLLMa, our goal is to develop a simple implementation that per-
forms well empirically; however, each component in the framework can be extended or made more
sophisticated. We first describe the strategy that we adopt for enumerating a space of relevant latent
states Θ = (θ1 , . . . , θm ). Given P as context, we prompt an LLM to identify k latent factors that
are predicted to influence the user’s goal G (see §C.2 for details on this prompt). Each latent factor
is a string (a word or phrase), which can be viewed as describing a dimension of our state space Θ.
We denote these k latent factors as (f1 , . . . , fk ).
For each latent factor, we prompt our LLM to generate ℓ plausible values of the latent factor (empir-
ically we find that it is sufficient to set ℓ to be small, e.g., <5). For a latent factor fj , we denote its


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


plausible values as f˜j1:ℓ , where each plausible value is also a string (a word or phrase). This process
discretizes the state space, where each of the k dimensions has ℓ bins. We find that this strategy,
while simple, yields an empirically effective method for forecasting states (described in §3.2).
A single state θj in this state space consists of one plausible value from each of the k latent factors,
which we can denote by θj = θj1:k ∈ Θ. In total, this produces a discretized state space of size
|Θ| = m = ℓk . While this state space is too large to enumerate explicitly, we develop a procedure
to forecast probabilities for these states in a scalable manner.
3.2 S TATE F ORECASTING
In the next step of DeLLMa, we form a probabilistic forecast of the unknown states, given informa-
tion contained in the context C ∈ P. A number of recent works have shown that LLMs are capable of
returning well-calibrated forecasts with respect to some provided information (Halawi et al., 2024;
Schoenegger et al., 2024) (see §2). Here, we develop a relatively simple forecasting method that we
find works well empirically; though DeLLMa allows us to flexibly use other forecasting methods in
the future (potentially leveraging search and retrieval of information). This step yields a distribution
over the state space, which we can sample from to get a Monte Carlo estimate of the expected utility.
For each of the k latent factors, and each of their ℓ possible values f˜j1:ℓ , we prompt our LLM to assign
a verbalized probability score ∈ {very likely, likely, somewhat likely, somewhat unlikely, unlikely,
very unlikely}. In total, we must assign k×ℓ scores. We provide all prompts for this probability score
procedure in Figure 11. We then define a dictionary V that maps each verbalized probability score to
a numerical value. Similar strategies converting from verbalized to numeric scores have been used
with success in prior work (Xiong et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023). After normalization, this yields a
distribution over the state space Θ, assuming independence between the k latent factors, which we
posit for computational simplicity. We sample states from this distribution by iterating through each
of the latent factors, sampling according to its approximate marginal probability, and concatenating
the samples. In Sec. 4.1 we directly evaluate this state forecasting procedure to show that it yields
well-calibrated forecasts in real-data scenarios, and we conduct an ablation study in Sec. 4.3.
The full procedure is shown in Algorithm 1. Here, the Normalize function simply scales the weights
instantiated in the marginal distribution to a well-defined probability mass function (PMF). We con-
sider the sampled states to be from an LLM-defined proposal distribution π LLM (θ | C), returned as
output from Algorithm 1, which approximates the posterior belief distribution π(θ | C).

Algorithm 1 S TATE F ORECAST                                           Algorithm 2 U TILITY E LICITATION
  Input: LLM M, user prompt P = (G, A, C),                               Input: LLM M, user prompt P = (G, A, C), pro-
  plausibilty score mapping V, latent factors {f1 ,                      posal distribution π LLM (θ | C), sample size s, mini-
  · · · , fk }, and plausible values {f˜11:ℓ , · · · , f˜k1:ℓ }.         batch size b, and overlap proportion q.
                                                                         # Sample fixed states ∀a ∈ A
  for i = 1 to k do                                                      SA ← A × {θi | θi ∼ π LLM , 1 ≤ i ≤ ⌊s/|A|⌋}
     πi (· | C) ← {}                                                     SA ← Shuffle(SA )
     # Verbalized probability score                                      Ω ← {} # Pairwise comparisons
     [v1 , · · · vℓ ] ← M(P, fi , f˜i1:ℓ )                               for i = 1 to s with step ⌊b × (1 − q)⌋ do
     for j = 1 to ℓ do                                                      # Rank the minibatch
        πj (f˜ij | C) ← V[vj ]                                              R ← M (P, (θi , ai ), · · · , (θi+b , ai+b ))
     end for                                                                # Format into comparison
     πi (· | C) ← Normalize(πi (· | C))                                     Ω ← Ω ∪ FormatRank(R)
  end for                                                                end for
  return π LLM (f1 , · · · , fk | C) := ki=1 πi (· | C)
                                           Q
                                                                         return U (·, ·) := BradleyTerry(Ω) ∈ Rs

3.3 U TILITY F UNCTION E LICITATION
Next, we need a method to elicit (which is to say: construct) a utility function U : Θ×A → R, which
maps a state-action pair to a real value. An accurate utility function, which balances the preferences
of a human user with respect to the goal that they describe, is difficult to define directly in a general-
purpose manner. There is a long history of work on utility elicitation methods (Farquhar, 1984),
which aim to construct a utility function from, e.g., pairwise preference data. Here, we combine
these methods with large language models to try and automatically elicit a utility function.
We conduct the following procedure. We first sample states from the forecast state distribution
π LLM (θ | C), and from these form a set of state-action pairs. We group these pairs into minibatches,


                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and prompt our LLM to rank the elements of each minibatch, given the user’s goal G ∈ P. This
LLM-based ranking of items—where each item consists of an action and a particular instantation of
states—is a procedure that can be broadly applied, and LLMs have a history of being successfully
used for similar comparisons (Lee et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2023). Based on these rankings, we are
able to extract pairwise preferences, which we can use in classic utility elicitation algorithms.
We show this procedure in Algorithm 2 and discuss two implementations of the FormatRank step:
Rank2Pairs and One-vs-All. Denoting (θ, a)(i) as the i-th preferred state-action pair of the mini-
batch, Rank2Pairs converts a ranking of decreasing preference R = (θ, a)(1) , · · · , (θ, a)(b)
to a list of pairwise comparisons by adding (θ, a)(i) ≻ (θ, a)(j) whenever i < j. In contrast,
One-vs-All assumes that the LLM is indifferent towards all but the top-ranked state-action pair, i.e.,

  (θ, a)(1) ≻ (θ, a)(i) | ∀ 2 ≤ i ≤ b . This implementation may be desirable when accurate com-
parisons of certain suboptimal state-actions is challenging. We then make use of these preferences
as training data for a Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) to elicit an approximate utility
function U : Θ × A → R with respect to the sampled state-action pairs. Finally, we find two ad-
ditional ingredients are beneficial for scaling our inference-time reasoning, which help improve the
accuracy and computational efficiency of utility elicitation: batching and variance reduction.
Batching. We implement a batched inference procedure that slices state-action samples SA =
{(θ, a)} into overlapping minibatches for ranking. We ensure that q% of samples are shared be-
tween two consecutive minibatches drawn from SA , where q is a hyperparameter that modulates
a minibatch’s degree of exposure to the preference of the previous minibatch. Larger q results in
finer-grained preference at the cost of more queries. Effects of q are ablated in Figure 3.
Variance Reduction. Directly sampling |SA | state values from the proposal distribution π LLM may
lead to high-variance estimates of utilities. We instead sample |SA |/|A| independent state values
from π LLM , create |A| duplicates, and pair them with each action a (see Figure 5 in Appendix A).
In Section 4.3, we conduct ablation studies to validate our utility elicitation procedure, which shows
high agreement rate between DeLLMa rankings and human preferences. We also study scaling laws
of sample size and overlap percentage. We find that this type of specialized inference-time solution
scales favorably against general-purpose systems such as OpenAI o1 (OpenAI, 2024).
3.4   E XPECTED U TILITY M AXIMIZATION
In the final step of DeLLMa, we compute the expected utility for each action, and then return the
action that maximizes the expected utility. In particular, for each action, we compute a Monte Carlo
estimate of the expected utility using state-action samples (drawn from the state forecast distribution
π LLM (θ | C)), as well as the elicited utility function. Note that these calculations are all performed
analytically (not via an LLM). We can then approximate the expected utility UC (a) as
                                                             1 X
                             UC (a) = Eπ(θ|C) [U (θ, a)] ≈           U (θ, a),                        (3)
                                                            |S|
                                                               θ∈S

given a set of state samples S ⊆ Θ drawn from our LLM-defined state forecast distribution, which
is an approximation of the LLM’s posterior belief distribution about states given context C, i.e.,
   i.i.d.
S ∼ π LLM (θ | C) ≈ π(θ | C). After computing the expected utility UC (a) for each action,
DeLLMa returns the final decision: a∗ = arg maxa∈A UC (a).

4     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate the performance of DeLLMa on two decision making under uncertainty environments
sourced from different domains: agricultural planning (Agriculture) and finance investing (Stocks).
Both involve sizable degrees of uncertainty from diverse sources, and are representative of distinct
data modalities (natural language and tabular) involved in decision making. We propose the follow-
ing DeLLMa variants designed to assess algorithmic improvements, as outlined in Section 3:
• DeLLMa-Pairs is the method using all techniques in §3.3 and Rank2Pairs for utility elicitation.
• DeLLMa-Top1 is identical to DeLLMa-Pairs, but replaces Rank2Pairs with One-vs-All.
• DeLLMa-Naive is a base version of DeLLMa-Pairs, where we sample multiple states per action
  and construct pairwise comparisons from a single batch (i.e., no batching or variance reduction).


                                                   6
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Zero-Shot               Chain-of-Thought           Self-Consistency                     DeLLMa           Zero-Shot
                   DeLLMa (Naive)          DeLLMa (Top 1)             DeLLMa (Pairs)
           100                                                                                      70
           80                                                                                       60
Accuracy


                                                                                         Accuracy
           60                                                                                       50

           40                                                                                       40
                                                                                                    30
           20
                                                                                                    20
            0                                                                                            GPT-4   Claude 3   Gemini 1.5
                   2          3        4             5        6            Average
                                    Number of Actions                                                    Large Language Models
      Figure 2: Results on the Agriculture environment. Left: DeLLMa variants outperform baseline
      methods for varying numbers of actions. Right: We see that DeLLMa yields a consistent improve-
      ment in decision-making accuracy across three families of leading LLMs.

      For DeLLMa-Pairs and Top1, we allocate a per action sample size of 64 and a minibatch size of 32.
      We set the overlap proportion q to 25% for the Agriculture dataset and 50% for the Stocks dataset
      due to budget constraints. For DeLLMa-Naive, we fix a total sample size of 50. As a default LLM in
      experiments (except for comparisons across different LLMs), we use GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023)1 .
      We compare DeLLMa against three baselines—zero-shot, self-consistency, and Chain-of-Thought
      (where example prompts for these baselines are given in Figures 9, 10, 19, and 20):
      • Zero-Shot. Only the goal G, the action space A, and the context C is provided. We adopt a greedy
        decoding process by setting temperature = 0.
      • Self-Consistency (SC) (Wang et al., 2022). We use the same prompt as in zero-shot, but with
        temperature = 0.5 to generate a set of K responses. We take the majority vote of the K responses.
      • Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022). For decision-making tasks, there is no standard CoT
        pipeline. Inspired by workflows from decision theory, we create a prompting chain consisting of
        three steps: (1) ask for unknown factors that impact the decision; (2) given these, ask for their
        possibility of occurence; (3) then ask for a final decision. Such a mechanism is similar to the
        DeLLMa pipeline (see §3) but only consists of prompting.
      Evaluation Metrics. For both datasets, our action spaces consist of a set of items, and we evaluate
      the performance of both DeLLMa and baseline methods by comparing the accuracy of their predic-
      tion from this set against the ground-truth optimal action (i.e., the action that maximizes ground-
      truth utility). We also report normalized utility—i.e., the ground-truth utility of the action chosen
      by a given method, normalized by the optimal ground-truth utility—in Appendix B. We defer more
      involved decision-making under uncertainty problems, such as constructing a weighted combination
      of actions (i.e., a portfolio), to future works.

      4.1        AGRICULTURE
      Data Acquisition. We collect bi-annual reports published by the United States Department of
      Agriculture (USDA) that provide analysis of supply-and-demand conditions in the U.S. fruit mar-
      kets2 . To emulate real-life farming timelines, we use the report published in September 2021 as
      context for planning the forthcoming agricultural year. We additionally supplement these natural
      language contexts with USDA-issued price and yield statistics in California3 .
      We define the utility of planting a fruit as its price × yield reported in the forthcoming year. We
      identify 7 fruits as our action set A—apple, avocado, grape, grapefruit, lemon, peach, and pear—that
      are both studied in the September 2021 report, and endowed with these statistics in 2021 and 2022.
      We create decision making problems by enumerating all possible combinations of available fruits,
      resulting in 120 decision problem instances. For each decision-making instance, we use related
      sections of the USDA report and current-year price and yield statistics as context. See Appendix C.1
      and Figure 8 for additional details on preprocessing, and Figure 13 for DeLLMa prompts.
             1
               We use GPT-4 checkpoint gpt4-1106-preview.
             2
               www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details/?pubid=107539
             3
               www.nass.usda.gov/Quick_Stats


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       DeLLMa (Pairs)                       DeLLMa (Top1)                                                                                         d drough
                                                                                                                                                                            t”,
                                                                                                                                                        continue      ge ”, . . .}
                                                                                                                                       (1)    climate:        no chan
                                                                                                                                                                                     U = 0.34
                                                                                                                                      θ 1 = {“       yi el d:
                                                   75                                                                                         “apple
                                                                                                                                                         w = 0.20
           65                                                                                                            ”                                                           ...
                                                                                                                   res            θ1(m) = {“            w = 0.11
                                                                                                             0   ac                         climate:
                                                                                                          :1                                          si
                                                                                                                                           “apple yi gnificant improv
                                                   64                                                ple                                                                    ement”, U = 0.75
                                                                                                  ap                                                eld: incr
Accuracy


                                        Accuracy
           60                                                                                :“                                                              ease ”, .
                                                                                                                                                                       . .}
                                                                                           a1
                                                                                                                                ...
                                                                                      an
           55                                      52                                      :“
                                                                                                av                                                                     t”,
                                                                                                                                                               provemen .}
                                                                                                  oca                                                  mild im         ..
                                                                                                      d                                (1)   climate: eld: decrease ”,               U = 0.32
                                                                                                       o:
                                                                                                            10                        θn = {“    ca do yi
                                                                                                                 ac                          “avo              04
           50                                                                                                         res                               w = 0.
                                                                                                                            ”                                                        ...
                                                   40                                                                                                    w = 0.25
                                                                                                                                  θn(m) = {“
                0%   25%   50%   75%                    4      8   16   32   64                                                                climate:
                                                                                                                                                        continue
                                                                                                                                             “avocado           d
                                                                                                                                                       yield: no drought”,           U = 0.42
                 Overlap Percentage                           Sample Size                                                                                        change ”,
                                                                                                                                                                           . . .}

Figure 3: Left: Study on sample size and overlap percentage used by DeLLMa. Scaling the compute
at test time produces better average accuracy. When ablating overlap percentage, we fix sample
size at 16; when ablating sample size, we fix overlap percentage at 25%. Right: Illustration of
the DeLLMa decision tree for the Agriculture dataset, showing two of the actions, and two of the
                                                                              (j)
sampled states per action. Each weight w denotes the posterior probability π(θi | C).

Main Result. From Figure 2, we observe that all DeLLMa strategies consistently outperform base-
line comparison methods, especially for larger action sets. We plot decision accuracy here, but in-
clude equivalent plots showing the utility of each strategy in Appendix B. Among DeLLMa variants,
the performance of Pairs and Top1 are consistent across the board; both are significantly better than
Naive. This observation shows the benefits of the algorithms outlined in §3.3. We give more detailed
analyses in the ablation study below. We also show a comparison of DeLLMa deployed on multiple
leading LLMs (GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), Claude-3 (Anthropic, 2024), Gemini 1.5 (Reid et al.,
2024)), with consistent performance improvements across multiple model families. We refer readers
to Appendix C and supplementary material for details on data, prompts,1and responses.

How Good Are State Forecasts? We first evaluate the quality Table 1: An evaluation of state
of forecast distributions. We manually annotate a set of ground forecasting, showing ECE and
truth values for states that the LLMs forecast within DeLLMa, NLL. Lower is better.
and then compare this with the forecast state distribution. We
compare the average calibration (ECE), and the negative log-                    ECE ↓ NLL ↓
likelihood (NLL), two popular metrics for assessing the qual-      GPT-4         0.062 1.11
ity of a probabilistic forecast. As shown in Table 1, all mod-     Claude 3      0.142 1.20
els achieve reasonable calibration performances, which correlate   Gemini 1.5    0.064 1.09
with the overall DeLLMa prediction accuracy. We defer addi-
tional comparisons to Table 6, in which DeLLMa outperform randomized baselines. We conduct
additional ablation studies to assess each DeLLMa module contributions in Section 4.3.

Failure Modes of Baseline Methods. One surprising observation is that, in the case of larger ac-
tion sets, our baseline methods often underperform random guessing. A failure mode is that these
methods elicit decisions that echo the sentiments presented in context, and they lack the ability to
reason what-if scenarios that lead to utility changes. Our experiments on SC and CoT indicate
that neither sampling reasoning paths, prompting the model to imagine the alternatives, nor aug-
menting an LLM with a posterior belief substantially enhance the model’s ability to reason with
uncertainty. By conditioning on sampled states, DeLLMa can avoid this pitfall while leveraging
in-context learning to decide the preferred state-action pair. See Appendix C.4 and Figures 12, 17
and 18 for discussions on failure cases of baseline methods that are addressed by DeLLMa.
In addition to performance improvements, our structured approach is endowed with human au-
ditability. In Figure 3 (right), we show an abbreviated decision network, with actions, states, sam-
pled latent factors, and derived utilities constructed from outputs of a DeLLMa agent. This modular
approach to decision making can facilitate transparency and trust of LLMs in high-stake scenarios.
4.2             S TOCKS
Making decisions involving financial investing requires handling a variety of uncertainties; however,
it is fundamentally different from the agriculture decision problems. Most evidently is the difference
in input format—contexts for agriculture rely more on textual information (summarizations from


                                                                                  8
           Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Zero-Shot               Chain-of-Thought       Self-Consistency
                       DeLLMa (Naive)          DeLLMa (Top 1)         DeLLMa (Pairs)                                                                ble ”,
                                                                                                                                         health: sta ange ”, . . .}
                                                                                                                                economic            ch                   U = 0.37
                                                                                                                        θ 1 = {“ VDA growth: no
                                                                                                                         (1)
           100                                                                                                                  “N
                                                                                                                                           w = 0.54
                                                                                                                                                                         ...
           80                                                                                                V DA
                                                                                                                  ”
                                                                                                                            θ1(m) = {“
                                                                                                                                              w = 0.05
                                                                                                                                     economic
                                                                                                          yN                                  health: im
                                                                                                    Bu                              “NVDA
Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                         provemen
                                                                                            :“                                             growth:                  t”, U = 0.81
           60                                                                             a1                                                        rapid ”,
                                                                                                                                                             . . .}
                                                                                                                      ...
           40                                                                            an
                                                                                              :“                                                   ble ”,
                                                                                                   Bu                                   health: sta ease ”, . . .}
                                                                                                      y                        economic          incr                    U = 0.52
                                                                                                                        θn = {“ OOGL growth:
                                                                                                          GO             (1)
           20                                                                                               OG                 “G
                                                                                                               L”                        w = 0.33
                                                                                                                                                                         ...
            0                                                                                                          θn(m) = {“          w = 0.04
                        2         3        4             5        6        Average                                               economic
                                                                                                                               “GOOG      health:
                                                                                                                                      L growth recession”,
                                        Number of Actions                                                                                       : no chan
                                                                                                                                                          ge ”, . . .}
                                                                                                                                                                         U = 0.25



           Figure 4: Results on the Stocks environment. Left: We see that on average, DeLLMa-Top1 outper-
           forms all baselines. Right: Illustration of the DeLLMa decision tree for the Stocks dataset, showing
           two of the actions and two of the sampled states per action.

           USDA reports) whereas contexts for stocks involve tabular data (historical prices per share). Stocks
           decision problems are well suited to test LLMs capability in reasoning on dynamic tabular data.

           Data Acquisition. Similar to the setup in §4.1, the action space A consists of individual stocks and
           we curate a total of 120 decision problem instances of varying sizes. In our experiments, we choose
           popular stocks whose symbols are AMD, DIS, GME, GOOGL, META, NVDA and SPY. Unlike
           agriculture data where the context C are collected through USDA reports, we collect historical stock
           prices as the context for this problem. As illustrated in Figure 1, each stock is presented with 24
           monthly price in history. In preventing possible data leakage and promoting LLMs to use their
                                                                                        1
           common-sense knowledge in making decisions, when using gpt4-1106-preview                as the LLM
           checkpoint, historical price between December 2021 to November 2023 are provided as the context
           C. These historical monthly prices are collected via Yahoo Finance4 manually by the authors.
           The goal of the LLM agent is to choose which stock to invest on December 1st, 2023, and sell on
           the last trading day of that month (December 29, 2023) so that the return is maximized. Detailed
           prompts are presented in Appendix D.1. We note that we only consider the simplistic setting—
           choosing one stock from a set of options {a1 , · · · , an }.

           Main Results. Similarly, we compare three variants of DeLLMa with the three popular base-
           lines. Shown in Figure 4, most of the observations are consistent with those in the agriculture
           experiments—DeLLMa’s variants outperform the baseline candidates. Unlike the agriculture set-
           ting, here DeLLMa-Naive only slightly improves over the baselines. We hypothesis this is due to
           the high volatility of stocks data, where inefficient sample size without variance reduction produces
           highly volatile predictors as well. This also validates the need for the design of the DeLLMa-Pairs
           and DeLLMa-Top1 methods.
           Additionally, DeLLMa-Top1 performs better than DeLLMa-Pairs in the stocks data. This difference
           may stem from the simplicity of utility elicitation from only the top action choice, which requires
           less data processing and may mitigate noise compared to enumerating all state-action pairs. We
           hypothesize that in high-volatility data like stocks, LLMs may struggle with pairwise comparisons
           due to potential hallucination issues, particularly when the model attempts to rank options without
           a clear ground truth. By focusing on the top choice, DeLLMa-Top1 could avoid accumulating noise
           from these internal rankings, achieving better performance.

           4.3        A BLATION S TUDIES
           Scaling Laws for Inference-Time Compute. Referring back to Figure 2, a potential explanation
           for the performance difference between DeLLMa-Naive and Pairs/Top1 is the discrepancy in sample
           size: for Naive, we allocate a fixed sample size (50) for all decision-making instances, and we
           allocate a fixed per action sample size (64) for Pairs and Top1. We eliminate this confounder in our
           ablation study, by noting that with per action sample size 8 (middle subfigure in Figure 3), DeLLMa-
           Pairs/Top1 achieve comparable performance to Naive, despite only receiving 16-48 samples in total
           for each problem instance.
                 4
                     finance.yahoo.com


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Performance compar- Table 3: Performance compari- Table 4: Results on a human
ison across variations of our son against SotA inference-time evaluation of utility elicitation
state forecasting procedure.  reasoning models.               in DeLLMa. Details in §4.3.
                  GPT-4   Claude 3   Gemini 1.5   Task          DeLLMa (n = 64)   o1-preview                 GPT-4   Claude 3   Gemini 1.5
 Uniform          58.3%    32.5%       45.8%      Agriculture        73.3%          33.3%      Agreement %
 Underspecified   55.0%    34.2%       42.5%                                                                 68.4%    65.3%       65.7%
                                                  Stock              64.2%          35.0%      with Human
 Overspecified    56.7%    35.8%       45.8%
 DeLLMa           60.0%    40.8%       47.5%



In Figure 3 (left), we observe linear performance trends when scaling up overlap percentage and
sample size. Intuitively, both higher overlap percentages (i.e., more exposure between minibatches)
and larger sample size lead to construction of finer-grained pairwise comparisons and thus high
quality approximate utilities. Furthermore, DeLLMa-Pairs consistently outperforms Top1, implying
that a nontrivial portion of the pairwise comparisons are meaningful. However, we note that the
number of required API queries scales linearly with both parameters, and users are advised to choose
these parameters that balance performance and cost. We report statistics for API queries and prompt
lengths for our methods in Table 5 of Appendix B.
State Forecasting Ablation. We now assess the quality of the state forecasting procedure by eval-
uating DeLLMa in the presence of low-quality or extraneous state information. On the agriculture
dataset, we report in Table 2 the ablation results from 3 variants for the propoal distribution π LLM :
uniform, underspecified, and overspecified. We fix a per action sample size of 16 and an overlap
percentage of 25%, and refer readers to Appendix E for additional details.
We observe that the performance of the modified forecasting methods in GPT-4 and Gemini 1.5 are
similar to full DeLLMa performance, and are better than our baseline methods. With these models,
DeLLMa appears to be robust against misspecified, insufficiently representative, and extraneous
forecast states. However, with Claude 3, ablation performance is more akin to zero-shot baselines.
This discrepancy may be due to Claude’s weaker performance in DeLLMa (c.f. Figure 2). Overall,
our state forecasting procedure appears to be beneficial for DeLLMa performance.
Evaluation Against OpenAI o1. In Section 4, we have compared different prompting approaches
while fixing the LLM backbone. We now evaluate OpenAI o1—a class of more advanced models
adept in inference-time reasoning—against DeLLMa. Table 3 shows that our best performances
(attained with a per action sample size of 64 and overlap percentage of 25%) can outperform o1
with the zero-shot prompt (c.f. Figures 9 and 22) by a wide margin, while attaining similar costs
(DeLLMa: $0.09 to $0.37 vs. o1: $0.21 per instance)5 . This study indicates the benefits of special-
ized inference-time reasoning for decision making under uncertainty.
Human Evaluation for Preference Ranking. Lastly, we perform a study to evaluate the quality
of utility elicitation in DeLLMa. We curate a dataset of 412 pairwise state-action samples; human
annotators (the paper authors and 5 external volunteers) are then shown pairs of these state-action
samples and asked to annotate a preference, based on the decision prompt P. These pairs are pre-
sented in shuffled order to eliminate potential positional bias. We then compute the agreement rate
between the pairwise annotations given by DeLLMa and those given by the annotators. Although
this step is noisy, we see a strong agreement between LLM and human annotations, as shown in Ta-
ble 4, across multiple LLMs. We also find that our inter-annotator agreement rate is 67.0% (±6.3%),
which is on par with the human-LLM agreements. Additional details of our annotation procedure
are reported in Appendix F.

5       C ONCLUSION
We propose DeLLMa, a framework designed to harness LLMs for decision making under uncer-
tainty in high-stakes settings. This is a structured approach in which we provide a process for
inference-time reasoning in LLMs that follows the principles of classical decision theory. We then
develop a feasible implementation with LLMs. Through experiments on real datasets, we highlight a
systematic failure of popular prompting strategies when applied to this type of decision making task,
and demonstrate the benefits of our approach to address these issues. The modularity of our frame-
work avails many possibilities, most notably auditability and using LLMs for a broader spectrum of
probablistic reasoning tasks.
    5
        DeLLMa costs can be further reduced by 50% with the OpenAI batch API.


                                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To facilitate reproducibility, we have included the following artifacts within our paper and supple-
mentary materials:
Data. All DeLLMa data, prompts, and LLM inference results for main experiments are given in
Section 4. We also include all prompts in Appendices C.2 and D.1.
Code. Our implementations for the zero-shot, self consistency, Chain-of-Thought, and DeLLMa
methods are included in the supplementary material. While these inference results are included,
reproducing them require OpenAI, Anthropic, and Gemini API access. We provide evaluation script
in results.sh for reproducing all numerical results.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We thank Yu Feng, the USC NLP Group, and anonymous reviewers for valuable insights, discus-
sions, and comments.


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

AI Anthropic. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku. Claude-3 Model Card, 2024.

Joris Baan, Nico Daheim, Evgenia Ilia, Dennis Ulmer, Haau-Sing Li, Raquel Fernández, Barbara
  Plank, Rico Sennrich, Chrysoula Zerva, and Wilker Aziz. Uncertainty in natural language gener-
  ation: From theory to applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15703, 2023.

Max H Bazerman and Don A Moore. Judgment in managerial decision making. John Wiley & Sons,
 2012.

Manuela Benary, Xing David Wang, Max Schmidt, Dominik Soll, Georg Hilfenhaus, Mani Nassir,
 Christian Sigler, Maren Knödler, Ulrich Keller, Dieter Beule, et al. Leveraging large language
 models for decision support in personalized oncology. JAMA Network Open, 6(11):e2343689–
 e2343689, 2023.

James O Berger. Statistical decision theory and Bayesian analysis. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2013.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
  mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
  intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.

Jiuhai Chen and Jonas W. Mueller. Quantifying uncertainty in answers from any language model
   via intrinsic and extrinsic confidence assessment. ArXiv, abs/2308.16175, 2023. URL https:
   //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261339369.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. 2021.
Ching-An Cheng, Allen Nie, and Adith Swaminathan. Trace is the new autodiff–unlocking efficient
  optimization of computational workflows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16218, 2024.
Fabian Falck, Ziyu Wang, and Christopher C Holmes. Are large language models bayesian? a
  martingale perspective on in-context learning. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Secure and Trustworthy
  Large Language Models.
Peter H Farquhar. State of the art—utility assessment methods. Management science, 30(11):1283–
  1300, 1984.
Yu Feng, Ben Zhou, Weidong Lin, and Dan Roth. BIRD: A trustworthy bayesian inference frame-
  work for large language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fAAaT826Vv.
Emilio Ferrara. Should chatgpt be biased? challenges and risks of bias in large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03738, 2023.
Peter C Fishburn. Utility theory. Management science, 14(5):335–378, 1968.
Danny Halawi, Fred Zhang, Chen Yueh-Han, and Jacob Steinhardt. Approaching human-level fore-
  casting with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18563, 2024.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer
  El-Showk, Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bow-
  man, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, Jackson Kernion, Shauna
  Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei, Tom
  Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Ka-
  plan. Language models (mostly) know what they know, 2022.
Mykel J Kochenderfer. Decision making under uncertainty: theory and application. MIT press,
 2015.
Mykel J Kochenderfer, Tim A Wheeler, and Kyle H Wray. Algorithms for decision making. MIT
 press, 2022.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Thomas Mesnard, Johan Ferret, Kellie Lu, Colton
  Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, Abhinav Rastogi, and Sushant Prakash. RLAIF: Scal-
  ing reinforcement learning from human feedback with ai feedback, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=AAxIs3D2ZZ.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020.
Beibin Li, Konstantina Mellou, Bo Zhang, Jeevan Pathuri, and Ishai Menache. Large language
  models for supply chain optimization, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
  words, 2022.
Zhen Lin, Shubhendu Trivedi, and Jimeng Sun. Generating with confidence: Uncertainty quantifi-
  cation for black-box large language models, 2023.
R Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa. Games and decisions: Introduction and critical survey. Courier
  Corporation, 1989.
Mark J Machina. Choice under uncertainty: Problems solved and unsolved. Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 1(1):121–154, 1987.
Jiageng Mao, Junjie Ye, Yuxi Qian, Marco Pavone, and Yue Wang. A language agent for autonomous
   driving, 2023.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expresssive power of transformers with chain of
 thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07923, 2023.
Sabrina J. Mielke, Arthur Szlam, Emily Dinan, and Y-Lan Boureau. Reducing conversational
  agents’ overconfidence through linguistic calibration, 2022.
Allen Nie, Ching-An Cheng, Andrey Kolobov, and Adith Swaminathan. Importance of directional
  feedback for llm-based optimizers. In NeurIPS 2023 Foundation Models for Decision Making
  Workshop, 2023.
OpenAI.    Learning to reason with llms.                     https://openai.com/index/
  learning-to-reason-with-llms/, 2024.
Martin Peterson. An introduction to decision theory. Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Zhen Qin, Rolf Jagerman, Kai Hui, Honglei Zhuang, Junru Wu, Jiaming Shen, Tianqi Liu, Jialu Liu,
  Donald Metzler, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. Large language models are effective
  text rankers with pairwise ranking prompting, 2023.
Ansh Radhakrishnan, Karina Nguyen, Anna Chen, Carol Chen, Carson Denison, Danny Hernandez,
  Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Jackson Kernion, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, et al. Question decomposition
  improves the faithfulness of model-generated reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11768, 2023.
Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-
 baptiste Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Gem-
 ini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
Allen Z. Ren, Anushri Dixit, Alexandra Bodrova, Sumeet Singh, Stephen Tu, Noah Brown,
  Peng Xu, Leila Takayama, F. Xia, Jacob Varley, Zhenjia Xu, Dorsa Sadigh, Andy Zeng, and
  Anirudha Majumdar. Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty alignment for large language model
  planners. ArXiv, abs/2307.01928, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:259342058.
Paul JH Schoemaker. The expected utility model: Its variants, purposes, evidence and limitations.
  Journal of economic literature, pp. 529–563, 1982.
Philipp Schoenegger, Indre Tuminauskaite, Peter S Park, and Philip E Tetlock. Wisdom of the
  silicon crowd: Llm ensemble prediction capabilities match human crowd accuracy. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.19379, 2024.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Chenglei Si, Chen Zhao, Sewon Min, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. Re-examining calibration: The
  case of question answering. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.),
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 2814–2829,
  Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.204. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  findings-emnlp.204.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
Yu Sun, Xinhao Li, Karan Dalal, Jiarui Xu, Arjun Vikram, Genghan Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xinlei
  Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Sanmi Koyejo, et al. Learning to (learn at test time): Rnns with expressive
  hidden states. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04620, 2024.
Arun James Thirunavukarasu, Darren Shu Jeng Ting, Kabilan Elangovan, Laura Gutierrez,
  Ting Fang Tan, and Daniel Shu Wei Ting. Large language models in medicine. Nature medicine,
  29(8):1930–1940, 2023.
Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Allan Zhou, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Huaxiu Yao, Chelsea
  Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Just ask for calibration: Strategies for eliciting calibrated
  confidence scores from language models fine-tuned with human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14975, 2023.
John Von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern. Theory of games and economic behavior. 1944.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Lionel Wong, Gabriel Grand, Alexander K Lew, Noah D Goodman, Vikash K Mansinghka, Jacob
  Andreas, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. From word models to world models: Translating from natural
  language to the probabilistic language of thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12672, 2023.
Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can llms
 express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.13063, 2023.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03409, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023.
Yining Ye, Xin Cong, Yujia Qin, Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Large language
  model as autonomous decision maker. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12519, 2023.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with
  reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15476–15488, 2022.
Qingcheng Zeng, Mingyu Jin, Qinkai Yu, Zhenting Wang, Wenyue Hua, Zihao Zhou, Guangyan
  Sun, Yanda Meng, Shiqing Ma, Qifan Wang, et al. Uncertainty is fragile: Manipulating uncer-
  tainty in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11282, 2024.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.
Yuchen Zhuang, Xiang Chen, Tong Yu, Saayan Mitra, Victor Bursztyn, Ryan A Rossi, Somdeb
  Sarkhel, and Chao Zhang. Toolchain*: Efficient action space navigation in large language models
  with a* search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13227, 2023.



                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                      A PPENDIX

A                      U TILITY E LICITATION D ETAILS

In Figure 5, we show an illustration of the overlapped batching and variance reduction strategies that
DeLLMa uses in its utility elicitation procedure (described in detail in Section 3.3).


                                                         θ (1)                                                        (θ (1), a1)      (θ (1), a2)
                                                                                    a1
                                                                             ⊗
                                                         θ   (2)                                    Pair              (θ (2), a1)      (θ (2), a2)
                                                         θ   (3)
                                                                                    a2                                (θ , a1)
                                                                                                                         (3)
                                                                                                                                       (θ (3), a2)
                                                         θ   (4)                                                      (θ , a1)
                                                                                                                         (4)
                                                                                                                                       (θ (4), a2)

                                                                                                                                      Shu e
                                                (1)
                                             (θ (3) , a12)
                                                                   (θ (2), a2)                                           (1)
                                                                                                                      (θ (3) , a12)    (θ (4), a1)
                                             (θ (4)
                                                (2), a
                                                      12)                           (θ (2), a1)
                                                                   (θ , a1)                                           (θ (4)
                                                                                                                         (2), a
                                                                                                     Overlapped
                                                                       (4)
                                                                                                                               12)     (θ (3), a1)
                                             (θ (1), a2)
                                                                                                      Batching
                                                                                    (θ (1), a1)
                                                                   (θ , a1)
                                                                       (3)                                            (θ , a2)
                                                                                                                         (1)              (2)
                                                                                                                                       (θ (3) , a12)
                                             (θ (2), a2)
                                                                   (θ , a1)
                                                                       (2)
                                                                                                                      (θ , a2)
                                                                                                                         (2)           (θ (1), a1)


                                       ffl


                                  Figure 5: Schematic diagram of overlapped batching and variance reduction.



B                      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In Figures 6 and 7 we show the normalized utility (i.e., ground-truth utility of the chosen action,
normalized by the maximum ground-truth utility) of each method. These results can be contrasted
against the accuracy of each method’s prediction of the optimal action in Figures 2 and 4.


                           Zero-Shot         Chain-of-Thought                    Self-Consistency             DeLLMa (Naive)             DeLLMa (Top 1)             DeLLMa (Pairs)

                     100
                     95
Normalized Utility


                     90
                     85
                     80
                     75
                     70
                                       2                           3                      4                       5                     6                 Average
                                                                                 Number of Actions

Figure 6: Normalized utility for the Agriculture dataset. Across all action sizes, DeLLMa-
Pairs/Top1 outperforms other methods, including DeLLMa-Naive. Similar to accuracy, DeLLMa-
Pairs slightly outperforms Top1, which is consistent with our hypothesis that the complete ranking
generated from GPT-4 is meaningful.


                                                                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Zero-Shot       Chain-of-Thought    Self-Consistency         DeLLMa (Naive)      DeLLMa (Top 1)             DeLLMa (Pairs)

                     100
Normalized Utility
                     80

                     60

                     40

                                       2                  3             4                   5               6                Average
                                                               Number of Actions

Figure 7: Normalized utility for the Stock dataset. DeLLMa-Top1 is competitive againt Pairs, sug-
gesting that financial decision making may be a challenging scenario for GPT-4 to elicit preference
unequivocally.


Aside from performance improvements, we also compare the cost measured in terms of prompt
length and API calls in Table 5. For the Agriculture dataset, DeLLMa-Naive is comparable to SC
in terms of prompt length and significantly outperform the latter, while only requiring 20% of API
calls. DeLLMa-Pairs/Top1 can push the performance further, but incurs a higher cost, especially for
large sample sizes.

Table 5: Number of GPT-4 API calls and word counts per decision-making instance (with action set
size 4 for the Agriculture dataset) across all methods discussed in Section 4.1. For DeLLMa-Naive,
we set the total sample size to 50. For DeLLMa-Pairs, we fix the overlap percentage to 25% and vary
the per action sample size from 16 to 64. DeLLMa-Top1 has the same statistics as DeLLMa-Pairs
since they only differ in post processing.

                                                   Zero-Shot    CoT          SC         D-Naive      D-Pairs (16)     D-Pairs (64)
                                API Calls              1         3            5            1              3               10
                              Token Counts            495       1946        2477         2629           5181            20639

We provide additional results on forecasting performance measured by the expected calibration error
(ECE) to supplement Table 1, by focusing on two sets of statistics in Table 6:
          • ECE under the uniform distribution forecast (ECE-Uniform).
          • ECE under the LLM forecast, but with random choice as the ground truth (ECE-Random). We
            report the standard deviation from 100 random trials.
To calculate the ECE, for a fixed set of latent factors (e.g., fruit price change, climate conditions),
we manually find and annotate ground truth values — using the USDA report and web search. We
can then compute metrics such as the expected calibration error (ECE) for forecasts of these latent
factors given by a model. Together, these results indicate that our state forecasting algorithm attains
much improved performance in comparison with these baselines.

Table 6: Comparison of ECE across different proposal distributions against randomized baselines.

                                                                  ECE             ECE-Random (±SD)         ECE-Uniform
                                         DeLLMa (GPT-4)           0.062             0.135 ± 0.092             0.333
                                        DeLLMa (Claude 3)         0.142             0.157 ± 0.084             0.333
                                       DeLLMa (Gemini 1.5)        0.064             0.113 ± 0.083             0.333



C                      A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR AGRICULTURE
C.1                        DATASET C URATION

To reduce context length, we first extract executive and per-fruit summaries of the report, reducing
the context length from 8,721 words to around < 700 words. These summaries are constructed on


                                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a per-model basis: each LLM (GPT-4, Claude-3, and Gemini 1.5) is prompted to generate its own
summaries. We proof-read these summaries to ensure that they do not contain any factual errors.
For each decision making instance, we use the executive summary, the summaries relevant to the
fruits in consideration, and their current-year price and yield statistics as context. We provide these
summaries in our supplementary material, and refer readers to the prompt for summarizing the report
in Appendix C.2, and report concrete summaries and statistics in supplementary materials.

C.2   P ROMPT U SED BY AGRICULTURE

Summary Prompt In Figure 8 we present the prompt used for summarizing the context in our
Agriculture experiments. This prompt is shared across all models tested.

Zero-Shot Prompt In Figure 9 we present an example prompt for zero-shot experiments consist-
ing of P = (G, C, A), with GPT-4 summaries generated from Figure 8 as context. We fix the prompt
format for all LLMs and select the corresponding summaries for each LLM.

Self-Consistency Prompt We adopt the same zero-shot prompt as the one shown in Figure 9, but
take a majority vote from K reasoning paths as the final prediction. Our preliminary study finds
that LLMs tend to be very confident in their decisions, and even with much higher temperature than
0.5, often all K independent runs yield consistent decisions. We thus set K = 5 to balance cost and
performance.

Chain-of-Thought Prompt We design a multi-prompt CoT procedure that closely emulates our
DeLLMa agent, consisting of three steps: (1) ask for unknown factors that impact the decision; (2)
given these, ask for their possibility of occurence; (3) then ask for a final decision. This procedure
differs from DeLLMa agents as it does not use an external program for utility elicitation and expected
utility maximization, but delegates each step of the process to an LLM. Example prompt can be found
in Figure 10.

DeLLMa Prompt Similar to the CoT Prompt, DeLLMa is a multi-prompt procedure (1) ask for
unknown factors that impact the decision; (2) given these, ask for their possibility of occurence
(i.e. a belief distribution). Instead of directly deciding on an action, DeLLMa samples state-action
pairs (via an external program) from this belief distribution, and leverage an LLM to elicit a utility
function U : S × A → R from pairwise comparisons. From here, we use another external program
to search for an action that maximizes the expected utility.
In Figures 8 and 11 we present the prompt for state enumeration and state forecasting (i.e. step
(1) and (2)) for the Agriculture dataset. Our implementation combines these two modules, but
in the future they should be separate as our framework continues to progress. For example, state
enumeration may leverage retrieval-augmented generation Lewis et al. (2020) for generating high-
quality unknown factors, and state forecasting may resort to tool usage to delibrate calibrated belief
distributions from quanitative analysis.
In Figure 13, we provide a DeLLMa prompt to generate ranked comparisons from sampled state-
action pairs. These state action pairs are sampled from the belief distribution via an external pro-
gram, written in Python. We provide all our implementations in the supplementary material.

C.3   AGRICULTURE DATASET R ESPONSES

Summaries See Figure 14 for formatted GPT-4 summaries from the USDA agricultural report
and statistics. Claude-3 and Gemini summaries follow the exact same format, but differ in LLM
generated contents.

Zero-Shot Responses See Figures 12, 17 and 18 for sample GPT-4 responses to zero-shot
prompts.

Self-Consistency Responses SC responses follow the exact same format as those in Figures 12,
17 and 18.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chain-of-Thought Responses See Figure 15 for a curtailed version of GPT-4 CoT response.

DeLLMa Responses See Figure 16 for a curtailed version of GPT-4 DeLLMa response.

C.4    FAILURE C ASES ON THE AGRICULTURE DATASET

In Section 4.1, we postulate that a failure mode of our baseline approaches is that they lack the ability
to perform probablistic reasoning, but are rather following the sentiment presented in context. Here,
we qualitatively test this hypothesis, by showcasing prompts and responses from our Zero-Shot
experiments. We present instances in Figures 12, 17 and 18 that are not able to make optimal
prediction with baseline methods, but are solved by DeLLMa agents.
Within each figure, we first present P, followed by the (incorrect) decision and explanation gen-
erated from the Zero-Shot baseline, and then present the top-ranked state action pair generated by
DeLLMa along with its explanation.
In the case of deciding between apple and grapefruit in Figure 12, GPT-4 presumes that a high price
for grapefruit is sustainable due to the presence of extreme weather conditions in the previous year.
With CoT, the model reasons with some counterfactual scenarios, such as more suitable weather
for the forthcoming year, but not in a systematic way. With DeLLMa, we provide these a list of
counterfactual scenarios as context, and leverage the model’s ability for situational thinking and
ranking to elicit an informative preference. We make similar observations for Figures 17 and 18.


D     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR S TOCKS

D.1    P ROMPT U SED BY S TOCKS

Zero-Shot Prompt Similar to the agriculture setup, we first present a sample zero-shot prompt in
Figure 19. The zero-shot prompt consists of three main parts (see Figure 1 for visual illustrations):
(1) an enumeration of action spaces (here AMD or GME), (2) a provided context (here, historical
stock prices between December 2021 to November 2023), and (3) the goal of the user (choose only
one stock to maximize their profit via investing in stocks).

Self-Consistency Prompt SC prompts are identical to zero-shot prompts.

Chain-of-Thought Prompt Similarly, we examplify a prompt for CoT. Notably, we break the
chain into three parts in Figure 20: (1) Enumerating unknown factors, (2) Enumerating π LLM (· | C),
and (3) making the final decision given the previous responses and context.

DeLLMa Prompt Finally, we showcase the DeLLMa ranking prompts where the LLM is asked
to provide comprehensive rankings of given state-action pairs.

D.2    S TOCK DATASET R ESPONSES

Zero-Shot Responses See Figure 22 for sample GPT-4 responses to zero-shot prompts.

Self-Consistency Responses SC responses follow the exact same format as those in Figure 22.

Chain-of-Thought Responses See Figure 23 for a curtailed version of GPT-4 CoT response.

DeLLMa Responses See Figure 24 for a curtailed version of GPT-4 DeLLMa response.


E     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR A BLATION S TUDIES

• Uniform: we maintain the same set of states, but replace the forecast distribution π LLM with a
  uniform distribution.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Underspecified: we reduce the diversity of our set of states by removing a latent factor fk , chosen
  at random, and then perform state forecasting as usual.
• Overspecified: in addition to the original set of latent factors, we add a small set of additional
  factors, which are intentionally unrepresentative or redundant. This represents a case where the
  latent factors contain extraneous information, which may confuse the LLM backbones.


F       D ETAILS ON A NNOTATION P IPELINE

For each pair of state-action values, we ask human evaluators (paper authors and 5 external volun-
teers) to annotate which state-action tuple is more preferred to the other, and compare our annota-
tions against preferences elicited by LLMs. To reduce bias in this procedure, we present these pairs
in shuffled orders, i.e. it is not always true that (s, a)1 ≻ (s, a)2 if {(s, a)1 , (s, a)2 } is presented to
the annotators. For each pair, we ask the annotators to either label them as 1 (state-action tuple 1 is
preferred), 2 (state-action tuple 2 is preferred), or 0 (uncertain). We then evaluate annotator-LLM
agreement after evaluation is concluded. In total, this procedure yields 412 annotations.
From these annotation results, we measure the agreement between each pair of annotators, and
compute inter-annotator agreement by micro-averaging all agreements. This procedure yields an
average agreement of 67.0% (±6.3%), which is on par with human-LLM agreements.


G       L ICENSE FOR E XISTING A SSETS

Large Language Models DeLLMa is built on top of frontier class LLMs such as GPT-4 (Achiam
et al., 2023), Claude-3 (Anthropic, 2024), and Gemini 1.5 (Reid et al., 2024). We are not aware of
their licenses, but ascertain that we abide to their respective terms of service (ToS)6 for our usage.

Agriculture Dataset The Agriculture dataset is curated from statistics and reports published by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. These assets are freely accessible under the Freedom of Infor-
mation Act. We ascertain that we abide to the USDA ToS7 .

Stock Dataset The Stock dataset is curated with the Yahoo Finance API8 . We ascertain that we
abide to the Yahoo Developer API ToS9 .


H       S OCIETAL I MPACT AND L IMITATIONS

Rational decision making under uncertainty has been extensively studied across many disciplines,
but remains elusive even for humans. Our work bears significant societal consequences as we live
in a world where humans increasingly rely on intelligent assistants for diverse problems. Unfortu-
nately, existing foundation models and LLMs are not capable of acting optimally under uncertainties
yet, which may induce harm if the general public delegate these models for decision making. These
risks are exacerbated when intelligent assistants operate as a black box without adequate trans-
parency. DeLLMa serves as a first step towards an approach that builds trust for humans to rely on
these systems to make important decisions under uncertainty.
While our approach sensibly improves the performance of LLMs for decision making under uncer-
tainty, deploying a prototype system in the wild without additional guardrail could incur significant
financial losses, in case of a suboptimal decision. We expect users to conduct extensive field tests
for the feasibility of such systems, or leverage a hybrid approach that integrates analyst judgements
for optimal decision making.
Another limitation of our approach stems from constrained state and action spaces. Our framework
currently operates on a small number of discrete state and action spaces, due to the context window
    6
      GPT-4 ToS, Claude-3 ToS, and Gemini 1.5 ToS.
    7
      https://www.usda.gov/policies-and-links
    8
      finance.yahoo.com
    9
      Yahoo Finance API ToS


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


size of state-of-the-art LLMs. This drawback may potentially limit the applicability of our system
in more complex use cases, or scenarios that require sequential decision making.
Finally, our current experiments focus on specific domains (agriculture and stocks) as representative,
controlled environments for testing decision-making under uncertainty. Future work will involve
evaluating DeLLMa across a broader set of domains to better understand its strengths and limitations
in diverse, real-world applications.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE S UMMARIZATION P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE
   Below is an agriculture report published by the USDA:
   <USDA Fruits & Nuts Report, omitted for brevity>a
   Please write a detailed summary of the report. You should format your response as a JSON object.
   The JSON object should contain the following keys:
   - ‘summary’: a string that summarize, in detail, the overview of the report. Your summary should
   include price, yield, production, and other information relevant to a farmer making decisions about
   what to plant. You should also include key factors, such as weather, supply chain, and demand, that
   affect the market.
   - ‘apple’: a string that describes, in detail, information pertaining to apple in the report. You
   should include information on apple prices and production, as well as factors that affect them.
   - ‘avocado’: a string that describes, in detail, information pertaining to avocado in the report.
   You should include information on avocado prices and production, as well as factors that affect them.
   - ‘grape’: a string that describes, in detail, information pertaining to grape in the report. You
   should include information on grape prices and production, as well as factors that affect them.
   - ‘grapefruit’: a string that describes, in detail, information pertaining to grapefruit in the
   report. You should include information on grapefruit prices and production, as well as factors that
   affect them.
   - ‘lemon’: a string that describes, in detail, information pertaining to lemon in the report. You
   should include information on lemon prices and production, as well as factors that affect them.
   - ‘peach’: a string that describes, in detail, information pertaining to peach in the report. You
   should include information on peach prices and production, as well as factors that affect them.
   - ‘pear’: a string that describes, in detail, information pertaining to pear in the report. You
   should include information on pear prices and production, as well as factors that affect them.
   - ‘factors’:   a list of strings that enumerates the factors that affect the market, based on the
   report.   You should include at least 5 factors, ranked in decreasing order of importance.


               Figure 8: E XAMPLE S UMMARIZATION P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE
      a
          https://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details/?pubid=107539


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE Z ERO -S HOT P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE
   Below is an agriculture report published by the USDA. It gives an overview of the fruit and nut
   market in the United States, with an additional focus on information pertaining to apple, avocado.
   Market Overview: the USDA report indicates a general increase in U.S. production of major noncitrus
   fruits for 2021, with apples, grapes, peaches, cranberries, and sweet and tart cherries seeing a
   rise in production, while pear production is forecasted to decline. the impact of extreme weather
   events and california’s ongoing drought on crop yields is uncertain. fruit and tree nut grower
   price indices remain high, with fluctuations throughout 2021. the consumer price index for fresh
   fruit also increased, suggesting higher retail prices. the northwest heat dome has introduced
   production uncertainty, particularly for tree fruits. the U.S. citrus season ended with declines in
   all commodities except california tangerines, and citrus prices are higher. tree nut supplies are
   forecasted to be down from the previous year’s record, with smaller almond and walnut crops expected
   to increase grower prices. factors such as weather conditions, supply chain issues, and demand are
   influencing the market.
   - Apple:
      - Product Summary: apple production is forecasted to be up 3 percent from 2020/21 but down
   5 percent from 2019/20. washington state’s crop is expected to be larger, but there is concern
   over heat damage. export markets may remain sluggish due to high tariffs and shipping challenges,
   potentially pushing more apples into the domestic market and lowering prices. processing prices may
   rise due to declines in new york and michigan, which account for a significant portion of processed
   apples.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average apple yield is 19,000 LB / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 0.244 $ / LB.
   - Avocado:
      - Product Summary: california avocado production has decreased, with wildfires and water
   restrictions impacting yields. however, U.S. avocado consumption has increased significantly,
   with imports from mexico and peru growing substantially. mexico dominates the U.S. avocado market,
   with imports peaking from may through july. peruvian imports compete during the summer months,
   traditionally a period of lower mexican imports.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average avocado yield is 2.87 TONS / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 2,430 $ / TON.
   I’m a farmer in California planning what fruit to plant next year. I would like to maximize my
   profit with ’10’ acres of land.
   Below are the actions I can take:
       Action 1. apple: 10 acres
       Action 2. avocado: 10 acres
   I would like to know which action I should take based on the information provided above.


                 Figure 9: E XAMPLE Z ERO -S HOT P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE
   PR O M P T 1
   Below is an agriculture report published by the USDA. It gives an overview of the fruit and nut
   market in the United States, with an additional focus on information pertaining to apple, avocado.
   Market Overview: the usda report indicates a general increase in u.s. production of major noncitrus
   fruits for 2021, with apples, grapes, peaches, cranberries, and sweet and tart cherries seeing a
   rise in production, while pear production is forecasted to decline. the impact of extreme weather
   events and california’s ongoing drought on crop yields is uncertain. fruit and tree nut grower
   price indices remain high, with fluctuations throughout 2021. the consumer price index for fresh
   fruit also increased, suggesting higher retail prices. the northwest heat dome has introduced
   production uncertainty, particularly for tree fruits. the u.s. citrus season ended with declines in
   all commodities except california tangerines, and citrus prices are higher. tree nut supplies are
   forecasted to be down from the previous year’s record, with smaller almond and walnut crops expected
   to increase grower prices. factors such as weather conditions, supply chain issues, and demand are
   influencing the market.
   - Apple:
        - Product Summary: apple production is forecasted to be up 3 percent from 2020/21 but down
   5 percent from 2019/20. washington state’s crop is expected to be larger, but there is concern
   over heat damage. export markets may remain sluggish due to high tariffs and shipping challenges,
   potentially pushing more apples into the domestic market and lowering prices. processing prices may
   rise due to declines in new york and michigan, which account for a significant portion of processed
   apples.
        - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average apple yield is 19,000 LB / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 0.244 $ / LB.
   - Avocado:
        - Product Summary: california avocado production has decreased, with wildfires and water
   restrictions impacting yields. however, u.s. avocado consumption has increased significantly,
   with imports from mexico and peru growing substantially. mexico dominates the u.s. avocado market,
   with imports peaking from may through july. peruvian imports compete during the summer months,
   traditionally a period of lower mexican imports.
        - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average avocado yield is 2.87 TONS / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 2,430 $ / TON.
   I’m a farmer in California planning what fruit to plant next year. I would like to maximize my
   profit with ’10’ acres of land.
   Below are the actions I can take:
   Action 1. apple: 10 acres
   Action 2. avocado: 10 acres
   First think about the unknown factors that would affect your final decisions.

   PR O M P T 2
   <SAME CONTEXT>
   Now I have enumerated the unknown factors that would affect my final decisions:
   <RESPONSE FROM PROMPT 1 CONTAINING LLM ENUMERATED UNKOWN FACTORS>
   Given these unknow factors, think about the possiblity that each factor would occur within a month.

   PR O M P T 3
   <SAME CONTEXT>
   Now I have enumerated the unknown factors that would affect my final decisions:
   <RESPONSE FROM PROMPT 1 CONTAINING LLM ENUMERATED UNKOWN FACTORS>
   I also empirically estimated the possibility of occurrence of each possible factor:
   <RESPONSE FROM PROMPT 2 CONTAINING LLM BELIEF DISTRIBUTION OVER UNKOWN FACTORS>
   Given these unknow factors and the possibility estimates of these factors’ occurrences, think about
   your final decision.
   I would like to know which action I should take based on the information provided above.


           Figure 10: E XAMPLE C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE B ELIEF S TATE E LICIATION P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE
   Below is an agriculture report published by the USDA. It gives an overview of the fruit and nut
   market in the United States, with an additional focus on information pertaining to apple, avocado,
   grape, grapefruit, lemon, peach, pear.
   Market Overview: the usda report indicates a general increase in u.s. production of major noncitrus
   fruits for 2021, with apples, grapes, peaches, cranberries, and sweet and tart cherries seeing a
   rise in production, while pear production is forecasted to decline. the impact of extreme weather
   events and california’s ongoing drought on crop yields is uncertain. fruit and tree nut grower
   price indices remain high, with fluctuations throughout 2021. the consumer price index for fresh
   fruit also increased, suggesting higher retail prices. the northwest heat dome has introduced
   production uncertainty, particularly for tree fruits. the u.s. citrus season ended with declines in
   all commodities except california tangerines, and citrus prices are higher. tree nut supplies are
   forecasted to be down from the previous year’s record, with smaller almond and walnut crops expected
   to increase grower prices. factors such as weather conditions, supply chain issues, and demand are
   influencing the market.
   - Apple:
       - Product Summary: apple production is forecasted to be up 3 percent from 2020/21 but down
   5 percent from 2019/20. washington state’s crop is expected to be larger, but there is concern
   over heat damage. export markets may remain sluggish due to high tariffs and shipping challenges,
   potentially pushing more apples into the domestic market and lowering prices. processing prices may
   rise due to declines in new york and michigan, which account for a significant portion of processed
   apples.
       - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average apple yield is 19,000 LB / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 0.244 $ / LB.
   - avocado:
       - Product Summary: california avocado production has decreased, with wildfires and water
   restrictions impacting yields. however, u.s. avocado consumption has increased significantly,
   with imports from mexico and peru growing substantially. mexico dominates the u.s. avocado market,
   with imports peaking from may through july. peruvian imports compete during the summer months,
   traditionally a period of lower mexican imports.
       - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average avocado yield is 2.87 TONS / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 2,430 $ / TON.
   ···
   - pear:
       - Product Summary: pear production is forecasted to be similar to the previous year, with
   losses in washington but gains in oregon and california. the impact of the northwest heat wave
   on production levels is still uncertain, but traditional pear trees with large canopies may offer
   some protection from heat damage.
       - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average pear yield is 15.6 TONS / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 565 $ / TON.
   I would like to adopt a decision making under uncertainty framework to make my decision. The goal
   of you, the decision maker, is to choose an optimal action, while accounting for uncertainty in the
   unknown state. The first step of this procedure is for you to produce a belief distribution over the
   future state. The state is a vector of 16 elements, each of which is a random variable. The state
   variables are enumerated below:
       - climate condition: the climate condition of the next agricultural season in California
       - supply chain disruptions: the supply chain disruptions of the next agricultural season in
   California
       - apple price change: the change in price per unit of apple for the next agricultural season in
   California
       - apple yield change: the change in yield of apple for the next agricultural season in California
       - avocado price change: the change in price per unit of avocado for the next agricultural season
   in California
       - avocado yield change: the change in yield of avocado for the next agricultural season in
   California
       ···
       - pear yield change: the change in yield of pear for the next agricultural season in California
   You should format your response as a JSON object with 16 keys, wherein each key should be a state
   variable from the list above.
   Each key should map to a JSON object with 3 keys, each of which is a string that describes the value
   of the state variable. Together, these keys should enumerate the top 3 most likely values of the
   state variable. Each key should map to your belief verbalized in natural language. If the state
   variable is continuous (e.g. changes to a quantity), you should discretize it into 3 bins.
   You should strictly choose your belief from the following list: ’very likely’, ’likely’, ’somewhat
   likely’, ’somewhat unlikely’, ’unlikely’, ’very unlikely’. For example, if one of the state variable
   is ’climate condition’, and the top 3 most likely values are ’drought’, ’heavy precipitation’, and
   ’snowstorm’, then your response should be formatted as follows:
   {
       "climate condition": {
           "drought": "somewhat likely",
           "heavy precipitation": "very likely",
           "snowstorm": "unlikely"
       },
       ...
   }   Figure 11: E XAMPLE B ELIEF S TATE E LICIATION P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE FAILURE C ASE FOR AGRICULTURE
   Ground Truth: Apple
   Prompt (Market overview omitted for brevity)
   - apple:
      - Product Summary: apple production is forecasted to be up 3 percent from 2020/21 but down
   5 percent from 2019/20. washington state’s crop is expected to be larger, but there is concern
   over heat damage. export markets may remain sluggish due to high tariffs and shipping challenges,
   potentially pushing more apples into the domestic market and lowering prices. processing prices may
   rise due to declines in new york and michigan, which account for a significant portion of processed
   apples.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average apple yield is 19,000 LB / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 0.244 $ / LB.
   - grapefruit:
      - Product Summary: grapefruit production has been significantly affected by winter storm uri
   in texas, reducing the crop to half the volume predicted. florida continues to lead in grapefruit
   production, but the impact of citrus greening disease and decreased bearing acreage has led to lower
   production levels. with reduced domestic production, imports have increased, and the average price
   for grapefruit has risen.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average grapefruit yield is 457 BOXES / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 24.33 $ / BOX, ON TREE EQUIV.
   I’m a farmer in California planning what fruit to plant next year. I would like to maximize my
   profit with ’10’ acres of land.
   Below are the actions I can take:
   Action 1. apple: 10 acres
   Action 2. grapefruit: 10 acres
   Prediction: Grapefruit
   Response Based on the provided data, grapefruit yields a higher revenue per acre than apples in
   california. the average yield for apples is 19,000 lb / acre at a price of 0.244 $ / lb, resulting
   in a revenue of $4,636 per acre (19,000 lb * 0.244 $ / lb). in contrast, grapefruit has an average
   yield of 457 boxes / acre at a price of 24.33 $ / box, on tree equiv, which results in a revenue
   of $11,116.71 per acre (457 boxes * 24.33 $ / box). despite the challenges faced by grapefruit
   production, such as the impact of winter storm uri and citrus greening disease, the higher price and
   yield per acre make grapefruit the more profitable option for maximizing profit on your 10 acres of
   land in california.
   DeLLMa explanation for ranking the following state-action pair at the top
   State climate condition: continued drought, supply chain disruptions: moderate disruptions,
   apple price change: increase, apple yield change: no change, grapefruit price change: increase,
   grapefruit yield change: increase
   Action apple: 10 acres
   Explanation ...   given the information provided, we prioritize scenarios where the price of the crop
   is likely to increase and the yield is not expected to decrease significantly.    state-action pair 4
   is chosen as the optimal action because it occurs under a continued drought (which is very likely),
   with moderate supply chain disruptions (likely), an increase in apple price (somewhat likely), no
   change in apple yield (likely), and an increase in grapefruit yield (unlikely).    this suggests that
   apples have a stable yield and a potential for price increase, making them a more reliable choice for
   maximizing profit.    the ranking of the other state-action pairs is based on a similar evaluation of
   the expected outcomes, with a preference for scenarios with stable or increasing prices and yields,
   and lower risk of negative impacts from climate and supply chain disruptions.


                        Figure 12: FAILURE E XAMPLE A PPLE VS . G RAPEFRUIT


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE D E LLM A R ANKING P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE
   Below is an agriculture report published by the USDA. It gives an overview of the fruit and nut
   market in the United States, with an additional focus on information pertaining to apple, avocado.
   Market Overview: the usda report indicates a general increase in u.s. production of major noncitrus
   fruits for 2021, with apples, grapes, peaches, cranberries, and sweet and tart cherries seeing a
   rise in production, while pear production is forecasted to decline. the impact of extreme weather
   events and california’s ongoing drought on crop yields is uncertain. fruit and tree nut grower
   price indices remain high, with fluctuations throughout 2021. the consumer price index for fresh
   fruit also increased, suggesting higher retail prices. the northwest heat dome has introduced
   production uncertainty, particularly for tree fruits. the u.s. citrus season ended with declines in
   all commodities except california tangerines, and citrus prices are higher. tree nut supplies are
   forecasted to be down from the previous year’s record, with smaller almond and walnut crops expected
   to increase grower prices. factors such as weather conditions, supply chain issues, and demand are
   influencing the market.
   - apple:
      - Product Summary: apple production is forecasted to be up 3 percent from 2020/21 but down
   5 percent from 2019/20. washington state’s crop is expected to be larger, but there is concern
   over heat damage. export markets may remain sluggish due to high tariffs and shipping challenges,
   potentially pushing more apples into the domestic market and lowering prices. processing prices may
   rise due to declines in new york and michigan, which account for a significant portion of processed
   apples.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average apple yield is 19,000 LB / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 0.244 $ / LB.
   - avocado:
      - Product Summary: california avocado production has decreased, with wildfires and water
   restrictions impacting yields. however, u.s. avocado consumption has increased significantly,
   with imports from mexico and peru growing substantially. mexico dominates the u.s. avocado market,
   with imports peaking from may through july. peruvian imports compete during the summer months,
   traditionally a period of lower mexican imports.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average avocado yield is 2.87 TONS / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 2,430 $ / TON.
   I’m a farmer in California planning what fruit to plant next year. I would like to maximize my
   profit with ’10’ acres of land.
   Below are the actions I can take: Action 1. apple: 10 acres Action 2. avocado: 10 acres
   I would like to adopt a decision making under uncertainty framework to make my decision. The goal
   of you, the decision maker, is to choose an optimal action, while accounting for uncertainty in the
   unknown state. Previously, you have already provided a forecast of future state variables relevant
   to planting decisions. The state is a vector of 6 elements, each of which is a random variable. The
   state variables (and their most probable values) are enumerated below:
   - climate condition: ’continued drought’: ’very likely’, ’mild improvement’: ’somewhat likely’,
   ’significant improvement’: ’unlikely’
   - supply chain disruptions: ’minor disruptions’: ’somewhat likely’, ’moderate disruptions’:
   ’likely’, ’severe disruptions’: ’somewhat unlikely’
   - apple price change: ’increase’: ’somewhat likely’, ’no change’: ’likely’, ’decrease’: ’somewhat
   unlikely’
   - apple yield change: ’increase’: ’somewhat unlikely’, ’no change’: ’likely’, ’decrease’:
   ’somewhat likely’
   - avocado price change: ’increase’: ’likely’, ’no change’: ’somewhat likely’, ’decrease’:
   ’unlikely’
   - avocado yield change: ’increase’: ’unlikely’, ’no change’: ’somewhat likely’, ’decrease’:
   ’likely’
   Below, I have sampled a set of state-action pairs, wherein states are sampled from the state belief
   distribution you provided and actions are sampled uniformly from the action space. I would like to
   construct a utility function from your comparisons of state-action pairs
   - State-Action Pair 1. State: climate condition: continued drought, supply chain disruptions:
   minor disruptions, apple price change: no change, apple yield change: no change, avocado price
   change: increase, avocado yield change: decrease; Action 1. apple: 10 acres
   - State-Action Pair 2. State: climate condition: significant improvement, supply chain
   disruptions: moderate disruptions, apple price change: decrease, apple yield change: decrease,
   avocado price change: decrease, avocado yield change: decrease; Action 2. avocado: 10 acres
   [State-Action Pairs 3 - 7, omitted for brevity]
   - State-Action Pair 8. State: climate condition: continued drought, supply chain disruptions:
   minor disruptions, apple price change: decrease, apple yield change: increase, avocado price
   change: no change, avocado yield change: increase; Action 2. avocado: 10 acres
   You should format your response as a JSON object. The JSON object should contain the following keys:
   - decision: a string that describes the state-action pair you recommend the farmer to take.
   The output format should be the same as the format of the state-action pairs listed above, e.g.
   State-Action Pair 5.
   - rank: a list of integers that ranks the state-action pairs in decreasing rank of preference. For
   example, if you think the first state-action pair is the most preferred, the second state-action pair
   is the second most preferred, and so on. For example, [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
   - explanation:   a string that describes, in detail, the reasoning behind your decision.   You should
   include information on the expected yield and price of each fruit, as well as factors that affect
   them.

            Figure 13: E XAMPLE D E LLM A R ANKING P ROMPT FOR AGRICULTURE


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   F ORMATTED GPT-4 S UMMARIZATION R ESPONSE
   "summary": "the usda report indicates a general increase in u.s. production of major noncitrus
   fruits for 2021, with apples, grapes, peaches, cranberries, and sweet and tart cherries seeing a
   rise in production, while pear production is forecasted to decline. the impact of extreme weather
   events and california’s ongoing drought on crop yields is uncertain. fruit and tree nut grower
   price indices remain high, with fluctuations throughout 2021. the consumer price index for fresh
   fruit also increased, suggesting higher retail prices. the northwest heat dome has introduced
   production uncertainty, particularly for tree fruits. the u.s. citrus season ended with declines in
   all commodities except california tangerines, and citrus prices are higher. tree nut supplies are
   forecasted to be down from the previous year’s record, with smaller almond and walnut crops expected
   to increase grower prices. factors such as weather conditions, supply chain issues, and demand are
   influencing the market.",
   "apple": {
          "summary": "apple production is forecasted to be up 3 percent from 2020/21 but down 5 percent
   from 2019/20. washington state’s crop is expected to be larger, but there is concern over heat
   damage. export markets may remain sluggish due to high tariffs and shipping challenges, potentially
   pushing more apples into the domestic market and lowering prices. processing prices may rise due to
   declines in new york and michigan, which account for a significant portion of processed apples.",
          "yield": "19,000 LB / ACRE",
          "price": "0.244 $ / LB"
   },
   "avocado": {
          "summary": "california avocado production has decreased, with wildfires and water
   restrictions impacting yields. however, u.s. avocado consumption has increased significantly,
   with imports from mexico and peru growing substantially. mexico dominates the u.s. avocado market,
   with imports peaking from may through july. peruvian imports compete during the summer months,
   traditionally a period of lower mexican imports.",
          "yield": "2.87 TONS / ACRE",
          "price": "2,430 $ / TON"
   },
   "grape": {
          "summary": "grape production is forecasted to be up 9 percent from 2020, despite drought and
   heat conditions. california table-type grape production is also expected to increase. high heat
   has affected the industry, with coachella valley shipments down and central california shipments up.
   imports from mexico, the main competitor, were down slightly, but overall shipments were higher in
   2021 than the previous year.",
          "yield": "6.92 TONS / ACRE",
          "price": "908 $ / TON"
   },
   "grapefruit": {...Omitted for Brevity...}
   "lemon": {...Omitted for Brevity...},
   "peach": {...Omitted for Brevity...},
   "pear": {...Omitted for Brevity...},
   "strawberry": {...Omitted for Brevity...},
   "factors": [
          "extreme weather events and climate conditions",
          "supply chain disruptions and shipping challenges",
          "domestic and international demand for produce",
          "pest and disease pressures, such as citrus greening",
          "changes in consumer preferences and health trends"
   ]


                 Figure 14: F ORMATTED GPT-4 S UMMARIZATION R ESPONSE


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT R ESPONSE FOR AGRICULTURE
   RE S P O N S E T O PR O M P T 1
   "response": {
                "unknown factors": {
                        "weather conditions": "the report mentions the ongoing drought in california and the
   impact of the northwest heat dome on tree fruits. future weather events such as heatwaves, droughts,
   or wildfires could significantly affect crop yields and quality.",
                        "market demand fluctuations": "consumer preferences and market demand for apples and
   avocados can change, impacting the potential profitability of each crop.",
                        "supply chain issues": "disruptions in the supply chain can affect the ability to get
   products to market efficiently and could influence costs and selling prices.",
                        "pest and disease outbreaks": "outbreaks of pests or diseases could reduce yields or
   lead to increased costs for pest control and management.",
                        "labor availability and costs": "availability and cost of labor can significantly
   impact the cost of production, especially for labor-intensive crops like fruits.",
   ...Omitted For Brevity...
                }
   }

   RE S P O N S E T O PR O M P T 2
   "response": {
              "global trade dynamics": {
                        "improved trade agreements": "somewhat likely",
                        "increased tariffs": "unlikely",
                        "increased international competition": "likely"
              },
              "labor availability and costs": {
                       "decreased labor availability": "likely", "increased labor costs":   "very likely",
                        "stable labor costs and availability": "somewhat unlikely"
              },
              "market demand fluctuations": {
                        "increased demand for apples and avocados": "likely",
                        "stable demand for apples and avocados": "somewhat likely",
                        "decreased demand for apples and avocados": "unlikely"
                },
                "pest and disease outbreaks": {
                        "outbreaks leading to yield loss": "somewhat likely",
                        "minor outbreaks with manageable impact": "likely",
                        "no significant outbreaks": "somewhat unlikely"
                },
              ...Omitted For Brevity...
   }

   RE S P O N S E T O PR O M P T 3
   {
              "decision": "action 2. avocado: 10 acres",
              "explanation": "based on the provided data and the estimated likelihood of various factors
   affecting crop production, planting avocados appears to be the more profitable option. although
   both apples and avocados are subject to risks such as labor costs, supply chain issues, and water
   availability, ..."
   }


          Figure 15: E XAMPLE C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT R ESPONSE FOR AGRICULTURE


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE D E LLM A R ESPONSE FOR AGRICULTURE
   RE S P O N S E T O BE L I E F DI S T R I B U T I O N EL I C I T A T I O N
   {
                "climate condition": {
                        "continued drought": "very likely",
                        "mild improvement": "somewhat likely",
                        "significant improvement": "unlikely"
                },
                "supply chain disruptions": {
                        "minor disruptions": "somewhat likely",
                        "moderate disruptions": "likely",
                        "severe disruptions": "somewhat unlikely"
                },
                "apple price change": {
                        "increase": "somewhat likely",
                        "no change": "likely",
                        "decrease": "somewhat unlikely"
                },
                "apple yield change": {
                        "increase": "somewhat unlikely",
                        "no change": "likely",
                        "decrease": "somewhat likely"
                },
                "avocado price change": {
                        "increase": "likely",
                        "no change": "somewhat likely",
                        "decrease": "unlikely"
                },
                "avocado yield change": {
                        "increase": "unlikely",
                        "no change": "somewhat likely",
                        "decrease": "likely"
                },
              ...Omitted For Brevity...
   }

   R E S P O N S E T O D E LLM A R A N K P R O M P T
   {
                 "decision": "state-action pair 18",
                 "rank": [ 18, 30, 4, 28, 31, 17, 26, 8, 6, 21, 3, 16, 32, 11, 19, 22, 23, 27, 10, 13, 9, 15,
   20, 12, 24, 14, 7, 5, 29, 25, 1, 2],
                 "explanation": "the decision-making process under uncertainty involves evaluating the
   potential outcomes of different actions given the probable states of the world. in this case, we
   are considering the planting of apples or avocados in california, taking into account various factors
   such as climate conditions, supply chain disruptions, and changes in yield and price for both fruits.
   the goal is to maximize profit on a 10-acre farm. to rank the state-action pairs, we consider the
   most probable values of the state variables and their impact on the outcomes of each action. the
   utility function is constructed based on the expected profitability of each action under the given
   state, considering both yield and price changes. state-action pair 18 is recommended because it
   represents a scenario with continued drought and moderate supply chain disruptions, which are likely
   to affect both crops. however, the price and yield of avocados are expected to increase, which
   suggests a higher potential for profit compared to apples, whose price remains unchanged and yield
   does not increase. the ranking reflects a preference for scenarios where avocados have favorable
   price and yield conditions, especially given the higher average price per unit for avocados and
   the significant increase in u.s. consumption, which suggests a strong market demand. scenarios
   with severe disruptions or decreases in yield or price are ranked lower due to the higher risk and
   potential for loss."
   }


                     Figure 16: E XAMPLE D E LLM A R ESPONSE FOR AGRICULTURE


                                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE FAILURE C ASE FOR AGRICULTURE
   Ground Truth: Avocado
   Prompt (Market overview omitted for brevity)
   - avocado:
      - Product Summary: california avocado production has decreased, with wildfires and water
   restrictions impacting yields. however, u.s. avocado consumption has increased significantly,
   with imports from mexico and peru growing substantially. mexico dominates the u.s. avocado market,
   with imports peaking from may through july. peruvian imports compete during the summer months,
   traditionally a period of lower mexican imports.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average avocado yield is 2.87 TONS / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 2,430 $ / TON.
   - grape:
      - Product Summary: grape production is forecasted to be up 9 percent from 2020, despite drought
   and heat conditions. california table-type grape production is also expected to increase. high heat
   has affected the industry, with coachella valley shipments down and central california shipments up.
   imports from mexico, the main competitor, were down slightly, but overall shipments were higher in
   2021 than the previous year.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average grape yield is 6.92 TONS / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 908 $ / TON.
   I’m a farmer in California planning what fruit to plant next year. I would like to maximize my
   profit with ’10’ acres of land.
   Below are the actions I can take:
   Action 1. avocado: 10 acres
   Action 2. grape: 10 acres
   Prediction: Grape
   Response ... although avocados have a higher price per ton, the significantly higher yield of
   grapes per acre makes grape production more profitable on a per-acre basis. additionally, the grape
   production is forecasted to be up despite the drought and heat conditions, indicating a resilient
   crop under current conditions. in contrast, avocado production has decreased due to wildfires and
   water restrictions, which may pose a higher risk. therefore, planting grapes is recommended to
   maximize profit on the 10 acres of land.
   DeLLMa explanation for ranking the following state-action pair at the top
   State climate condition: continued drought, supply chain disruptions: minor disruptions, avocado
   price change: increase, avocado yield change: decrease, grape price change: increase, grape yield
   change: no change
   Action avocado: 10 acres
   Explanation the decision is based on the combination of favorable price changes for avocados and the
   increase in avocado yield despite the continued drought.   the state indicates an increase in avocado
   price, which is likely, and a decrease in avocado yield, which is somewhat likely.   however, the
   decrease in yield is offset by the high price per ton for avocados, which is significantly higher
   than that of grapes.   additionally, the state indicates an increase in grape price, which is somewhat
   likely, and no change in grape yield, which is somewhat likely.   however, the lower price per ton
   for grapes makes the avocado option more appealing financially.   the continued drought condition is a
   concern for both crops, but avocados have historically been a more profitable crop in california due
   to their higher price per unit and strong market demand.   the minor supply chain disruptions are less
   severe than moderate disruptions, which could affect the grape market more due to its reliance on
   timely shipments for fresh consumption.   the combination of high prices and the ability to withstand
   drought conditions makes avocados a more optimal choice for maximizing profit on the 10 acres of land
   available.

                      Figure 17: FAILURE E XAMPLE AVOCADO VS . G RAPE


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE FAILURE C ASE FOR AGRICULTURE
   Ground Truth: Pear
   Prompt (Market overview omitted for brevity)
   - lemon:
      - Product Summary: lemon production is at its lowest in five years, with a 6 percent decrease
   for the fresh market. both california and arizona saw smaller crops, with arizona experiencing
   a significant drop due to heat damage. despite lower domestic production, fresh lemon imports
   increased, and u.s. fresh lemon exports decreased. grower prices for lemons have risen by 7
   percent.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average lemon yield is 428 BOXES / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 23.3 $ / BOX, ON TREE EQUIV.
   - pear:
      - Product Summary: pear production is forecasted to be similar to the previous year, with
   losses in washington but gains in oregon and california. the impact of the northwest heat wave
   on production levels is still uncertain, but traditional pear trees with large canopies may offer
   some protection from heat damage.
      - California Price and Yield Statistics: the average pear yield is 15.6 TONS / ACRE and the
   average price per unit is 565 $ / TON.
   I’m a farmer in California planning what fruit to plant next year. I would like to maximize my
   profit with ’10’ acres of land.
   Below are the actions I can take:
   Action 1. lemon: 10 acres
   Action 2. pear: 10 acres
   Prediction: Lemon
   Response
   based on the provided data, we can calculate the expected revenue for both lemons and pears per acre
   and then extrapolate that to 10 acres. for lemons, the average yield is 428 boxes per acre, and the
   average price per box is $23.3. this results in an expected revenue of 428 boxes/acre * $23.3/box
   = $9,972.4 per acre. for 10 acres, this would be $99,724. for pears, the average yield is 15.6
   tons per acre, and the average price per ton is $565. this results in an expected revenue of 15.6
   tons/acre * $565/ton = $8,814 per acre. for 10 acres, this would be $88,140. comparing the two,
   lemons are expected to yield higher revenue per acre than pears. additionally, the report indicates
   that lemon production is at its lowest in five years and grower prices have risen by 7 percent,
   which could potentially lead to even higher revenues if the trend continues. on the other hand,
   pear production is forecasted to be similar to the previous year and the impact of the northwest heat
   wave on production levels is still uncertain. therefore, based on the expected revenue and market
   conditions, planting lemons would be the more profitable action.
   DeLLMa explanation for ranking the following state-action pair at the top
   State climate condition: mild improvement, supply chain disruptions: minor disruptions, lemon price
   change: decrease, lemon yield change: no change, pear price change: increase, pear yield change:
   decrease
   Action pear: 10 acres
   Explanation the state indicates a mild improvement in climate conditions, which is beneficial for
   crop growth, and minor supply chain disruptions, which are less likely to impact the delivery and
   sale of the produce.   additionally, the lemon price is expected to decrease, and the lemon yield is
   not expected to change, which could result in lower profitability for lemons.   on the other hand,
   the pear price is expected to increase, and although the pear yield is expected to decrease, the
   higher price could compensate for the lower yield, potentially leading to higher profits for pears.
   furthermore, the average yield and price per unit for pears in california are favorable, with a
   high price per ton and a reasonable yield per acre.    given the uncertainties in the market and the
   specific conditions of the state variables, planting pears seems to be the more prudent choice in
   this scenario.   pairs with conditions that are more likely to lead to increased profitability and
   lower risk are ranked higher.


                          Figure 18: FAILURE E XAMPLE L EMON VS . P EAR


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE Z ERO -S HOT P ROMPT FOR S TOCKS
   Below are the stocks I am considering: AMD, GME. I would like to know which stock I should buy based
   on the information of their historical prices in the last 24 months. I can only buy one stock and
   I have a budget of 10000 dollars. I would like to maximize my profit. Today is 2023-12-01. I’m
   buying stocks today and will sell them at the end of the month (2023-12-29).
   Below are the information about stock AMD (i.e. Advanced Micro Devices). Units are in dollars per
   share.
   Current Price: 119.88.
   Historical Prices: 2021-12: 143.49, 2022-01: 126.84, 2022-02: 119.63, 2022-03: 112.68, 2022-04:
   95.80, 2022-05: 94.27, 2022-06: 90.85, 2022-07: 82.90, 2022-08: 96.37, 2022-09: 74.99, 2022-10:
   60.32, 2022-11: 69.61, 2022-12: 68.09, 2023-01: 70.27, 2023-02: 82.07, 2023-03: 90.47, 2023-04:
   90.81, 2023-05: 102.22, 2023-06: 117.79, 2023-07: 113.69, 2023-08: 108.82, 2023-09: 103.11,
   2023-10: 102.56, 2023-11: 117.59.
   Below are the information about stock GME (i.e. GameStop Corp). Units are in dollars per share.
   Current Price: 14.52.
   Historical Prices: 2021-12: 39.48, 2022-01: 29.49, 2022-02: 29.20, 2022-03: 29.93, 2022-04:
   36.32, 2022-05: 26.57, 2022-06: 32.74, 2022-07: 34.21, 2022-08: 36.60, 2022-09: 26.81, 2022-10:
   25.85, 2022-11: 26.21, 2022-12: 21.54, 2023-01: 19.60, 2023-02: 20.84, 2023-03: 19.42, 2023-04:
   21.27, 2023-05: 21.65, 2023-06: 24.38, 2023-07: 23.04, 2023-08: 19.12, 2023-09: 17.66, 2023-10:
   14.33, 2023-11: 13.15.
   I’m a trader planning my next move. I would like to maximize my profit with 10000 dollars.
   Below are the actions I can take:
   Action 1. AMD: 10000 dollars
   Action 2. GME: 10000 dollars
   I would like to know which action I should take based on the information provided above.


                    Figure 19: E XAMPLE Z ERO -S HOT P ROMPT FOR S TOCKS


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT P ROMPT FOR S TOCKS
   PR O M P T 1
   Below are the stocks I am considering: AMD, GME. I would like to know which stock I should buy based
   on the information of their historical prices in the last 24 months. I can only buy one stock and
   I have a budget of 10000 dollars. I would like to maximize my profit. Today is 2023-12-01. I’m
   buying stocks today and will sell them at the end of the month (2023-12-29).
   Below are the information about stock AMD (i.e. Advanced Micro Devices). Units are in dollars per
   share.
   Current Price: 119.88.
   Historical Prices: 2021-12: 143.49, 2022-01: 126.84, 2022-02: 119.63, 2022-03: 112.68, 2022-04:
   95.80, 2022-05: 94.27, 2022-06: 90.85, 2022-07: 82.90, 2022-08: 96.37, 2022-09: 74.99, 2022-10:
   60.32, 2022-11: 69.61, 2022-12: 68.09, 2023-01: 70.27, 2023-02: 82.07, 2023-03: 90.47, 2023-04:
   90.81, 2023-05: 102.22, 2023-06: 117.79, 2023-07: 113.69, 2023-08: 108.82, 2023-09: 103.11,
   2023-10: 102.56, 2023-11: 117.59.
   Below are the information about stock GME (i.e. GameStop Corp). Units are in dollars per share.
   Current Price: 14.52.
   Historical Prices: 2021-12: 39.48, 2022-01: 29.49, 2022-02: 29.20, 2022-03: 29.93, 2022-04:
   36.32, 2022-05: 26.57, 2022-06: 32.74, 2022-07: 34.21, 2022-08: 36.60, 2022-09: 26.81, 2022-10:
   25.85, 2022-11: 26.21, 2022-12: 21.54, 2023-01: 19.60, 2023-02: 20.84, 2023-03: 19.42, 2023-04:
   21.27, 2023-05: 21.65, 2023-06: 24.38, 2023-07: 23.04, 2023-08: 19.12, 2023-09: 17.66, 2023-10:
   14.33, 2023-11: 13.15.
   I’m a trader planning my next move. I would like to maximize my profit with 10000 dollars.
   Below are the actions I can take:
   Action 1. AMD: 10000 dollars
   Action 2. GME: 10000 dollars
   First think about the unknown factors that would affect your final decisions.

   PR O M P T 2
   <SAME CONTEXT>
   Now I have enumerated the unknown factors that would affect my final decisions:
   <RESPONSE FROM PROMPT 1 CONTAINING LLM ENUMERATED UNKOWN FACTORS>
   Given these unknow factors, think about the possiblity that each factor would occur within a month.

   PR O M P T 3
   <SAME CONTEXT>
   Now I have enumerated the unknown factors that would affect my final decisions:
   <RESPONSE FROM PROMPT 1 CONTAINING LLM ENUMERATED UNKOWN FACTORS>
   I also empirically estimated the possibility of occurrence of each possible factor:
   <RESPONSE FROM PROMPT 2 CONTAINING LLM BELIEF DISTRIBUTION OVER UNKOWN FACTORS>
   Given these unknow factors and the possibility estimates of these factors’ occurrences, think about
   your final decision.
   I would like to know which action I should take based on the information provided above.


              Figure 20: E XAMPLE C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT P ROMPT FOR S TOCKS


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE D E LLM A R ANKING P ROMPT FOR S TOCKS
   Below are the stocks I am considering: AMD, GME. I would like to know which stock I should buy based
   on the information of their historical prices in the last 24 months. I can only buy one stock and
   I have a budget of 10000 dollars. I would like to maximize my profit. Today is 2023-12-01. I’m
   buying stocks today and will sell them at the end of the month (2023-12-29).
   Below are the information about stock AMD (i.e. Advanced Micro Devices). Units are in dollars per
   share.
   Current Price: 119.88.
   Historical Prices: 2021-12: 143.49, 2022-01: 126.84, 2022-02: 119.63, 2022-03: 112.68, 2022-04:
   95.80, 2022-05: 94.27, 2022-06: 90.85, 2022-07: 82.90, 2022-08: 96.37, 2022-09: 74.99, 2022-10:
   60.32, 2022-11: 69.61, 2022-12: 68.09, 2023-01: 70.27, 2023-02: 82.07, 2023-03: 90.47, 2023-04:
   90.81, 2023-05: 102.22, 2023-06: 117.79, 2023-07: 113.69, 2023-08: 108.82, 2023-09: 103.11,
   2023-10: 102.56, 2023-11: 117.59.
   Below are the information about stock GME (i.e. GameStop Corp). Units are in dollars per share.
   Current Price: 14.52.
   Historical Prices: 2021-12: 39.48, 2022-01: 29.49, 2022-02: 29.20, 2022-03: 29.93, 2022-04:
   36.32, 2022-05: 26.57, 2022-06: 32.74, 2022-07: 34.21, 2022-08: 36.60, 2022-09: 26.81, 2022-10:
   25.85, 2022-11: 26.21, 2022-12: 21.54, 2023-01: 19.60, 2023-02: 20.84, 2023-03: 19.42, 2023-04:
   21.27, 2023-05: 21.65, 2023-06: 24.38, 2023-07: 23.04, 2023-08: 19.12, 2023-09: 17.66, 2023-10:
   14.33, 2023-11: 13.15.
   I’m a trader planning my next move. I would like to maximize my profit with ’10000’ dollars.
   Below are the actions I can take:
   Action 1. AMD: 10000 dollars
   Action 2. GME: 10000 dollars
   I would like to adopt a decision making under uncertainty framework to make my decision. The goal
   of you, the decision maker, is to choose an optimal action, while accounting for uncertainty in the
   unknown state. Previously, you have already provided a forecast of future state variables relevant
   to planting decisions. The state is a vector of 20 elements, each of which is a random variable.
   The state variables (and their most probable values) are enumerated below:
   <ENUMERATE STATE BELIEF DISTRIBUTION>
   Below, I have sampled a set of state-action pairs, wherein states are sampled from the state belief
   distribution you provided and actions are sampled uniformly from the action space. I would like to
   know which state-action pair I should take based on the information you have so far.
   - State-Action Pair 1. State: economic health: recession, market sentiment and investor
   psychology: neutral, political events and government policies: stable, natural disasters and
   other ’black swan’ events: none, geopolitical issues: stable, merges and major acquisitions related
   to advanced micro devices (amd): none, regulatory changes and legal issues happened to advanced
   micro devices (amd): minor, financial health of advanced micro devices (amd): weak, company growth
   of advanced micro devices (amd): stagnant, company product launches of advanced micro devices (amd):
   moderate impact, merges and major acquisitions related to gamestop corp (gme): none, regulatory
   changes and legal issues happened to gamestop corp (gme): major, financial health of gamestop corp
   (gme): weak, company growth of gamestop corp (gme): stagnant, company product launches of gamestop
   corp (gme): moderate impact; Action 1. AMD: 10000 dollars
   - State-Action Pair 2. State: economic health: recession, market sentiment and investor
   psychology: optimistic, political events and government policies: stable, natural disasters and
   other ’black swan’ events: minor impact, geopolitical issues: stable, merges and major acquisitions
   related to advanced micro devices (amd): none, regulatory changes and legal issues happened to
   advanced micro devices (amd): none, financial health of advanced micro devices (amd): stable,
   company growth of advanced micro devices (amd): rapid, company product launches of advanced micro
   devices (amd): successful, merges and major acquisitions related to gamestop corp (gme): none,
   regulatory changes and legal issues happened to gamestop corp (gme): none, financial health of
   gamestop corp (gme): strong, company growth of gamestop corp (gme): rapid, company product launches
   of gamestop corp (gme): unsuccessful; Action 2. GME: 10000 dollars
   ....
   ....
   ....
   - State-Action Pair 50. State: economic health: stable, market sentiment and investor psychology:
   neutral, political events and government policies: major upheaval, natural disasters and other
   ’black swan’ events: minor impact, geopolitical issues: stable, merges and major acquisitions
   related to advanced micro devices (amd): major, regulatory changes and legal issues happened to
   advanced micro devices (amd): minor, financial health of advanced micro devices (amd): stable,
   company growth of advanced micro devices (amd): stagnant, company product launches of advanced
   micro devices (amd): moderate impact, merges and major acquisitions related to gamestop corp (gme):
   none, regulatory changes and legal issues happened to gamestop corp (gme): major, financial health
   of gamestop corp (gme): weak, company growth of gamestop corp (gme): moderate, company product
   launches of gamestop corp (gme): successful; Action 1. AMD: 10000 dollars
   You should format your response as a JSON object. The JSON object should contain the following keys:
   - decision: a string that describes the state-action pair you recommend the trader to take.
   The output format should be the same as the format of the state-action pairs listed above, e.g.
   State-Action Pair 5.
   - rank: a list of integers that ranks the state-action pairs in decreasing rank of preference. For
   example, if you think the first state-action pair is the most preferred, the second state-action pair
   is the second most preferred, and so on. For example, [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
   - explanation:   a string that describes, in detail, the reasoning behind your decision.   You should
   include information on the expected price of each stock, as well as factors that affect them.


               Figure 21: E XAMPLE D E LLM A R ANKING P ROMPT FOR S TOCKS


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE Z ERO -S HOT R ESPONSE FOR S TOCK
   {
          "decision": "action 1. amd: 10000 dollars",
          "explanation": "based on the historical price data provided, amd has shown a pattern of
   increasing in value from november to december in the previous year (2022), going from 69.61 in
   november to 68.09 in december. although this is a slight decrease, it is important to note that
   the price in november 2023 is significantly higher than in november 2022, suggesting a stronger
   performance year over year. additionally, amd’s current price of 119.88 is close to its recent high
   in june 2023 of 117.79, indicating a potential for continued growth or stability in the short term.
   on the other hand, gme’s historical prices show a decline from november to december in 2022, and the
   current price of 14.52 is lower than the previous year’s december price of 21.54, suggesting a weaker
   performance and potentially less room for growth within the same timeframe. given the historical
   data and the current trends, investing in amd appears to have a higher potential for profit when
   selling at the end of december 2023. however, it is important to consider that past performance is
   not always indicative of future results, and this analysis does not account for external factors such
   as market conditions, company performance, and industry trends that could impact stock prices."
   }


                 Figure 22: Z ERO - SHOT R ESPONSE FOR THE S TOCK DATASET


                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT R ESPONSE FOR S TOCK
   RE S P O N S E T O PR O M P T 1
   "response": {
                "unknown factors": {
                        "market conditions": "current market conditions and economic indicators such as
   interest rates, inflation, and economic growth can significantly impact stock prices.",
                        "company performance": "future earnings reports, product launches, and other
   company-specific news that could affect the stock price are unknown.",
                        "industry trends": "changes in the technology and retail sectors, respectively, could
   influence the performance of amd and gme.",
                        "regulatory changes": "any upcoming regulatory changes that could impact the companies’
   operations or industry dynamics are not known.",
                        "investor sentiment": "the overall sentiment of investors towards the stock market and
   these specific stocks could change, affecting their prices.",
   ...Omitted For Brevity...
                }
   }

   RE S P O N S E T O PR O M P T 2
   "response": {
                "company performance": {
                        "future earnings reports exceed expectations": "somewhat likely",
                        "product launches are successful and well-received": "likely",
                        "company-specific negative news arises": "somewhat unlikely"
   },
                "competition": {
                        "competitors release superior products": "somewhat likely",
                        "competitors take significant market share": "unlikely",
                        "amd/gme maintains competitive edge": "likely"
   },
                "global events": {
                        "geopolitical tensions escalate": "somewhat likely",
                        "natural disasters affect market": "unlikely",
                        "new pandemic arises": "very unlikely"
   },
                "industry trends": {
                        "technology sector continues to grow": "likely",
                        "retail sector faces challenges": "somewhat likely",
                        "shift in consumer behavior affects gme": "likely"
   }
              ...Omitted For Brevity...
   }

   RE S P O N S E T O PR O M P T 3
   {
                "decision": "action 1. amd: 10000 dollars",
                "explanation": "based on the historical prices provided and the empirically estimated
   possibilities of various factors occurring, the recommendation is to purchase amd stock.
   historically, amd’s stock has shown a pattern of increase from november to december in the previous
   year (2022), going from 69.61 to 68.09 dollars per share..."
   }


               Figure 23: E XAMPLE C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT R ESPONSE FOR S TOCK


                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   E XAMPLE D E LLM A R ESPONSE FOR S TOCK
   RE S P O N S E T O BE L I E F DI S T R I B U T I O N EL I C I T A T I O N
   {
                "economic health": {
                        "growth": "somewhat likely",
                        "stable": "likely",
                        "recession": "somewhat unlikely"
                },
                "market sentiment and investor psychology": {
                        "optimistic": "somewhat likely",
                        "neutral": "likely",
                        "pessimistic": "somewhat unlikely"
                },
                "political events and government policies": {
                        "stable": "likely",
                        "minor changes": "somewhat likely",
                        "major upheaval": "unlikely"
                },
                "natural disasters and other ’black swan’ events": {
                        "none": "likely",
                        "minor impact": "somewhat likely",
                        "major impact": "unlikely"
                },
                "geopolitical issues": {
                        "stable": "somewhat likely",
                        "tensions rising": "likely",likely",
                        "escalation to conflict": "unlikely"
                },
                "merges and major acquisitions related to advanced micro devices (amd)":   {
                        "none": "very likely",
                        "minor": "somewhat unlikely",
                        "major": "unlikely"
                },
              ...Omitted For Brevity...
   }

   R E S P O N S E T O D E LLM A R A N K P R O M P T
   {
                 "decision": "state-action pair 32",
                 "rank": [32, 13, 6, 3, 28, 31, 1, 11, 19, 22, 14, 17, 23, 29, 26, 27, 25, 24, 30, 21, 18, 20,
   15, 10, 9, 12, 16, 7, 5, 4, 8, 2],
                 "explanation": "the decision-making process under uncertainty involves evaluating the
   state-action pairs based on the provided state variables and their most probable values. the goal
   is to maximize the expected utility, which in this case is the potential profit from the stock
   investment. given the budget constraint of $10 and the goal to sell at the end of the month, we need
   to consider the historical performance of the stocks, the current market conditions, and the state
   variables that could influence the stocks’ future prices. amd has shown a strong recovery trend
   in the past months, and the state variables suggest a stable to positive outlook for the company,
   with moderate to rapid growth and successful product launches being somewhat likely. gme, on the
   other hand, appears to be in a weaker position with stagnant growth and a weaker financial health
   being more likely. the chosen state-action pair 32 suggests an optimistic market sentiment, stable
   economic health, and a successful product launch for amd, despite a major impact from ’black swan’
   events, which could indicate a higher risk but potentially higher reward scenario. the ranking
   provided orders the state-action pairs from most to least preferred based on the positive indicators
   for amd and the negative indicators for gme, with a preference for scenarios that suggest economic
   growth, stable or optimistic market sentiment, and successful company performance for amd."
   }


                      Figure 24: E XAMPLE D E LLM A R ESPONSE FOR S TOCK


                                                        37
