Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S HARPNESS -AWARE M INIMIZATION E FFICIENTLY S E -
LECTS F LATTER M INIMA L ATE I N T RAINING

 Zhanpeng Zhou1∗† , Mingze Wang2∗, Yuchen Mao1 , Bingrui Li3 , Junchi Yan1,4†
 1
   Sch. of Computer Science & Sch. of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
 2
   Peking University 3 Tsinghua University 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
 {zzp1012,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT
          Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) has substantially improved the generaliza-
          tion of neural networks under various settings. Despite the success, its effectiveness
          remains poorly understood. In this work, we discover an intriguing phenomenon
          in the training dynamics of SAM, shedding light on understanding its implicit
          bias towards flatter minima over Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). Specifically,
          we find that SAM efficiently selects flatter minima late in training1 . Remarkably,
          even a few epochs of SAM applied at the end of training yield nearly the same
          generalization and solution sharpness as full SAM training. Subsequently, we delve
          deeper into the underlying mechanism behind this phenomenon. Theoretically,
          we identify two phases in the learning dynamics after applying SAM late in train-
          ing: i) SAM first escapes the minimum found by SGD exponentially fast; and ii)
          then rapidly converges to a flatter minimum within the same valley. Furthermore,
          we empirically investigate the role of SAM during the early training phase. We
          conjecture that the optimization method chosen in the late phase is more crucial
          in shaping the final solution’s properties. Based on this viewpoint, we extend
          our findings from SAM to Adversarial Training. We released our source code at
          https://github.com/zzp1012/SAM-in-Late-Phase.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Understanding the surprising generalization abilities of over-parameterized neural networks yields an
important yet open problem in deep learning. Recently, it has been observed that the generalization
of neural networks is closely tied to the sharpness of the loss landscape (Keskar et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2020). This has led to the development of
many gradient-based optimization algorithms that explicitly/implicitly regularize the sharpness of
solutions. In particular, Foret et al. (2021) proposed Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), which
has substantially improved the generalization and robustness (Zhang et al., 2024) of neural networks
across many tasks, including computer vision (Foret et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Kaddour et al.,
2022) and natural language processing (Bahri et al., 2022).
Despite the empirical success of SAM, its effectiveness is not yet fully understood. Andriushchenko
& Flammarion (2022) has shown that existing theoretical justifications based on PAC-Bayes gen-
eralization bounds (Foret et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020a) are incomplete in explaining the superior
performance of SAM. Additionally, recent theoretical analyses of SAM’s dynamics and properties
often rely on unrealistic assumptions, such as a sufficiently small learning rate or perturbation radius,
which undermines the validity of their conclusions. Understanding the hidden mechanisms behind
SAM remains an active area of research.
Recent works show that the effectiveness of gradient-based optimization methods can be attributed to
their implicit bias toward solutions with favorable properties (Vardi, 2023). One notable example of
such implicit bias is that Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its variants tend to find flat minima,
which often leads to better generalization (Keskar et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017). It is known that
    ∗
     Equal contribution.
    †
     Corresponding author. The work was in part supported by NSFC (62222607) and Shanghai Municipal
Science and Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102).
   1
    “Late in training” refers to the phase when the optimization process is nearing the late stages of training.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                           Generalization gap between
                                                                                                             𝜽SGD→SAM and 𝜽SAM
      Test Error
                                                                  SAM solution            SGD solution
                                                                 (at 200 epochs)         (at 175 epochs)


                             Epoch
                               (a)                                                 (b)

Figure 1: SAM operates efficiently even when applied only during the final few epochs of
training. (a) Test error curves for WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10 trained with different strategies.
The blue and green baseline curves represent training solely with SGD and SAM, respectively. The
orange curve shows the test error of a neural network initially trained with SGD up to epoch t = 175,
followed by SAM training up to epoch T = 200. The first 100 epochs are omitted for clarity. Curves
are means and standard deviations over five trials with different random seeds. The detailed settings
and hyper-parameters are described in Section 2. (b) A schematic picture of the training trajectory
after applying SAM late in training. The contour plot represents the loss landscape, with darker
regions indicating lower loss. The orange dotted lines depict the path of the SAM iterator.

SAM selects flatter minima over SGD in practice, which represents a form of implicit bias as well.
While the design of SAM is inspired by sharpness regularization, its practical implementation (see
Equation (3)), which minimizes a first-order approximation of the original objective (see Equations (1)
and (2)), does not explicitly achieve this. Understanding SAM’s implicit bias towards flatter minima,
especially in comparison to SGD, is of paramount importance for explaining its effectiveness.
In this work, we uncover an intriguing phenomenon in the training dynamics of SAM, which sheds
light on understanding its implicit bias toward flatter minima. Specifically, we find that SAM operates
efficiently even when applied only during the last few epochs of training2 . As shown in Figure 1
(a), SAM applied in the last few epochs—after initial training with SGD—can achieve nearly the
same test performance as training exclusively with SAM. Furthermore, our analysis of the solution
sharpness reveals that last-few-epochs SAM identifies flatter minima as effectively as full SAM
training. We conclude that SAM efficiently selects flatter minima over SGD late in training. Contrary
to the conventional view that early training dynamics are critical (Achille et al., 2019; Frankle et al.,
2020), our discovery underscores the importance of the late training phase for generalization.
Subsequently, we delve deeper into the mechanism behind the efficiency of SAM in selecting flatter
minima over SGD during the late phase of training. Theoretically, we identify a two-phase picture in
the learning dynamics after applying SAM late in training: Phase I. SAM initially escapes from the
relatively sharp minimum found by SGD exponentially fast; Phase II. it then rapidly converges to a
flatter minimum over SGD within the same valley. See Figure 1 (b) for an illustration. As outlined in
Table 1, we characterize the two-phase picture into four key claims (P1-4), each supported by rigorous
analyses of SAM’s convergence, escape behavior, and bias toward flatter minima. These claims
are further validated by experiments in both toy models and real-world scenarios. This two-phase
picture explains SAM’s ability to efficiently find flatter minima, even when applied only in the last
few epochs, yielding novel insights into its implicit bias and effectiveness.
Furthermore, we investigate the necessity of applying SAM during the early phase of training. Our
results show that early-phase SAM has a minimal effect on both generalization and sharpness of the
final solution. Based on these findings, we conjecture that the choice of the optimization algorithm
during the late phase of training plays a more critical role in shaping the final properties of the
solution. Extending this viewpoint to Adversarial Training (AT) (Madry et al., 2018) and robustness,
we find that similar to SAM, AT efficiently selects robust minima when applied late in training.
In summary, our work focuses on the implicit bias of SAM in the late training phase, which has not
yet been carefully studied. Our two-phase picture advances the understanding of its effectiveness.
    2
      Andriushchenko & Flammarion (2022) observed a similar finding but did not explore it in depth. Surprising,
we first show that even few epochs of SAM at the end of training yield generalization comparable to full SAM
training. We study this further via extensive experiments under various setup and rigorous theoretical analysis.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2       BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES
Notation and Setup. Let Dtrain = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 and Dtest = {(xi , yi )}n+m   i=n+1 be the training set
and the testing set, where xi ∈ Rd is the input and yi ∈ Rk is the corresponding target. We consider
a model in the form of f (x; θ), where θ ∈ Rp are the model parameters and f (x; θ) ∈ Rk is the
output of the input x. The loss of the model at the i-th sample (xi , yi ) is denoted as ℓ(yi ; f (xi ; θ)),
simplified to ℓi (θ). The loss over the training set and the testing loss are then given by LDtrain (θ) =
1
  Pn                                 1
                                       Pn+m
n    i=1 ℓi (θ) and LDtest (θ) = m        i=n+1 ℓi (θ), respectively. Unless otherwise specified, we
denote L(θ) = LDtrain (θ) for simplicity. For classification tasks, we define the classification error
on the test set Dtest as ErrDtest (θ). For a matrix A, let ∥A∥2 , ∥A∥F , and Tr(A) denote its spectral
norm, Frobenius norm and trace, respectively.
For our theoretical analysis in Section 4, we always assume k = 1 for simplicity3 and consider
the squared loss, i.e., ℓi (θ) = 12 |f (xi ; θ) − yi |2 . We focus on the over-parameterized case in
the sense that minθ L(θ) = 0. To characterize    Pn the local geometry of the training loss at point
θ, we consider the Fisher matrix G(θ) = n1 i=1 ∇f (xi ; θ)∇f (xi ; θ)⊤ and the Hessian matrix
                    Pn
H(θ) = G(θ) + n1 i=1 (f (xi ; θ) − yi ) ∇2 f (xi ; θ), where G(θ) ≈ H(θ) in the low-loss region.
Sharpness-Aware Minimization. The central idea behind SAM is to minimize the worst-case loss
within a neighborhood of the current parameters. Specifically, SAM problem can be formulated as
                        min LSAM (θ; ρ),      where     LSAM (θ; ρ) = max L(θ + ϵ).                                 (1)
                         θ                                                ∥ϵ∥2 ≤ρ

Here, ρ is a given neighborhood radius. However, finding the perturbation in the parameter space that
maximizes the loss, i.e. ϵ, can be computationally intractable in practice. Thus Foret et al. (2021)
approximated the maximize-loss perturbation using a first order solution:
                    ϵ ≈ arg max L (θ) + ϵ⊤ ∇L (θ) = ρ∇L (θ) / ∥∇L (θ)∥2 .

                                                                                                  (2)
                              ∥ϵ∥2 ≤ρ

Consequently, let η be the learning rate and ξt = {ξt,1 , · · · , ξt,B } ⊂ [n] be the batch indices
                                                                                               P sampled
at iteration t, where B is the batch size. The mini-batch loss is given by Lξt (θ) = B1 i∈ξt ℓi (θ).
With a small yet key modification to SGD , the update rule of SAM with stochastic gradients is:
            θ t+1 = θ t − η∇Lξt θ t + ρt ∇Lξt (θ t ) , where ρt = ρ/ ∇Lξt θ t 2 .

                                                                                                     (3)

Our experiments are conducted using SAM in Equation (3),                                𝜽0
whereas our theoretical analyses in Section 4 apply the simpli-
fied SAM in Equation (4). Specifically, we approximate the                              𝑡1
step size ρt in Equation (3) with a constant ρ. We also assume                         𝜽SGD
the independence between the randomness in the inner and
outer updates, i.e., ξt1 , ξt2 . These simplifications facilitate math-                         𝑡2
                                                                                               𝜽SGD
ematical tractability while capturing the central behavior of
SAM in training dynamics and generalization, which has been
supported by empirical evidence (Andriushchenko & Flam-
marion, 2022). They have also been widely adopted in recent                   𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM, 𝑡2 𝜽𝑇SGD 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM, 𝑡1 𝜽𝑇SAM
theoretical advances on SAM (Andriushchenko & Flammarion,
2022; Behdin & Mazumder, 2023; Agarwala & Dauphin, 2023;         Figure 2: The illustration of the
Behdin et al., 2023; Monzio Compagnoni et al., 2023).            switching method. Blue dashed
                                                                 lines represent SGD training, while
           θ t+1 = θ t − η∇Lξt1 θ t + ρ∇Lξt2 (θ t ) .               (4)
                                                                 orange dashed lines represent SAM
                                                                 training. θ 0 denotes the random ini-
Switching Method. In this paper, we demonstrate our main dis- tialization. t1 , t2 denotes two dif-
covery by switching between SGD and SAM at a specific point ferent switching points.
during training, referred to as switching method. Specifically,
let T be the total number of training epochs and t be the switching epoch, considering the switch
from SGD to SAM without loss of generality. We initially train the model from scratch with SGD
                     t                                                                       T
for t epochs to get θSGD , and then switch to SAM for the remaining T − t epochs to get θSGD→SAM,t   .
Notably, when t = T or t = 0, the model is trained exclusively with SGD or SAM, simply denoted
    3
        The extension to the case where k > 1 is straightforward.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       WideResNet-28-10 on CIFAR-100                       WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10


          Generalization gap between
            𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇SAM
     Sharpness of
     𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡


                                                                                                         𝑇−𝑡
                                                  SAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 :
                                                                                                          𝑇

                         ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 − ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM          Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 − Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM,t     ||𝐻 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 ||2


Figure 3: The impact of SAM training proportion on generalization/sharpness when switching
                                                                 T                T
from SGD to SAM. The generalization gap between the models θSGD→SAM,t      and θSAM  (top row) / the
              T                                                           T
sharpness of θSGD→SAM,t (bottom row) vs. the SAM training proportion of θSGD→SAM,t . Dots represent
the mean over three trials with different random seeds, and error bars indicate standard deviations.
Results on more datasets and architectures can be found in Appendix B.2.
    T          T
as θSGD and θSAM , respectively. See Figure 2 for an illustration. We fix the total number of training
epochs T and vary the switching point t to study the effect of SAM at different training phases. To
ensure a fair comparison, we ensure the same initialization, mini-batch orders, and hyper-parameters
across all models, regardless of the switching point. Consequently, the training trajectories of models
with different switching points align precisely before the switch.
Main Experimental Setup. Following Foret et al. (2021); Kwon et al. (2021), we perform experi-
ments on the commonly used image classification datasets CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009),
with standard architectures such as WideResNet (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016), ResNet (He et al.,
2016), and VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015). We use the standard configurations for the basic
training settings shared by SAM and SGD (e.g., learning rate, batch size, and data augmentation) as
in the original papers , and set the SAM-specific perturbation radius ρ to 0.05, as recommended by
Foret et al. (2021). We also extend our findings to AT (Madry et al., 2018) and ASAM (Kwon et al.,
2021). Due to space limits, more experimental details and results can be found in Appendix B.

3    SAM E FFICIENTLY S ELECTS F LATTER M INIMA L ATE IN T RAINING
In this section, we provide empirical evidence indicating that SAM efficiently selects flatter minima
over SGD late in training. We first show that applying SAM only during the last few epochs of
training achieves generalization comparable to training entirely with SAM. Taking a step further, we
demonstrate that last-few-epochs SAM finds flatter minima as effectively as full SAM training.
Applying SAM in the last few epochs achieves generalization comparable to full SAM training.
We conduct experiments on various datasets and architectures to investigate the effect of applying
SAM late in training, after initial training with SGD, on generalization. Specifically, we use the
switching method (detailed in Section 2), which switches from SGD to SAM at epoch t, to obtain
             T
the model θSGD→SAM,t    . For comparison, we train a baseline model entirely with SAM under the same
                        T
settings, resulting in θSAM . Both models are trained for a total of T epochs. To assess the generalization
             T                       T
ability of θSGD→SAM,t   relative to
                                    θSAM , we Tcalculated the test loss and  test error gaps between  these
                       T                                          T                        T

two models: LDtest θSGD→SAM,t − LDtest θSAM and ErrDtest θSGD→SAM,t           − ErrDtest θSAM  , where Dtest
                                                                      T                T
denotes the unseen test set. If the generalization gap between θSGD→SAM,t        and θSAM  approaches zero,
                T                                                                        T
then we say θSGD→SAM,t achieve nearly the same generalization performance as θSAM           .
Surprisingly, we find that applying SAM only in the final few epochs can achieve nearly the same
generalization performance as training entirely with SAM. In particular, we fix the number of total
                                                                                           T
training epochs T and vary the switching point t to adjust the SAM training proportion of θSGD→SAM,t ,
                                                                                 T               T
which is exactly (T − t)/T . We analyze how the generalization gap between θSGD→SAM,t       and θSAM
changes as the SAM training proportion increases. In Figure 3, the generalization gap becomes


                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


negligible once the SAM training proportion exceeds zero, indicating that even a few epochs of SAM
applied at the end of training yield generalization performance comparable to full SAM training. This
phenomenon is consistently observed across various datasets and architectures.
A similar phenomenon was noted by Andriushchenko & Flammarion (2022), but it was not given
significant attention. We isolate and extend this phenomenon by showing that even fewer epochs of
SAM (e.g. 1-5 epochs for WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10) applied in the late phase of training yield
test error and loss comparable to full SAM training.
Applying SAM in the last few epochs finds flatter minima as effectively as full SAM training.
Furthermore, we investigate the effect of applying SAM in the late phase of training on the sharpness
                                                                                               T
of the final solution. Similarly as before, we analyze how the sharpness of the solution θSGD→SAM,t
changes w.r.t. the SAM training proportion. We measure the sharpness along the most curved
direction of the loss surface, i.e., the spectral norm of the Hessian matrix ∥H(θ)∥2 . In Figure 3, the
                             T
sharpness of the solution θSGD→SAM,t    dramatically drops once the SAM training proportion is greater
than zero, reflecting a similar trend to the generalization gap. This indicates that applying SAM in the
last few epochs of training is as effective as training entirely with SAM in achieving flatter minima.
In summary, we see that SAM efficiently selects flatter minima over SGD when applied late in training.
This suggests a fine-tuning scheme for SAM: start from a pretrained checkpoint and continue training
with SAM for several epochs, reducing computational costs while maintaining similar performance.
In Section 4, we will dig deeper into the underlying mechanism behind this phenomenon and gain
new insights into SAM’s implicit bias towards flatter minima.


4       H OW SAM E FFICIENTLY S ELECTS F LATTER M INIMA L ATE IN T RAINING
We have seen that SAM efficiently selects flatter minima over SGD when applied late in training. In
this section, we aim to explore the precise mechanism behind this phenomenon. Theoretically, we
identify a two-phase picture in training dynamics after switching to SAM in the late phase, which is
characterized by four key claims (P1-4), as outlined in Table 1. This picture demonstrates that SAM
provably escapes the minimum found by SGD and converges to a flatter minimum within the same
valley in just a few steps, explaining its efficiency in selecting flatter minima late in training.

    Phase I          (P1). SAM rapidly escapes from the minimum found by SGD;              Corollary 4.2
    (escape)         (P2). However, the iterator remains within the current valley.        Proposition 4.1
    Phase II         (P3). SAM selects a flatter minimum compared to SGD;                  Theorem 4.1
    (converge)       (P4). The convergence rate of SAM is extremely fast.                  Theorem 4.3

             Table 1: Overview of the two-phase picture and corresponding theoretical results.

To understand the two-phase picture, let us first consider a toy but representative example.
Example 4.1. Consider using the shallow neural network f (u, v; x) = tanh(v tanh(ux)) to fit
a single data point (x = 1, y = 0) under the squared loss ℓ(y; y ′ ) = (y − y ′ )2 /2, then the loss
landscape can be written as L(θ) = 12 tanh2 (v tanh(u)), where θ = (u, v).

Figure 4 (a) visualizes the training dynamics for Example 4.1. In Figure 4 (a), the dynamics occur
within the valley surrounding the set of the minima M = {(u, v) : v = 0}. On M, the sharpness
is given by ∥H(θ)∥2 = Tr(H(θ)) = ∥H(θ)∥F = tanh2 (u), implying that the smaller the |u|, the
                                                                               end
flatter the minimum. Initially, SGD converges to a relatively sharp minimum θSGD   . After switching
to SAM, the iterator exhibits the two-phase dynamics:
                                                                  end
    • Phase I (escape). SAM first escapes the sharp minimum θSGD      found by SGD within a few
      iterations (P1), but remains within the same valley around M4 (P2);
                                                                                  end
    • Phase II (converge). SAM then rapidly converges to another flatter minimum θSAM (P3-4),
                                      end
      with a smaller |u| compared to θSGD .

    4
        Note that the landscape has another valley around a different set of minima N = {(u, v) : u = 0}


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   1
       Toy model on 2 tanh2 𝑣 tanh 𝑢𝑥                                   WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10


                                                                                     ℒ 𝜽𝜆
                                           ℒ𝐷train 𝜽𝑆𝐺𝐷→𝑆𝐴𝑀,𝑡
                                                    𝑡′+𝑡
𝑣


                                                                                     ℒ′′ 𝜽𝜆
                       𝑢                                            Step 𝑡′                           𝜆
                       (a)                                            (b)                             (c)

Figure 4: (a) Visualization of the two-phase dynamics for Example 4.1. The horizontal gray
line represents the set of the global minima M = {(u, v) : v = 0}, where smaller values of |u|
                                                                                  end
correspond to flatter minima. The blue lines trace the SGD iterates, leading to θSGD  , while the orange
                                                                         end              end        end
lines show the SAM iterates, which converge to a flatter minimum θSAM . Notably, θSGD          and θSAM
stay in the same valley around M. (b) The exponentially fast escape from minima found by SGD.
                     t+t′
Train loss LDtrain (θSGD→SAM,t ) v.s. the update step t′ . Here, t is the switching step, chosen to be
sufficiently large for SGD to converge, and t′ is the number of updates after switching to SAM. The
red line represents the mean over 100 trials with different randomness. (c) SAM converges to a flatter
minimum within the same valley as the one found by SGD. The loss L (top row) / the second-order
finite difference L′′ (bottom row) of the interpolated model θλ v.s. the interpolation coefficient λ.
                        end
Here, θλ = (1 − λ)θSGD→SAM             end
                                 + λθSGD   , and L′′ (θλ ) = (L(θλ+h ) + L(θλ−h ) − 2L(θλ )) /(2h)2 ,
                                                                              end               end
where h is fixed to 0.1. This is no barrier in the loss curve, indicating θSGD→SAM       and θSGD    stay
                            ′′                                            end                       end
within the same valley. L (θλ ) gradually increases with λ, implying θSGD→SAM is flatter than θSGD       .


This toy example successfully illustrates the two-phase picture after switching to SAM in the late
training phase, but it offers only a basic intuition. In the following, we will formally present our
theoretical results, with each claim rigorously supported by corresponding analysis.

4.1 T HEORETICAL GUARANTEES FOR P1 AND P3: LINEAR STABILITY ANALYSIS
In this subsection, we provide theoretical support for two key claims in our two-phase picture
through a linear stability analysis: P1. SAM escapes from the relatively sharp minima found by SGD
exponentially fast; P3. SAM selects a flatter minimum compared to SGD.
During the late phase of training, the model remains close to some global minimum θ ⋆ and can be
locally approximated by its linearization:

                              flin (x; θ) = f (x; θ ⋆ ) + ⟨∇f (x; θ ⋆ ), θ − θ ⋆ ⟩ .                        (5)

Consequently, we can characterize the local dynamical stability (Strogatz, 2000) of the SAM iterator
near the global minimum on this linearized model.
Similar to the linear stability of SGD (Wu et al., 2022), we define the linear stability of SAM in
Definition 4.1. Note that for a specific optimizer, only linearly stable minima can be selected.
Definition 4.1 (Loss-based linear stability of SAM). A global minimum θ ⋆ is said to be lin-
early
   Pnstable for SAM if there          exists a C > 0 such that, when SAM optimizes the loss L(θ) =
 1                               2
2n    i=1 (f lin (x i ; θ) − yi )  on  the linearized model (Equation (5)), the following condition holds:
E[L(θ t )] ≤ CE[L(θ 0 )], ∀t ≥ 0. Here, θ 0 could be any point near θ ⋆ where the linearization is valid.

Wu et al. (2022) has shown that the linear stability of stochastic algorithms is significantly influenced
by the gradient noise ξ(θ) = ∇ℓξ (θ) − ∇L(θ), where ξ denotes the index of a random sample.
Thus, it is crucial to consider the structural properties of the gradient noise in our analysis.
Gradient noise structure. A series of studies (Zhu et al., 2018; Feng & Tu, 2021; Wu et al., 2020b;
2022; Mori et al., 2022; Wojtowytsch, 2024) have established two key properties of the gradient
noise ξ(θ): (i) its shape is highly anisotropic; (ii) its magnitude is loss dependent. Specifically, by
incorporating both the noise shape and magnitude,
                                              Pn Mori et al. (2022) has proposed an approximation
for the gradient noise covariance Σ(θ) = n1 i=1 ξ(θ)ξ(θ)⊤ , suggesting Σ(θ) ∼ 2L(θ)G(θ).


                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Inspired by this approximation, we assume a weaker alignment property of the noise covariance Σ(θ)
(see Assumption 4.1) in our analysis, which has been theoretically and empirically validated in recent
works (Wu et al., 2022; Wang & Wu, 2023).
                                                                   Tr(Σ(θ)G(θ))
Assumption 4.1 (Gradient noise alignment). There exists γ > 0 s.t. 2L(θ)∥G(θ)∥ 2 ≥ γ for all θ.
                                                                                              F


By analyzing the linear stability of SAM under this gradient noise alignment assumption, we establish
two theorems supporting the two key claims P1 and P3.
Theorem 4.1 (P3. Proof in Appendix C.1.). Let θ ⋆ be a global minimum that is lin-
early stable  for SAM in Equation      (4), and suppose Assumption 4.1 holds. Then we have
         2         2             2
∥H(θ ⋆ )∥F 1 + ρBγ ∥H(θ ⋆ )∥F ≤ ηB2 γ .
Theorem 4.1 characterizes the sharpness of the linearly stable minima for SAM, which is influenced
by the learning rate η, the batch size B, and the perturbation radius ρ. Since only linearly stable
minima can be selected by optimizer, Theorem 4.1 characterizes the sharpness of global minima
selected by SAM. Notably, taking ρ = 0 recovers the corresponding result for SGD (see Table 2).

                                             SAM
                                                (Theorem 4.1)                      SGD (Wu et al., 2022)
                                            2      ρ2 γ       2                                   2
        Sharpness bound        ∥H(θ   ⋆
                                          )∥F ·1 + B ∥H(θ ⋆ )∥F ≤ ηB2 γ               ∥H(θ ⋆ )∥F ≤ ηB2 γ

           Table 2: Comparison of the sharpness of global minima selected by SAM and SGD.
Support for P3. We compare the bounds on the sharpness of the global minima selected by SAM
                                                                2
and SGD in Table 2. The additional term 1 + ρ2 γ ∥H(θ ⋆ )∥F > 1 in SAM’s bound impose stricter
requirement on the sharpness for by SAM compared to SGD, which supports our key claim P3 that
SAM tends to select flatter global minima over SGD. This term arises from SAM’s inner update,
i.e., θ t+1/2 = θ t + ρ∇ℓξt (θ t ) = θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ) + ρ(∇ℓξt (θ t ) − ∇L(θ t )). Intuitively, the ascent
update ρ∇L(θ t ) tends to increase the loss, while the noise ρ(∇ℓξt (θ t ) − ∇L(θ t )) introduces extra
stochasticity. These factors together contribute to the flatter-minima selection by SAM.
Corollary 4.2 (P1. Proof in  Appendix C.1.). Let θ ⋆ be a global minimum, and suppose Assump-
                            2           2          2
tion 4.1 holds. If ∥H(θ ⋆ )∥F 1 + ρBγ ∥H(θ ⋆ )∥F > ηB2 γ , then θ ⋆ is linearly non-stable for SAM
in Equation (4). Indeed, E[L(θ t )] ≥ C t E[L(θ 0 )] holds for all t > 0 with C > 1.

Corollary 4.2, together with Theorem 4.1, characterizes the necessary condition for a global minimum
to be linearly stable for SAM, namely the stability condition of SAM. Furthermore, Corollary 4.2
illustrates that if a global minimum fails to meet the stability condition of SAM, the SAM iterator
will escape from the minimum exponentially fast. Notably, such escape occurs within the low-loss
regions, where the linear approximation in Equation (5) holds. Complementary analysis of dynamics
in the high-loss regions is provided in Proposition 4.1.
Support for P1. Although the sharpness bound for SGD in Table 2 is an upper bound, Wu et al.
(2022) empirically demonstrates that the bound is nearly tight, with SGD solutions approximately
                        2
satisfying H(θSGD end
                      ) F ≈ ηB2 γ 5 . Thus, with the same η and B, the solution found by SGD cannot
satisfy the stability condition of SAM. This leads to our key claim P1 that SAM escapes from the
sharp minima found by SGD exponentially fast, as validated by our experiments in Figure 4 (b).
Comparison with other linear stability analyses of SAM (Shin et al., 2023; Behdin et al., 2023).
                                                                                              2
These works have focused on the norm-based linear stability, characterized by E[∥θ t − θ ⋆ ∥ ] ≤
              2
C θ 0 − θ ⋆ , ∀t ≥ 0, which is stricter than our loss-based stability (see Definition 4.1) due to
the presence of degenerate directions in over-parameterized models (see Lemma C.2). Another key
difference is the novel use of the alignment property of gradient noise (see Assumption 4.1) in our
analysis, enabling us to derive a concrete bound on the sharpness of SAM’s solutions.

4.2 T HEORETICAL G UARANTEE FOR P2: B EYOND L OCAL A NALYSIS
In this subsection, we provide theoretical support for another key claim in our two-phase picture: P2.
SAM remains within the current valley during escape.
   5
       ≈ is not used in any formal proofs. Here, it indicates empirical finding that has not been rigorously proven.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sub-quadratic landscape. In high-loss regions, the local linearization in Equation (5) no longer
provides a valid approximation for neural networks, and consequently, the quadratic approximation
of the neural network loss landscape fails to capture its true structure. Beyond the quadratic landscape,
Ma et al. (2022) has introduced the concept of the sub-quadratic landscape: the loss grows slower
than a quadratic function, and the landscape in high-loss regions is significantly flatter than in
low-loss regions. The sub-quadratic landscape has been empirically verified in high-loss regions, and
is able to explain the Edge of Stability phenomenon (Cohen et al., 2021) (also observed in Wu et al.
(2018); Jastrzebski et al. (2020)), which the quadratic landscape cannot account for.
While Section 4.1 focuses on a local analysis near global minima, the analysis here is necessarily
non-local, as SAM might iterate into high-loss regions during escape. In this subsection, we need to
show that SAM remains within the current valley during escape under a sub-quadratic landscape.
Additional setup. For simplicity, we assume a model size of p = 1 and consider the full-batch SAM,
i.e., θt+1 = θt − η∇L(θt + ρ∇L(θt )). This setup is sufficient to illustrate that SAM will remain
within the current valley under a sub-quadratic landscape.
Definition 4.2 (Sub-quadratic landscape for p = 1). Let θ⋆ = 0 be a global minimum of L with
sharpness L′′ (0) = a > 0. The valley V = [−c, c] is termed sub-quadratic if for all z, z1 , z2 ∈ V , it
holds that zL′ (z) ≥ 0 and L′′ (|z1 |) ≥ L′′ (|z2 |) if |z1 | ≤ |z2 |.

Following Theorem 1 in (Ma et al., 2022), we define the sub-quadratic landscape in Definition 4.2.
Specifically, for any 0 < z1 < z2 < c, it holds that L′′ (z1 ) > L′′ (z2 ) and L(z1 ) < L(z2 ), indicating
that high-loss regions are flatter than low-loss regions. The same applies for 0 > z1 > z2 > −c.
Proposition 4.1 (P2. Proof in Appendix C.2.). Under Definition 4.2, assume the landscape is
sub-quadratic in the valley V = [−2b, 2b]. Then, for all initialization θ0 ∈ (−b, b), and η, ρ s.t. η <
min b/|L′ (z)|, ρ ≤ min{1/a, η, η min |L′ (2z)/L′ (z)|}, the full-batch SAM (see Equation (10))
z∈V                                      0<|z|<b
will remain within the valley V , i.e., θt ∈ V for all t ∈ N.
Proposition 4.1 shows that under a sub-quadratic landscape, even if SAM escapes the minimum θ⋆
when η > 2/a(1 + aρ) and θ0 ≈ θ⋆ , it will still remain within the current valley6 . This proposition
holds when η < min b/|L′ (z)|, where the upper bound min b/|L′ (z)| can be sufficiently large under
                     z∈V                                         z∈V
highly sub-quadratic landscapes (see Example C.1). Furthermore, this proposition can be extended to
almost all initializations within the valley V . See Proposition C.2.
Support for P2. Proposition 4.1 supports our key claim P2 that SAM remains within the current
valley during escape. Intuitively, as shown in Section 4.1, the low-loss region around the sharp
minimum found by SGD cannot satisfy SAM’s stability condition, causing SAM to escape toward
higher-loss regions; however, under the sub-quadratic landscape, the high-loss regions are much
flatter, which satisfies SAM’s stability condition and prevents it from escaping the current valley. The
experiment in Figure 4 (c) backs up this theoretical claim.

4.3 T HEORETICAL G UARANTEE FOR P4: C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
In this subsection, we provide theoretical support for the final claim in our two-phase picture: P4.
The convergence rate of SAM is significantly fast.
To establish the convergence results for stochastic optimization algorithms, it is often necessary to
make assumptions about the loss landscape and the magnitude of gradient noise ξ(θ).
Assumption 4.2 (Loss landscape: L-smoothness and Polyak–Łojasiewicz). (i) There exists L > 0
                                                                 2
s.t. ∥H(θ)∥2 ≤ L for all θ; (ii) There exists µ > 0 s.t. ∥∇L(θ)∥ ≥ 2µL(θ) for all θ.

Assumption 4.2 are quite standard and is frequently used in the non-convex optimization litera-
ture (Karimi et al., 2016). Specifically, for neural networks, if L(·) is four-times continuously
differentiable, this assumption holds at least near the set of global minima of L (Arora et al., 2022).
                                                                                            2
Assumption 4.3 (Gradient noise magnitude). There exists σ > 0 s.t. E[∥ξ(θ)∥ ] ≤ σ 2 L(θ), ∀θ.
                                                   2
The bounded variance assumption E[∥ξ(θ)∥ ] ≤ σ 2 is commonly employed in classical optimization
theory (Bubeck et al., 2015). However, as discussed in Section 4.1, recent studies (Mori et al., 2022;
   6
       Multiple valleys exist in the settings of Proposition 4.1 (see Remark C.3 for more details).


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    WideResNet-28-10 on CIFAR-100                      WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10


       Generalization gap between
         𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇SAM
       Sharpness of
       𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡


                                                                                                      𝑡
                                               SAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 :
                                                                                                      𝑇

                      ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 − ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM         Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 − Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM,t     ||𝐻 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 ||2


Figure 5: The impact of SAM training proportion on generalization/sharpness when switching
                                                                  T                T
from SAM to SGD. The generalization gap between the models θSAM→SGD,t       and θSAM  (top row)/the
              T                                                           T
sharpness of θSAM→SGD,t (bottom row) vs. the SAM training proportion of θSAM→SGD,t . Dots represent
the mean over three trials with different random seeds, and error bars indicate standard deviations.
Results on more datasets and architectures can be found in Appendix B.5.

Feng & Tu, 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Wojtowytsch, 2024) have shown that the magnitude of SGD noise
                                                                                 2
is also bounded by the loss value. Thus, we introduce Assumption 4.3: E[∥ξ(θ)∥ ] ≤ σ 2 L(θ). This
indicates that the noise magnitude diminishes to zero at global minima, contrasting sharply with the
classical bounded variance assumption and closely aligning with real-world scenarios.
Under these assumptions, we present the convergence result for stochastic SAM in Theorem 4.3.
Theorem 4.3 (P4. Proof in Appendix C.3.). Under Assumption 4.2 and 4.3, let {θ t }t be
the parameters trained by SAM in Equation (4). If η ≤ min{1/2L, µB/2Lσ 2 } and ρ ≤
                                                                      t
min 1/4L, µB/4Lσ 2 , ηµ2 /24L2 , then we have E [L(θ t )] ≤ (1 − ηµ/2) L(θ 0 ), ∀t ∈ N.

Support for P4. Theorem 4.3 supports our key claim P4 that the convergence rate of stochas-
tic SAM is significantly fast, and notably faster than the previous result on SAM’s convergence
rate (Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2022).
Comparison with other convergence results for stochastic SAM (Andriushchenko & Flammarion,
2022; Shin et al., 2023). These works, along with our result, all study the convergence on stochastic
SAM under the standard Assumption 4.2. Andriushchenko & Flammarion (2022) has shown that
stochastic SAM converges under a polynomially fast rate of O(1/t), but this is much slower than our
exponentially fast rate. The difference lies in the assumptions on gradient noise magnitude: they have
                                         2
used the classical assumption E[∥ξ(θ)∥ ] ≤ σ 2 , whereas we rely on the more realistic Assumption 4.3.
Shin et al. (2023) has also proved that stochastic SAM converges exponentially fast. However, their
analysis is based on an additional interpolation assumption due to over-parameterization.

5   I S SAM N ECESSARY IN THE E ARLY P HASE OF T RAINING ?
Since our main discovery in Section 3, one might question the necessity of using SAM in the early
phase. In this section, we demonstrate that applying SAM during the early phase offers only marginal
benefits for generalization and sharpness compared to full SGD training. Thus, we conjecture that the
optimization algorithm chosen at the end of training is more critical in shaping the final solution’s
properties. Based on this viewpoint, we extend our findings from SAM to Adversarial Training.
Early-phase SAM may offer limited improvements over SGD in generalization and sharpness.
We conduct experiments under various settings to investigate the effect of applying SAM during the
early phase of training, followed by SGD, on generalization and sharpness. Similarly to Section 3, we
                                                                               T
use the switching method but switch from SAM to SGD, to obtain the model θSAM→SGD,t     . In Figure 5,
the generalization gap remains substantial even when trained with SAM for most of the time (e.g.,
                                                             T
t/T = 0.8). A similar trend is observed in the sharpness of θSAM→SGD,t . Only full SAM training (i.e.,


                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10 with Adversarial Training


     Classification Error Err𝐷 𝜽


                                                                        Classification Error Err𝐷 𝜽


                                                                                                                                                        Classification Error
                                                                                                                                                       𝑇−𝑡
                                           Epoch                                                      AT training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SGD→AT,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                                                         𝑇
                                            (a)                                                                                (b)
                                   𝜽𝑇SGD           𝜽𝑇AT    𝜽𝑇SGD→AT,𝑡                                      Err𝐷perturb 𝜽         Err𝐷clean 𝜽

Figure 6: AT improves robustness efficiently even when applied only during the final few epochs
of training. (a) Robust/natural error vs. training epochs for models trained with different strategies.
                                 T
(b) Robust/natural error of θSGD→AT     vs. the AT training proportion (T − t)/T . Dashed lines denotes
the robust error ErrDperturb , and solid lines denotes the natural error ErrDclean . Blue and green curves
                                                               T         T
represent models trained solely with SGD and AT, i.e., θSGD        and θAT , respectively. Orange curves
                                                                        T
indicate models which switching from SGD to AT at epoch t, i.e., θSGD→AT,t . All results are averaged
over five trials with different randomness.

t/T = 1) consistently finds the flat minima. This suggests that applying SAM before SGD could
yield only limited improvements in generalization and sharpness compared to full SGD training.
Together with findings in Section 3, we conjecture that the optimization algorithm chosen in the
late training phase is more critical in determining the final solution’s properties. However, current
findings are based solely on generalization/sharpness—can we extend to other properties?
Extension: Adversarial Training efficiently finds robust minima late in training. Adversarial
Training (AT) (Madry et al., 2018), in which networks are trained on adversarial examples (Szegedy
et al., 2014), significantly improves the robustness of neural networks. Recently, Zhang et al. (2024)
highlighted a duality between SAM and AT: while SAM perturbs the model parameters during
training (see Equation (1)), AT perturbs input samples, with both methods relying on gradients for
perturbations. Here, we pose the question: can our findings on SAM be extended to AT?
Similar to SAM, we discover that applying AT only during the final few epochs yields robustness
comparable to training entirely with AT. With the switching method, which switches from SGD
                                            T
to AT at epoch t, we obtain the model θSGD→AT,t     . We evaluate its robustness by classification error
on adversarial examples, termed robust error ErrDperturb (θ), and its performance on clean examples,
                                                                                  T
referred to as natural error ErrDclean (θ). In Figure 6 (a), the robust error of θSGD→AT,t drops sharply
after switching to AT at 180 epoch, matching that of full AT training, while the natural error only
                                                                                                T
slightly spikes. Additionally, we vary the switching point t to examine how the robustness of θSGD→AT,t
changes with the increasing proportion of AT epochs, i.e., (T − t)/T . In Figure 6 (b), the robust error
    T
of θAT is comparable to that of models trained entirely with AT (i.e., when (T − t)/T = 1) once the
proportion of AT epochs exceeds 0. These results together confirm that AT efficiently enhances the
robustness of neural networks late in training.

6    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
In conclusion, we discovered an intriguing phenomenon that SAM efficiently selects flatter minima
over SGD when applied late in training. We provided a theoretical explanation for this by conducting
a two-phase analysis of the learning dynamics after switching to SAM in the late training phase. Our
results suggest that late training dynamics may play an important role in understanding the implicit
bias of optimization algorithms. Since we extended our findings to AT with the switching method, a
natural future direction is to generalize this novel approach to other optimization algorithms.
Limitations. We note that even if our theoretical setup closely reflects real settings, it still relies on
several simplifications, such as assuming a constant perturbation radius ρ and using squared loss.
We also note that our theory only explains the behavior of SAM in the late training phase; it cannot
account for the phenomena observed for early-phase SAM.


                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Alessandro Achille, Matteo Rovere, and Stefano Soatto. Critical learning periods in deep networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=BkeStsCcKQ. 2

Atish Agarwala and Yann Dauphin. SAM operates far from home: eigenvalue regularization as
  a dynamical phenomenon. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
  Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 152–168. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
  agarwala23a.html. 3

Kwangjun Ahn, Jingzhao Zhang, and Suvrit Sra. Understanding the unstable convergence of gradient
 descent. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and
 Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 247–257. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
 URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/ahn22a.html. 22

Kwangjun Ahn, Ali Jadbabaie, and Suvrit Sra. How to escape sharp minima with random perturba-
 tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15659, 2023. 30

Maksym Andriushchenko and Nicolas Flammarion. Towards understanding sharpness-aware mini-
 mization. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and
 Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 639–668. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
 URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/andriushchenko22a.html. 1, 2,
 3, 5, 9, 17, 18, 21, 25

Sanjeev Arora, Zhiyuan Li, and Abhishek Panigrahi. Understanding gradient descent on the edge
  of stability in deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 948–1024.
  PMLR, 2022. 8, 30

Dara Bahri, Hossein Mobahi, and Yi Tay. Sharpness-aware minimization improves language model
  generalization. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 7360–7371, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.508. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.
  508. 1, 17

Peter L Bartlett, Philip M Long, and Olivier Bousquet. The dynamics of sharpness-aware minimiza-
  tion: Bouncing across ravines and drifting towards wide minima. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 24(316):1–36, 2023. 17

Marlon Becker, Frederick Altrock, and Benjamin Risse. Momentum-sam: Sharpness aware mini-
 mization without computational overhead. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12033, 2024. 17

Kayhan Behdin and Rahul Mazumder. On statistical properties of sharpness-aware minimization:
  Provable guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11836, 2023. 3

Kayhan Behdin, Qingquan Song, Aman Gupta, Sathiya Keerthi, Ayan Acharya, Borja Ocejo, Gregory
  Dexter, Rajiv Khanna, David Durfee, and Rahul Mazumder. msam: Micro-batch-averaged
  sharpness-aware minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09693, 2023. 3, 7, 17

Guy Blanc, Neha Gupta, Gregory Valiant, and Paul Valiant. Implicit regularization for deep neural
  networks driven by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck like process. In Conference on learning theory, pp.
 483–513. PMLR, 2020. 17

Sébastien Bubeck et al. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Foundations and Trends®
  in Machine Learning, 8(3-4):231–357, 2015. 8, 30


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiangning Chen, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Boqing Gong. When vision transformers outperform resnets
  without pre-training or strong data augmentations. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=LtKcMgGOeLt. 1,
  17
Jeremy Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on
  neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jh-rTtvkGeM. 8,
  22
Yan Dai, Kwangjun Ahn, and Suvrit Sra. The crucial role of normalization in sharpness-aware
  minimization. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=zq4vFneRiA. 17
Alex Damian, Tengyu Ma, and Jason D Lee. Label noise SGD provably prefers flat global minimizers.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27449–27461, 2021. 17
Terrance DeVries. Improved regularization of convolutional neural networks with cutout. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017. 18
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy. 18
Jiawei Du, Hanshu Yan, Jiashi Feng, Joey Tianyi Zhou, Liangli Zhen, Rick Siow Mong Goh, and
   Vincent Tan. Efficient sharpness-aware minimization for improved training of neural networks. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
   net/forum?id=n0OeTdNRG0Q. 17
Yu Feng and Yuhai Tu. The inverse variance–flatness relation in stochastic gradient descent is critical
  for finding flat minima. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(9):e2015617118,
  2021. 6, 9
Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimization
  for efficiently improving generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6Tm1mposlrM. 1, 3, 4, 17, 18
Jonathan Frankle, David J. Schwab, and Ari S. Morcos. The early phase of neural network training.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=Hkl1iRNFwS. 2
Khashayar Gatmiry, Zhiyuan Li, Ching-Yao Chuang, Sashank Reddi, Tengyu Ma, and Stefanie
 Jegelka. The inductive bias of flatness regularization for deep matrix factorization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.13239, 2023. 17
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. 4, 18
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Flat Minima. Neural Computation, 9(1):1–42, 01 1997.
  ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.1.1. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.
  1997.9.1.1. 17
Stanisław Jastrz˛ebski, Zachary Kenton, Devansh Arpit, Nicolas Ballas, Asja Fischer, Yoshua Bengio,
  and Amos Storkey. Three factors influencing minima in sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04623,
  2017. 17
Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Maciej Szymczak, Stanislav Fort, Devansh Arpit, Jacek Tabor, Kyunghyun
  Cho, and Krzysztof Geras. The break-even point on optimization trajectories of deep neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09572, 2020. 8


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhiwei Jia and Hao Su. Information-theoretic local minima characterization and regularization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4773–4783. PMLR, 2020. 17
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantas-
  tic generalization measures and where to find them. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJgIPJBFvH. 1,
  17
Jean Kaddour, Linqing Liu, Ricardo Silva, and Matt Kusner. When do flat minima optimizers work?
  In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=vDeh2yxTvuh. 1, 17
Ryo Karakida, Tomoumi Takase, Tomohiro Hayase, and Kazuki Osawa. Understanding gradient
  regularization in deep learning: Efficient finite-difference computation and implicit bias. In
  Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and
  Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 15809–15827. PMLR, 23–29 Jul
  2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/karakida23a.html. 17
Hamed Karimi, Julie Nutini, and Mark Schmidt. Linear convergence of gradient and proximal-
  gradient methods under the polyak-łojasiewicz condition. In Machine Learning and Knowledge
  Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2016, Riva del Garda, Italy,
  September 19-23, 2016, Proceedings, Part I 16, pp. 795–811. Springer, 2016. 8
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Peter
  Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=H1oyRlYgg. 1, 17
Hoki Kim, Jinseong Park, Yujin Choi, and Jaewook Lee. Stability analysis of sharpness-aware
  minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.06308, 2023. 17
Minyoung Kim, Da Li, Shell X Hu, and Timothy Hospedales. Fisher SAM: Information geom-
 etry and sharpness aware minimisation. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
 Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
 11148–11161. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
 kim22f.html. 17
Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
  2014. 18
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
  4, 18
Jungmin Kwon, Jeongseop Kim, Hyunseo Park, and In Kwon Choi. Asam: Adaptive sharpness-aware
  minimization for scale-invariant learning of deep neural networks. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5905–5914. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/kwon21b.html. 4, 17, 18, 19
Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. Visualizing the loss land-
  scape of neural nets. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2018/file/a41b3bb3e6b050b6c9067c67f663b915-Paper.pdf. 23
Zhiyuan Li, Tianhao Wang, and Sanjeev Arora. What happens after SGD reaches zero loss?–a
  mathematical framework. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. 17
Kangqiao Liu, Liu Ziyin, and Masahito Ueda. Noise and fluctuation of finite learning rate stochastic
  gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7045–7056. PMLR, 2021.
  9


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yong Liu, Siqi Mai, Xiangning Chen, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Yang You. Towards efficient and scalable
  sharpness-aware minimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12360–12370, 2022. 17
Philip M. Long and Peter L. Bartlett. Sharpness-aware minimization and the edge of stability. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 25(179):1–20, 2024. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/
  v25/23-1285.html. 17, 22
Kaifeng Lyu, Zhiyuan Li, and Sanjeev Arora. Understanding the generalization benefit of normal-
  ization layers: Sharpness reduction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  34689–34708, 2022. 17
Chao Ma and Lexing Ying. On linear stability of SGD and input-smoothness of neural networks.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:16805–16817, 2021. 17
Chao Ma, Daniel Kunin, Lei Wu, and Lexing Ying. Beyond the quadratic approximation: the
  multiscale structure of neural network loss landscapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11326, 2022. 8,
 17
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. To-
  wards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJzIBfZAb. 2,
  4, 10, 18
Enea Monzio Compagnoni, Luca Biggio, Antonio Orvieto, Frank Norbert Proske, Hans Kersting,
  and Aurelien Lucchi. An SDE for modeling SAM: Theory and insights. In Andreas Krause,
  Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 25209–25253. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/monzio-compagnoni23a.html. 3, 17
Takashi Mori, Liu Ziyin, Kangqiao Liu, and Masahito Ueda. Power-law escape rate of sgd. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 15959–15975. PMLR, 2022. 6, 8
Maximilian Mueller, Tiffany Joyce Vlaar, David Rolnick, and Matthias Hein. Normalization layers are
 all that sharpness-aware minimization needs. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lArwl3y9x6.
 17, 18
Rotem Mulayoff, Tomer Michaeli, and Daniel Soudry. The implicit bias of minima stability: A view
  from function space. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17749–17761, 2021.
  17
Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, David Mcallester, and Nati Srebro. Exploring generaliza-
  tion in deep learning. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vish-
  wanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2017/file/10ce03a1ed01077e3e289f3e53c72813-Paper.pdf.
  1
Sungbin Shin, Dongyeop Lee, Maksym Andriushchenko, and Namhoon Lee. The effects of overpa-
  rameterization on sharpness-aware minimization: An empirical and theoretical analysis. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.17539, 2023. 7, 9, 17
Dongkuk Si and Chulhee Yun. Practical sharpness-aware minimization cannot converge all the way
  to optima. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=nijJN0LHqM. 17
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings,
  2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556. 4, 18


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Steven H. Strogatz. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology, Chemistry
  and Engineering. Westview Press, 2000. 6
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2014. 10
Gal Vardi. On the implicit bias in deep-learning algorithms. Commun. ACM, 66(6):86–93, may 2023.
  ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/3571070. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3571070. 1,
 17
Mingze Wang and Lei Wu. A theoretical analysis of noise geometry in stochastic gradient descent.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00692, 2023. 7
Mingze Wang, Haotian He, Jinbo Wang, Zilin Wang, Guanhua Huang, Feiyu Xiong, Zhiyu Li, Weinan
 E, and Lei Wu. Improving generalization and convergence by enhancing implicit regularization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20763, 2024. 17
Kaiyue Wen, Tengyu Ma, and Zhiyuan Li. How sharpness-aware minimization minimizes sharpness?
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=5spDgWmpY6x. 17
Kaiyue Wen, Tengyu Ma, and Zhiyuan Li. Sharpness minimization algorithms do not only minimize
  sharpness to achieve better generalization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023b. 17
Stephan Wojtowytsch. Stochastic gradient descent with noise of machine learning type part ii:
  Continuous time analysis. Journal of Nonlinear Science, 34(1):16, 2024. 6, 9
Dongxian Wu, Shu-Tao Xia, and Yisen Wang. Adversarial weight perturbation helps robust general-
  ization. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 2958–2969. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1ef91c212e30e14bf125e9374262401f-Paper.pdf. 1
Jingfeng Wu, Wenqing Hu, Haoyi Xiong, Jun Huan, Vladimir Braverman, and Zhanxing Zhu. On the
   noisy gradient descent that generalizes as sgd. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
   pp. 10367–10376. PMLR, 2020b. 6
Lei Wu and Weijie J Su. The implicit regularization of dynamical stability in stochastic gradient
  descent. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
  Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 37656–37684. PMLR,
  23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/wu23r.html. 17
Lei Wu, Chao Ma, and Weinan E. How sgd selects the global minima in over-parameterized learning:
  A dynamical stability perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
  8, 17
Lei Wu, Mingze Wang, and Weijie Su.        The alignment property of sgd noise and
  how it helps select flat minima: A stability analysis.    In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 4680–4693. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/1e55c38dd7d465c2526ae29d7ec85861-Paper-Conference.pdf. 6, 7, 17
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07146,
  2016. 4, 18
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understand-
  ing deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8gdB9xx. 1, 17


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yihao Zhang, Hangzhou He, Jingyu Zhu, Huanran Chen, Yifei Wang, and Zeming Wei. On the duality
  between sharpness-aware minimization and adversarial training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15152,
  2024. 1, 10, 17
Tongtian Zhu, Fengxiang He, Kaixuan Chen, Mingli Song, and Dacheng Tao. Decentralized sgd
  and average-direction sam are asymptotically equivalent. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 43005–43036. PMLR, 2023. 17
Zhanxing Zhu, Jingfeng Wu, Bing Yu, Lei Wu, and Jinwen Ma. The anisotropic noise in stochastic
  gradient descent: Its behavior of escaping from sharp minima and regularization effects. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1803.00195, 2018. 6
Juntang Zhuang, Boqing Gong, Liangzhe Yuan, Yin Cui, Hartwig Adam, Nicha C Dvornek, sekhar
  tatikonda, James s Duncan, and Ting Liu. Surrogate gap minimization improves sharpness-
  aware training. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=edONMAnhLu-. 17


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORK
Implicit flat-minima bias. Extensive studies have been dedicated to understanding the implicit
bias in deep learning (Vardi, 2023). One notable example is the flat-minima bias: SGD and its
variants tend to select flat minima (Keskar et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017), which often generalize
better (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Jiang et al., 2020). Many works (Ma & Ying, 2021;
Mulayoff et al., 2021; Wu & Su, 2023; Gatmiry et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2023b) have theoretically
justified the superior generalization of flat minima in neural networks. Wu et al. (2018; 2022); Ma &
Ying (2021) have taken a dynamical stability perspective to explain why SGD favors flat minima;
in-depth analysis of SGD dynamics near global minima shows that the SGD noise drives SGD
towards flatter minima (Blanc et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022; Damian et al., 2021).
Further studies (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2017; Lyu et al., 2022) have explored how training components,
like learning rate and normalization, influence the flat-minima bias of SGD.
Understandings towards SAM. Inspired by the implicit flat-minima bias of SGD, Foret et al. (2021)
has proposed Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) algorithm. SAM and its variants (Kwon et al.,
2021; Zhuang et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022; Mueller et al., 2023;
Becker et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024) have achieved superior performance across a wide range
tasks (Chen et al., 2022; Kaddour et al., 2022; Bahri et al., 2022). Despite their successes, their
effectiveness remains poorly understood. On the optimization front, Andriushchenko & Flammarion
(2022); Si & Yun (2023); Shin et al. (2023) have studied the convergence properties of stochastic
SAM; Monzio Compagnoni et al. (2023); Kim et al. (2023) have demonstrated that SAM requires
more time to escape saddle points compared to SGD; Long & Bartlett (2024) have analyzed the
edge of stability phenomenon for SAM. On the implicit bias side, Shin et al. (2023); Behdin et al.
(2023) have examined SAM’s flat-minima bias using dynamical stability analysis; Wen et al. (2023a);
Monzio Compagnoni et al. (2023); Bartlett et al. (2023) have studied how SAM moves towards
flat minima; Andriushchenko & Flammarion (2022) has showed that SAM has the low-rank bias;
and Wen et al. (2023b) has revealed that SAM does not only minimize sharpness to achieve better
generalization. Dai et al. (2023) has characterized the role of Normalization in SAM. In comparison,
our work focuses on the dynamics of SAM in the late training phase, a topic largely unattended
in the literature, offering both theoretical and empirical analyses of SAM’s convergence, escape
behavior, and bias toward flatter minima. Additionally, several studies have explored the connection
between SAM and other algorithms: Zhang et al. (2024) explored the duality between SAM and AT;
Zhu et al. (2023) demonstrated the equivalence between average-direction SAM and decentralized
SGD. Another related work is Jia & Su (2020), which introduces a sharpness-regularized training
algorithm with a formulation similar to SAM. Notably, its ablation study demonstrates the algorithm’s
effectiveness when applied in the mid or late training stages. Karakida et al. (2023) has analyzed the
implicit bias of Gradient Regularization (GR), which shares a similar form with SAM, and showed
that GR tends to select solutions in rich regimes.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     M ORE E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND R ESULTS
B.1    D ETAILED E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

In this subsection, we introduce the detailed experimental settings.
In this work, we mainly compare the training dynamics of SAM and SGD. In fact, SAM and SGD
share almost identical training settings, with the only difference lying in that SAM introduces an
extra hyper-parameter, perturbation radius ρ. Therefore, we first outline the basic training settings for
training with SGD across different network architectures and datasets.
VGG-16 and ResNet-20 on the CIFAR-10 dataset. We train the VGG-16 (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015) and the ResNet-20 architecture (He et al., 2016) on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky et al.,
2009), using standard data augmentation and hyperparameters as in the original papers (Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2015; He et al., 2016). Data augmentation techniques include random horizontal flips and
random 32 × 32 pixel crops. A weight decay of 5 × 10−4 is applied, and the momentum for gradient
update is set to 0.9. The learning rate is initialized at 0.1 and is dropped by 10 times at epoch 807 .
The total number of training epochs is 160.
WideResNet-16-8 on the CIFAR-10 dataset, and WideResNet-28-10 on the CIFAR-100 dataset.
We train the WideResNet-16-8 architecture (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) on the CIFAR-10
dataset and the WideResNet-28-10 architecture on the CIFAR-100 dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009),
following the standard settings as in the original papers (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). Data
augmentation techniques include random horizontal flips, random 32 × 32 pixel crop, and cutout
regularization (DeVries, 2017). A weight decay of 5 × 10−4 is applied, and the momentum for
gradient update is set to 0.9. The learning rate is initialized at 0.1 and is dropped by 5 times at 60 and
120 epochs. The total number of training epochs is 200.
Then, we specify the extra hyper-parameter for SAM, i.e., the perturbation radius ρ.
Additional setup for SAM, ASAM and USAM. For SAM, the perturbation radius is set to 0.05
across all architectures and datasets, as recommended by Foret et al. (2021). In Appendix B.3, our
findings on SAM generalize to another SAM variant, ASAM (Kwon et al., 2021). For ASAM, the
perturbation radius is set to 2.0, as recommended by Kwon et al. (2021). In Appendix B.4, we further
generalize our findings to USAM (Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2022) to verify the simplified
SAM update rule used in our theoretical analyses. For USAM, the perturbation radius is set to 0.1.
In Section 5, we also extend our findings to Adversarial Training (AT). AT shares almost the same
settings as SGD as well, except that AT trains neural networks on adversarial examples generated
from the original images. Here, we specify the additional settings for creating adversarial examples.
Additional setup for AT. We considered untargeted PGD attack (Madry et al., 2018) to generate
adversarial examples xAdv from the original image x, with the constraint that xAdv − x ∞ ≤ ϵ,
where ∥·∥∞ denotes the L∞ norm. Following the standard configurations of Madry et al. (2018), we
set the perturbation limit ϵ to 4/255 and the step size for PGD attack to 2/255.
Additional setup for experiments on ViTs. In Figure 8, we train the ViT-T/S architecture (Doso-
vitskiy et al., 2021) on the CIFAR-100 dataset, following the settings in Mueller et al. (2023). Data
augmentation techniques include random horizontal flips, random 32 × 32 pixel crops and AutoAug-
ment. The early phase optimization is done with AdamW Kingma (2014), with a constant learning
rate 1 × 10−4 . A weight decay of 5 × 10−4 is applied, and the batch size is set to 64. The late phase
optimization is done with SAM, with an extra hyperparameter, the perturbation radius, set to 0.1. The
total number of training epochs is 200.

B.2    M ORE E XPERIMENTS ON L ATE -P HASE SAM

In this subsection, we provide more experimental results under various settings to demonstrate the
effect of SAM on generalization and sharpness when applied during the late phase of training.
   7
     Note that in the original paper, the learning rate is reduced by a factor of 10 at epoch 120 as well. However,
based on our theory in Section 4.1, the learning rate affects the solution sharpness (see Table 2). To fairly
compare the sharpness of solutions found by the switching method, which switches at different epochs, we
remove the learning rate decay during the late phase of training. The same applies for other architectures and
datasets.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10                                 VGG-16 on CIFAR-10


            Generalization gap between


                                                                                                                                              Generalization gap between
              𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇SAM


                                                                                                                                                𝜽SGD→SAM and 𝜽SAM
            Sharpness of
            𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡


                                                                                                                       𝑇−𝑡
                                                                SAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                        𝑇

                                         ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 − ℒ 𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM       Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 − Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM,t       ||𝐻 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 ||2


Figure 7: Additional experiments for VGG-16 and ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10: the impact of
SAM training proportion on generalization/sharpness when switching from SGD to SAM. The
                                         T               T                                 T
generalization gap between the models θSGD→SAM,t   and θSAM  (top row) / the sharpness of θSGD→SAM,t
                                                   T
(bottom row) vs. the SAM training proportion of θSGD→SAM,t . Dots represent the mean over five trials
with different random seeds, and error bars indicate standard deviations.
                                                       ViT-T on CIFAR-100                                    ViT-S on CIFAR-100


                                                                                                                                                          Generalization gap between
      Generalization gap between
       𝜽𝑇Adam→SAM,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇SAM


                                                                                                                                                            𝜽SGD→SAM and 𝜽SAM
                                                                                                                         𝑇−𝑡
                                                               SAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇Adam→SAM,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                          𝑇

                   Generalization gap:                       ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇Adam→SAM,𝑡 − ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM          Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇Adam→SAM,𝑡 − Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM,t


Figure 8: Additional experiments for ViTs on CIFAR-100: the impact of SAM training pro-
portion on generalization when switching from Adam to SAM. The generalization gap between
            T                 T                                        T
the models θAdam→SAM,t  and θSAM  vs. the SAM training proportion of θAdam→SAM,t . Dots represent the
mean over five trials with different random seeds, and error bars indicate standard deviations.


In Figure 7, we include more experimental results for ResNet-20 and VGG-16 on the CIFAR-10
datasets.
In Figure 8, we include experiment results for ViT-T/S on the CIFAR-100 datasets. Notice that due to
an implementation limitation in PyTorch, computing the gradient twice consecutively for ViTs is not
feasible. Thus, only generalization results are presented. Additionally, as Adam is a more common
practice for training ViTs, we replace SGD with Adam before the switch.
In Figure 9, we include further experimental results using the squared loss. In Figure 9, both the
generalization gap and sharpness follow trends consistent with our previous findings in Figure 3,
thereby bridging the gap between our theoretical and experimental settings.

B.3               E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS ON ASAM

In this subsection, we generalize our findings on SAM to another SAM variant, ASAM (Kwon et al.,
2021). Similar to SAM, we find that applying ASAM during the late training phase, after initial
training with SGD, achieves generalization ability and solution sharpness comparable to full ASAM
training. Still, we apply the switching method to investigate the effect of the late-phase ASAM


                                                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       VGG-19 on CIFAR-10 (Squared Loss)                     VGG-16 on CIFAR-10 (Squared Loss)


     Generalization gap between


                                                                                                                                         Generalization gap between
       𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇SAM


                                                                                                                                           𝜽SGD→SAM and 𝜽SAM
     Sharpness of
     𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡


                                                                                                                 𝑇−𝑡
                                                          SAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                  𝑇

                                  ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 − ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM         Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 − Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM,t        ||𝐻 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 ||𝐹


Figure 9: Additional experiments using squared loss: the impact of SAM training proportion on
generalization when switching from SGD to SAM. The generalization gap between the models
  T                T                                          T
θSGD→SAM,t   and θSAM  vs. the USAM training proportion of θSGD→SAM,t  . Dots represent the mean over
three trials with different random seeds, and error bars indicate standard deviations.

                                               ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10                                  VGG-16 on CIFAR-10
       Generalization gap between
        𝜽𝑇SGD→ASAM,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇ASAM
       𝜽𝑇SGD→ASAM,𝑡
       Sharpness of


                                                                                                                 𝑇−𝑡
                                                         ASAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                  𝑇

                                          WideResNet-28-10 on CIFAR-100                          WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10
       Generalization gap between


                                                                                                                                         Generalization gap between
        𝜽𝑇SGD→ASAM,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇ASAM


                                                                                                                                           𝜽SGD→SAM and 𝜽SAM
       𝜽𝑇SGD→ASAM,𝑡
       Sharpness of


                                                                                                                 𝑇−𝑡
                                                         ASAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                  𝑇

                                  ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→ASAM,𝑡 − ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇ASAM       Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→ASAM,𝑡 − Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇ASAM,t   ||𝐻 𝜽𝑇SGD→ASAM,𝑡 ||2


Figure 10: The impact of ASAM training proportion on generalization/sharpness when switching
                                                                  T                T
from SGD to ASAM. The generalization gap between the models θSGD→ASAM,t      and θASAM  (top row) /
                  T                                                               T
the sharpness of θSGD→ASAM,t (bottom row) vs. the ASAM training proportion of θSGD→ASAM,t    . Dots
represent the mean over three trials with different random seeds, and error bars indicate standard
deviations.


                                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           WideResNet-28-10 on CIFAR-100                         WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10


      Generalization gap between


                                                                                                                                       Generalization gap between
       𝜽𝑇SGD→USAM,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇𝐔SAM


                                                                                                                                         𝜽SGD→SAM and 𝜽SAM
      𝜽𝑇SGD→USAM,𝑡
      Sharpness of


                                                                                                                  𝑇−𝑡
                                                         USAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SGD→USAM,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                   𝑇

                                   ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→USAM,𝑡 − ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇USAM      Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→USAM,𝑡 − Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇USAM,t   ||𝐻 𝜽𝑇SGD→USAM,𝑡 ||2


Figure 11: The impact of USAM training proportion on generalization when switching from
                                                               T                 T
SGD to USAM. The generalization gap between the models θSGD→USAM,t         and θUSAM  vs. the USAM
                         T
training proportion of θSGD→USAM,t . Dots represent the mean over three trials with different random
seeds, and error bars indicate standard deviations.

across various architectures and datasets. We use the switching method, which switches from SGD
                                  T                                                    T
to ASAM, to obtain the model θSGD→ASAM,t    . We also train a baseline model, i.e., θSGD→SAM,t  . We
vary the switching point t while keeping T fixed to adjust the proportion of ASAM training and
                                                     T          T
study its impact on the generalization gap between θASAM   and θSGD→ASAM,t , as well as the sharpness
     T
of θSGD→ASAM,t . As shown in Figure 10, both the generalization gap and the sharpness drop once the
ASAM training proportion exceeds zero, implying that ASAM, even when applied only during the
last few epochs, achieves comparable generalization performance and solution sharpness as training
entirely with ASAM. These results further highlight the importance of studying the implicit bias of
different optimization algorithms towards the end of training.

B.4         E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS ON USAM

In this subsection, we generalize our findings on SAM to another SAM variant, USAM (An-
driushchenko & Flammarion, 2022), to further justify the simplification made on the SAM update
rule in our theoretical analysis. With a small modification to Equation (3) , the update rule of USAM
with stochastic gradients is:
                               θ t+1 = θ t − η∇Lξt θ t + ρ∇Lξt (θ t ) .

                                                                                                    (6)

                                                                                      T
Consistently with the main paper, we measure how the generalization gap between θSGD→USAM,t
      T                                   T
and θUSAM , as well as the sharpness of θSGD→USAM,t , changes as the USAM training proportion
T −t
  T increases. In Figure 11, both the generalization gap and sharpness drop sharply once the USAM
training proportion exceeds zero. This finding validates the effectiveness of USAM in capturing
the main behavior of SAM, further bridging the gap between our theoretical results and empirical
findings.

B.5         M ORE E XPERIMENTS ON E ARLY-P HASE SAM

In this subsection, we provide more experimental results to demonstrate the effect of SAM on
generalization and sharpness when applied during the early phase of training.
The effect of early-phase SAM on the generalization ability. In Figure 12, we include more
experimental results for ResNet-20 and VGG-16 on the CIFAR-10 datasets. Similar to our results
                                               T             T
in Figure 5, the generalization gap between θSAM→SGD,t and θSAM   remains substantial until the SAM
                                                                           T
training proportion exceeds 0.6. The same applies for the sharpness of θSAM→SGD,t    . These results
further validate that applying SAM only during the early phase offers limited improvements on
generalization and sharpness of the final solution compared to full SAM training.


                                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10                                            VGG-16 on CIFAR-10


      Generalization gap between


                                                                                                                                                   Generalization gap between
        𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 and 𝜽𝑇SAM


                                                                                                                                                     𝜽SGD→SAM and 𝜽SAM
      Sharpness of
      𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡


                                                                                                                          𝑡
                                                               SAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                          𝑇

                                   ℒ𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 − ℒ 𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM                  Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 − Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM,t       ||𝐻 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 ||2


Figure 12: Additional experiments for VGG-16 and ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10: the impact of
SAM training proportion on generalization/sharpness when switching from SAM to SGD. The
                                         T                T                               T
generalization gap between the models θSAM→SGD,t    and θSAM  (top row)/the sharpness of θSAM→SGD,t
                                                   T
(bottom row) vs. the SAM training proportion of θSAM→SGD,t  . Dots represent the mean over five trials
with different random seeds, and error bars indicate standard deviations.
                                                                           Fully-connected net on CIFAR-10 5k subset
                                                          Sharpness ||𝐻 𝜽 ||2


                                                                                            Iteration

Figure 13: The impact of (early-phase) SAM on the sharpness evolution. The sharpness evolution
curves for fully-connected nets on CIFAR-10 5k subset trained with different strategies. The blue and
purple baseline curves represents training entirely with GD and (full-batch) SAM, respectively. The
red, green and orange curves represent the switching method, which switches from GD to (full-batch)
SAM at different switching point t, with t ∈ {2000, 5000, 10000}. A constant learning rate η = 0.01
(2/η = 200) is used for both GD and (full-batch) SAM.

The effect of early-phase SAM on the sharpness evolution. Other than focusing on the sharpness
of the final solution, we are also interested in the effect of early-phase SAM on the evolution process
of the sharpness.
Furthermore, we explore how sharpness at the iterator evolves when switching from SAM to (S)GD.
Recent works (Cohen et al., 2021; Ahn et al., 2022) have shown that when training neural networks
with Gradient Descent (GD), the sharpness ∥H(θ)∥2 tends to increase monotonically until it arrives
at 2/η, where η is the learning rate. This is commonly known as the Edge of Stability (EoS)
phenomenon8 . Specifically, we follow the setup of Cohen et al. (2021), measuring sharpness
evolution for models trained with the switching method, which switches from (full-batch) SAM9
to GD, as well as models trained entirely with GD and SAM. In Figure 13, we observe the EoS
phenomenon for models trained entirely with GD. However, for models trained entirely with SAM,
sharpness initially decreases, then slightly increases before converging to a value much smaller than
2/η. As for models trained using the switching method, sharpness evolution mirrors that of full SAM
training up to the switching point t. After t, the sharpness rapidly increases and then oscillates around
    8
      Despite Long & Bartlett (2024) noted an “edge of stability” for SAM, here, the Edge of Stability phenomenon
refers specifically to GD.
    9
      In this experiment, we adopt the SAM with full-batch gradient for fair comparison with GD.


                                                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10: f 𝛼, 𝛽 = ℒ 𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡 + 𝛼𝜹target + 𝛽𝜹random
                            1st Random vector 𝜹random,1                 2nd Random vector 𝜹random,2                                          3rd Random vector 𝜹random,3
𝛽


                                                              𝛽


                                                                                                                             𝛽
                                        𝛼                                           𝛼                                                                    𝛼

                                                            (𝛼 = 0, 𝛽 = 0): 𝜽𝑇SGD→SAM,𝑡                          (𝛼 = 1, 𝛽 = 0): 𝜽𝑇SGD


Figure 14: A 2D visualization of the loss landscape around SGD and SGD-to-SAM solutions. The
orange dot (α = 1, β = 0) denotes the SGD solution, and the orange triangle denotes (α = 0, β = 0)
denotes the solution obtained by switching from SGD to SAM. The contour plot represents the loss
landscape, with darker regions indicating lower loss. The random vectors are sampled three times.
                                                                  WideResNet-28-10 on CIFAR-100



                                                                                          Err𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡
      ℒ 𝐷test 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡


                                                                                                                                         𝑡
                                                          SAM training proportion when obtaining 𝜽𝑇SAM→SGD,𝑡 :
                                                                                                                                         𝑇


Figure 15: The impact of perturbation radius on generalization when switching from SAM to
                                                             T
SGD. The test loss (left) / test error (right) of the model θSAM→SGD,t vs. the SAM training proportion.
Different perturbation radius ρ ∈ {0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2} are chosen for SAM. Dots represent the
mean over five trials with different random seeds, and error bars indicate standard deviations.

2/η, regardless of how late the switch occurs. This implies that early-phase SAM cannot prevent the
emergence of the EoS phenomenon. Once switching to GD, the iterator immediately escapes the
flat minima found by SAM, resulting in relatively sharper minima. Together with our findings in
Figures 5 and 12, we firmly say that early-phase SAM has a limited impact on both generalization
and sharpness of the final solution.

B.6                  OTHER E XPERIMENTS

A 2D visualization of loss landscape Other than the 1D interpolation in Figure 4 (c), we provide
2D visualization of the loss landscape, using the approach proposed by Li et al. (2018). In this
                                         T
setup, we center the visualization at θSGD→SAM,t       and select two directions: δtarget and δrandom .
                            T       T
Specifically, δtarget = θSGD − θSGD→SAM,t , pointing towards the SGD solution, and δrandom is a
random direction sampled from N (0, Ip ) , with layer-wise normalization (Li et al., 2018) applied.
                                                               T
We then plot the loss landscape as a function f (α, β) = L(θSGD→SAM,t     + αδtarget + βδrandom ). In
                              T               T
Figure 14, it is clear that θSGD→SAM,t and θSGD stay within the same valley. Moreover, the contours
         T                                       T                 T
around θSGD→SAM,t        are wider compared to θSGD  , indicating θSGD→SAM,t   corresponds to a flatter
minimum. This two-dimensional approach provides additional insights into the structure of the loss
landscape and further supports our two key claims P2 and P3.
The effect of perturbation radius on generalization when switching from SAM to SGD In our
theory (see Table 2), the perturbation radius ρ influences the sharpness of the global minima selected
by SAM. Specifically, a larger perturbation radius leads to the selection of flatter global minima. In
contrast, SGD’s behavior is independent of the perturbation radius. However, as discussed in our


                                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          WideResNet-16-8 on CIFAR-10


                                                                                           ℒ𝐷train 𝜽𝑆𝐺𝐷→𝑆𝐴𝑀,𝑡
           ℒ𝐷train 𝜽𝑆𝐺𝐷→𝑆𝐴𝑀,𝑡


                                                     ℒ𝐷 𝜽𝑆𝐺𝐷→𝑆𝐴𝑀,𝑡


                                                                                                    𝑡′+𝑡
                    𝑡′+𝑡


                                                         𝑡′+𝑡
                                Step 𝑡′                                 Step 𝑡′
                                  (a)                                     (b)
                                                                                                                ′
                                                                                        t+t
Figure 16: Extending Figure 4 (c) to include more update steps. Train/test loss LD (θSGD→SAM,t   )
                       ′
v.s. the update step t . Here, t is the switching step, chosen to be sufficiently large for SGD to
converge, and t′ is the number of updates after switching to SAM. The red line represents the mean
over 100 trials with different randomness.

conjecture in Section 5, the properties of the final solutions are primarily shaped by the optimization
method chosen in the late training phase. Consequently, when switching from SAM to SGD, the
generalization properties of the final solution are expected to be independent of the perturbation
radius, as SGD dominate in the final stage of training.
To further explore this, we have conducted experiments to investigate the effect of perturbation radius
on generalization when switching from SAM to SGD. Specifically, we varied the perturbation radius
                                                                                           T
ρ ∈ {0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2} for SAM and measured how the test loss and error of θSAM→SGD,t
                                                t
change as the SAM training proportion T increases. In Figure 15, we observe no significant
differences in test loss or error across different ρ values, even when training with SAM for most of the
time (e.g., Tt = 0.8). Notably, only full SAM training (i.e., Tt = 1) shows a pronounced dependence
on ρ, where a larger perturbation radius leads to better generalization. These findings align with our
expectation that the perturbation radius has minimal impact on generalization when transitioning
from SAM to SGD, further validating our theoretical results in Section 4 and conjecture in Section 5.
Extending Figure 4 (c) to include more update steps. In Figure 16, we observe that the training
loss initially increases exponentially fast and then gradually decreases, consistent with our theoretical
predictions.


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P ROOFS IN S ECTION 4
In our theoretical analysis of Stochastic SAM, defined in Equation (4), we adopt the technical
simplification in Appendix C.2 of Andriushchenko & Flammarion (2022), which assumes that
the inner noise and outer noise are independent. Specifically, we analyze the following variant
of Equation (4):
                                   θ t+1 = θ t − ηLξt2 (θ t + ρ∇Lξt1 (θ t ))                                  (7)

where ξt1 and ξt2 are two independent stochastic mini-batches of data of size B.

C.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1 AND C OROLLARY 4.2

For simplicity, we denote the two-step update rules of SAM defined in Equation (7) as:
                                         θ t+1/2 = θ t + ρ∇Lξt1 (θ t ),
                                       θ t+1 = θ t − η∇Lξt2 (θ t+1/2 ).

For B-batch gradient noise, denoted by ξ B (θ) := Lξ (θ) − ∇L(θ), we have:
                                                    1                1
                            E[ξ B (θ)ξ B (θ)⊤ ] =     E[ξ(θ)ξ(θ)⊤ ] = Σ(θ),                                   (8)
                                                    B                B
where ξ are the sample indices in a mini-batch and ξ(θ) is the 1-batch gradient noise, used in
Assumption 4.1.
For the linearized model ( Equation (5)), it holds that:
                                             1
                                   L(θ) =      (θ − θ ⋆ )⊤ H(θ ⋆ )(θ − θ ⋆ ).
                                             2

Without loss of generality, we can let θ ⋆ = 0. For simplicity, we denote G := H(θ ⋆ ).
Next, according to the definition of linear stability (Definition 4.1), we consider the dynamics of
stochastic SAM on the linearized model.

First, we have the following estimate for E L(θ t+1 ) :

          E L(θ t+1 )


           1 h                                                   i
       = E (θ t − η∇Lξt2 (θ t+1/2 ))⊤ G(θ t − η∇Lξt2 (θ t+1/2 ))
           2
           1 h                                                                              i
       = E (θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) − ηξ B (θ t+1/2 ))⊤ G(θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) − ηξ B (θ t+1/2 ))
           2
           1 h                                             i
       = E (θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 )⊤ G(θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) + 0
           2
               1      h             ⊤
                                                  i
           + η 2 E ξ B (θ t+1/2 ) Gξ B (θ t+1/2 )
               2
       (8) 1
               h                                           i    η2 h                     i
       = E (θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 )⊤ G(θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) +           E Tr Σ(θ t+1/2 )G)
           2                                                    2B
                                      2              i η 2 γ ∥G∥2 h
           Assumption 4.1    η 2 γ ∥G∥F h                                       i
                 ≥        0+            E L(θ t+1/2 ) =          F
                                                                   E L(θ t+1/2 ) .
                                   B                         B
Remark C.1 (Clarifications on E). The expectation E is taken with respect to the random variables
{ξt1 , ξt2 }t (t ≥ 0), which are the indices of independently random examples sampled from Dtrain .
Remark C.2 (ξ B (θ t+1/2 ) and θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) are uncorrelated). Observing that θ t −
η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) = ϕ(ξ11 , ξ12 , · · · , ξt1 ) and θ t+1/2 = ψ(ξ11 , ξ12 , · · · , ξt1 ), we can use the law of total
expectation to derive
    D                                         E
  E[ ξ B (θ t+1/2 ), θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) ]


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                    h  D                                                                      E                         i
=Eξ11 ,ξ12 ,··· ,ξt1 Eξt2 ∇Lξt2 (θ t+1/2 ) − ∇L(θ t+1/2 ), θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) ξ11 , ξ12 , · · · , ξt1
                    h hD                                                                                                    E                        ii
=Eξ11 ,ξ12 ,··· ,ξt1 Eξt2 ∇Lξt2 (ψ(ξ11 , ξ12 , · · · , ξt1 )) − ∇L(ψ(ξ11 , ξ12 , · · · , ξt1 )), ϕ(ξ11 , ξ12 , · · · , ξt1 ) ξ11 , ξ12 , · · · , ξt1
=Eξ11 ,ξ12 ,··· ,ξt1 [0] = 0.



Then we estimate the lower bound for E L(θ t+1/2 ) :
                       h          i
                    E L(θ t+1/2 )
                     1 h                                           i
                 = E (θ t − ρ∇Lξt1 (θ t ))⊤ G(θ t + ρ∇Lξt1 (θ t ))
                     2
                     1
                 = E (θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ) + ρξ B (θ t ))⊤ G(θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ) + ρξ B (θ t ))

                     2
                     1                                          1       h        ⊤
                                                                                          i
                 = E (θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ))⊤ G(θ t + ρ∇L(θ t )) + ρ2 E ξ B (θ t ) Gξ B (θ t )
                     2                                             2
                 (8) 1   t                                         ρ2
                 = E (θ + ρ∇L(θ t ))⊤ G(θ t + ρ∇L(θ t )) +            E Tr Σ(θ t )G

                     2                                             2B
      Assumption 4.1 1                                          ρ2 γ ∥G∥2F
                       E (θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ))⊤ G(θ t + ρ∇L(θ t )) +               E L(θ t )

           ≥
                     2                                                 B
                                                           2     2
                     1   h
                            ⊤
                                                     i   ρ γ ∥G∥F
                 = E θ t (I + ρG)G(I + ρG)θ t +                      E L(θ t )

                     2                                       B
               (♣) 1 h ⊤          i ρ2 γ ∥G∥2
                ≥ E θ t Gθ t +                F
                                                 E L(θ t )

                     2                !   B
                                    2
                           ρ2 γ ∥G∥F
                                        E L(θ t ) ,

                 = 1+
                                B

where (♣) holds due to (I + ρG)G(I + ρG) = G + 2ρG2 + ρ2 G3 ⪰ G.
By combining these two estimates, we obtain:
                                                                                          !
                                          η 2 γ ∥G∥2F                  ρ2 γ ∥G∥F
                                                                                      2
                             E L(θ t+1 ) ≥                                                    E L(θ t )

                                                                    1+
                                                B                           B

Hence, if θ ⋆ is linear stable for stochastic SAM, it must hold:
                                                               !
                                            2                2
                                   η 2 γ ∥G∥F       ρ2 γ ∥G∥F
                                                1+               ≤ 1,                                                             (9)
                                         B               B

which completes the proof of Theorem 4.1.
                                                                                 η 2 γ∥G∥2F            ρ2 γ∥G∥2F

Furthermore, if the condition (9) can not be satisfied, i.e.,   B                                 1+       B           > 1, then the
exponentially fast escape holds:
                                   E L(θ t ) ≥ C t E L(θ 0 ) ,



                η 2 γ∥G∥2F            ρ2 γ∥G∥2F

where C =            B           1+       B           > 1. This complete the proof of Corollary 4.2.

C.2     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.1

As we mentioned in Section 4.2, this proposition focus on a model size of p = 1 and consider the
full-batch SAM, i.e.,
                              θt+1 = θt − η∇L(θt + ρ∇L(θt )).                               (10)


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Proposition 4.1.
First, we define the hitting time:
                                     T := inf t ∈ N : |θt+1 | ≥ b .



We aim to prove that T does not exists, which implies that θt ∈ (−b, b) ⊂ V holds for all t ∈ N.
Assuming T exists, then one of the following three cases must hold:

   • Case I: θT = 0. In this case, L′ (θT ) = 0, which implies that θT +1 = 0. This contradicts the
     definition of T .
   • Case II: 0 < θT < b. By the sub-quadratic property and ρ ≤ 1/a, for the inner update
     θT +1/2 := θT + ρL′ (θT ), we have:
                                         Z θT
                     T
                0<θ <θ     T +1/2     T
                                  =θ +ρ       L′′ (z)dz < θT + ρaθT ≤ 2θT < 2b.
                                                        0

     Consequently, we estimate the two-sided bounds for θT +1 :
       – The lower bound for θT +1 :
                               θT +1 =θT − ηL′ (θT +1/2 ) > 0 − η sup L′ (z)
                                                                               z∈(0,2b)
                                                                  ′
                                      ≥0 − η           max       L (z) > −b.
                                               z∈(−2b,2b)

       – The upper bound for θT +1 :
                         θT +1 =θT − ηL′ (θT +1/2 ) < θT + ρL′ (θT ) − ηL′ (θT +1/2 )
                              (♠)
                               < θT + ηL′ (θT +1/2 ) − ηL′ (θT +1/2 ) = θT < b.
                                               ′       T +1/2
          To justify (♠), we prove ρ < η L L
                                           (θ
                                             ′ (θ T )
                                                      )
                                                        when L′ (θT ) > 0 (noticing θT L′ (θT ) ≥ 0 by
          sub-quadratic property) Since θT < θT +1/2 < 2θT , we aconsider two scenarios:
                R 2θT      ′′
            * If θT +1/2 L (z)dz ≤ 0, then
                                                          R 2θT
                              L′ (θT +1/2 )   L′ (2θT ) − θT +1/2 L′′ (z)dz   L′ (2θT )
                                            =                               ≥           .
                                L′ (θT )                 L′ (θT )             L′ (θT )
                                                    L′ (2z)                   L′ (θ T +1/2 )
               Using the condition ρ < η min        L ′ (z) , we obtain ρ < η   L′ (θ T )
                                                                                             .
                                            0<|z|<b
                 R 2θT      ′′                                                      ′′          ′′
             * If θT +1/2 L (z)dz > 0, then since the sub-quaratic property L (|z1 |) ≥ L (|z2 |)
                                             ′′ T +1/2                   ′′        ′′ T +1/2
               for |z1 | ≤ |z2 |, we have L (θ         ) > 0. Thus, L (z) ≥ L (θ             ) > 0 for
               θT < z < θT +1/2 , implying:
                                                         Z θT +1/2
                                  ′ T +1/2      ′ T
                               L (θ        ) = L (θ ) +            L′′ (z)dz > L′ (θT ).
                                                                      θT
                                                                           ′    T +1/2
               Using the condition ρ < η, we obtain ρ < η < η L L
                                                                (θ
                                                                  ′ (θ T )
                                                                           )
                                                                             .
                                                   ′    T +1/2
          Therefore, we have shown ρ < η L L
                                           (θ
                                             ′ (θ T )
                                                      )
                                                        , implying (♠).

     Thus, we obtain |θT +1 | < b, which contradicts the definition of T .
   • Case III: −b < θT < 0. The proof for this case is extremely similar to the proof for Case II.
     This case is also contradicts the definition of T .

Thus, we have proved that T does not exist, which implies i.e., θt ∈ (−b, b) ⊂ V, ∀t ∈ N.



                                                            27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The next result provides an example for the highly sub-quadratic landscape. Intuitively, it means that
the decay of L′′ (|z|) is extremely fast.
Example C.1 (highly sub-quadratic landscape). Let L(0) = L′ (0) = 0, L′′ (0) = a, and
                                          (
                                 ′′         a − |z|
                                                 ϵ , |z| < aϵ
                                L (z) =                                ,
                                            0,       else in [−2b, 2b]
where 0 < ϵ ≪ 1 is a constant to reflect the sub-quadratic degree.
Notice that this example satisfies Definition 4.2. Moreover, it is straightforward that
                                      (
                                                 |z|
                                        z   a −  2ϵ , |z| < aϵ
                            L′ (z) =                                       .
                                        aϵ
                                         2 ,           else in [−2b, 2b]
Additionally, we can calculate the upper bounds for η and ρ in Proposition 4.1:
                                                     b     2b
                                    η ≤ min         ′
                                                         = ,
                                          |z|≤2b |L (z)|   ϵa
                                               L′ (2z)

                                     1                            1
                           ρ ≤ min     , min             =  min     , 2  .
                                     a |z|≤b L′ (z)               a
One can see that in the highly sub-quadratic case, i.e., 0 < ϵ ≪ 1, the upper bound for η goes to
+∞.

In addition, we prove Proposition C.1, which illustrates that SAM will escape the current valley
under a quadratic landscape. This result stands in stark contrast to Proposition 4.1 for sub-quadratic
landscape, which further confirms our adaptation of the sub-quadratic landscape.
Proposition C.1 (Non-local escape behaviour under a quadratic landscape.). Assume the landscape
in the valley Vb = (−2b, 2b) be quadratic, i.e., L(z) = az 2 /2. Then, for all initialization θ0 ∈
                              2
Vb \{0}, and η, ρ s.t. η > a(1+aρ) , full-batch SAM will escape from the valley Vb , i.e., there exists
            T
T > 0 s.t. θ ∈ / Vb .

Proof of Proposition C.1. By a straightforward calculation, we have
                      θt+1 = θt − ηa θt + ρ · aθt = (1 − ηa(1 + aρ))θt .


           2
If η > a(1+aρ) , then |θt | ≥ |1 − ηa(1 + aρ)|t |θ0 |, where |1 − ηa(1 + aρ)| > 1. This means that
there exists T > 0 s.t. θT ∈/ Vb .
Remark C.3 (multiple valleys in Proposition 4.1). Proposition 4.1 assumes the landscape is sub-
quadratic within the valley V = [−2b, 2b], but it does not impose any assumptions about the landscape
outside V . Therefore, additional valleys can exist in (−∞, −2b) ∪ (2b, +∞). For example, consider

                                                           πθ
                                       L(θ) = 1 − cos          ,
                                                           2b
which satisfies the sub-quadratic property within V = [−2b, 2b]. This loss function has infinitely
many valleys:
                                  [2(2k − 1)b, 2(2k + 1)b], k ∈ Z.
By Proposition 4.1, SAM remains in the current valley V = [−2b, 2b] and cannot enter into other
valleys.
Proposition C.2 (Extension of Proposition 4.1). Under Definition 4.2, assume the landscape is
                                                                                          0
sub-quadratic in the valley V = [−2b, 2b]. Then, for any ϵ ∈ (0,
                                                               1) and all initialization θ ′∈ (−(2   −
                                                                                               2
                                                                                          L (     z)
ϵ)b, (2−ϵ)b), and η, ρ s.t. η < min(2−ϵ)b/|L′ (z)|, ρ ≤ min a(2−ϵ)
                                                                 ϵ
                                                                    , η, η      min           2−ϵ
                                                                                            L′ (z)    ,
                                z∈V                                           0<|z|<(2−ϵ)b
the full-batch SAM will remain within the valley V , i.e., θt ∈ V for all t ∈ N.

Notice that Proposition C.2 generalizes Proposition 4.1 to almost all initializations within the valley
(−2b, 2b). By choosing sufficiently small ϵ, the result effectively applies to all initializations within
(−2b, 2b).


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Proposition C.2. This proof is highly similar to that of Proposition 4.1. First, we define the
hitting time:
                             T := inf t ∈ N : |θt+1 | ≥ (2 − ϵ)b .



We aim to prove that T does not exists, which implies that θt ∈ (−(2 − ϵ)b, (2 − ϵ)b) ⊂ V holds for
all t ∈ N.
Assuming T exists, then one of the following three cases must hold:

  • Case I: θT = 0. In this case, L′ (θT ) = 0, which implies that θT +1 = 0. This contradicts the
    definition of T .
                                                                         ϵ
  • Case II: 0 < θT < (2 − ϵ)b. By the sub-quadratic property and ρ ≤ a(2−ϵ) , for the inner update
     θT +1/2 := θT + ρL′ (θT ), we have:
                                            Z θT
                                                                                        2 T
              0<θ <θT     T +1/2      T
                                    =θ +ρ              L′′ (z)dz < θT + ρaθT ≤             θ < 2b.
                                                0                                      2−ϵ
     Consequently, we estimate the two-sided bounds for θT +1 :
       – The lower bound for θT +1 :
                              θT +1 =θT − ηL′ (θT +1/2 ) > 0 − η sup L′ (z)
                                                                            z∈(0,2b)
                                                               ′
                                     ≥0 − η          max      L (z) ≥ −(2 − ϵ)b.
                                                z∈(−2b,2b)

       – The upper bound for θT +1 :
                        θT +1 =θT − ηL′ (θT +1/2 ) < θT + ρL′ (θT ) − ηL′ (θT +1/2 )
                              (♯)
                              <θT + ηL′ (θT +1/2 ) − ηL′ (θT +1/2 ) = θT < (2 − ϵ)b.
                                            ′       T +1/2
          To justify (♯), we prove ρ < η L L
                                           (θ
                                             ′ (θ T )
                                                      )
                                                        when L′ (θT ) > 0 (noticing θT L′ (θT ) ≥ 0 by
                                                              2
          sub-quadratic property) Since θT < θT +1/2 < 2−ϵ       θT , we consider two scenarios:
                   2    T
                R 2−ϵ θ    ′′
            * If θT +1/2 L (z)dz ≤ 0, then
                                                          R 2 θT ′′
                          L′ (θT +1/2 )   L′ ( 2−ϵ
                                                2
                                                   θT ) − θ2−ϵ
                                                             T +1/2 L (z)dz     L′ ( 2−ϵ
                                                                                      2
                                                                                         θT )
                                        =                                    ≥                .
                             L′ (θT )                   L′ (θT )                   L′ (θT )
                                                        L′ ( 2−ϵ
                                                               2
                                                                 z)                    ′
                                                                                         (θ T +1/2 )
               Using the condition ρ < η            min      ′
                                                          L (z)     , we obtain ρ < η L L  ′ (θ T )  .
                                           0<|z|<(2−ϵ)b
                    2
                R 2−ϵ  θ T ′′                                                      ′′          ′′
            * If θT +1/2 L (z)dz > 0, then since the sub-quaratic property L (|z1 |) ≥ L (|z2 |)
                                            ′′ T +1/2                   ′′        ′′ T +1/2
              for |z1 | ≤ |z2 |, we have L (θ         ) > 0. Thus, L (z) ≥ L (θ             ) > 0 for
              θT < z < θT +1/2 , implying:
                                                        Z θT +1/2
                                 ′ T +1/2      ′ T
                              L (θ        ) = L (θ ) +            L′′ (z)dz > L′ (θT ).
                                                                   θT
                                                                        ′    T +1/2
               Using the condition ρ < η, we obtain ρ < η < η L L
                                                                (θ
                                                                  ′ (θ T )
                                                                           )
                                                                             .
                                                ′    T +1/2
          Therefore, we have shown ρ < η L L
                                           (θ
                                             ′ (θ T )
                                                      )
                                                        , implying (♯).

     Thus, we obtain |θT +1 | < b, which contradicts the definition of T .
  • Case III: −b < θT < 0. The proof for this case is extremely similar to the proof for Case II.
    This case is also contradicts the definition of T .

Thus, we have proved that T does not exist, which implies i.e., θt ∈ (−b, b) ⊂ V, ∀t ∈ N.



                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.3

For simplicity, we denote the two-step update rules of SAM defined in Equation (7) as:
                                    θ t+1/2 = θ t + ρ∇Lξt1 (θ t ),
                                  θ t+1 = θ t − η∇Lξt2 (θ t+1/2 ).

Then we list a few useful properties under the condition of Theorem 4.3.
Lemma C.1. Suppose Assumption 4.2. Then we have:
                                                   2    2L2
                             2µL(θ) ≤ ∥∇L(θ)∥ ≤             L(θ), ∀θ.                         (11)
                                                         µ

Proof of Lemma C.1. The upper bound is a direct corollary of PL and smoothness. Please refer to
Lemma B.6 in Arora et al. (2022) and Lemma 5 in Ahn et al. (2023) for proof details.

The smoothness in Assumption 4.2 also implies the classical quadratic upper bound for the
loss (Bubeck et al., 2015):
                                                              L    2
                       L(θ + v) ≤ L(θ) + ⟨∇L(θ), v⟩ +           ∥v∥ , ∀θ, v.                  (12)
                                                              2

Additionally, Assumption 4.3 holds for the gradient noise ξ(θ) with batch size 1. Thus, for B-batch
gradient noise, denoted by ξ B (θ), we have E[ξ B (θ)ξ B (θ)⊤ ] = B1 E[ξ(θ)ξ(θ)⊤ ], implying:
                                     h        2
                                                i σ2
                                  E ξ B (θ)       ≤     L(θ), ∀θ.                              (13)
                                                     B
For the learning rate η and the permutation radius ρ, we choose then as follows:
                                                            1 µB ηµ2

                                 1 µB
                     η ≤ min       ,         , ρ ≤ min        ,       ,        .              (14)
                                2L 2Lσ 2                   4L 4Lσ 2 24L2

C.3.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.3
For L(θ t+1/2 ), it has the quadratic upper bound:

             L(θ t+1/2 ) = L θ t + ρ∇Lξt1 (θ t ) = L θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ) + ρξ B (θ t )


           (12)                                                  ρ2 L B t 2
           ≤ L θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ) + ∇L θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ) , ρξ(θ t ) +

                                                                      ξ (θ ) 2 .
                                                                  2

Taking the expectation, we obtain the upper bound of E[L(θ t+1/2 )]:
                   h           i                            ρ2 L h B t 2 i
                  E L(θ t+1/2 ) ≤ E L θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ) +

                                                                    E ξ (θ )
                                                                 2
             (13)                       ρ2 L σ 2
              ≤ E L θ t + ρ∇L(θ t ) +               E L(θ t )

                                             2 B
                                                ρ2 L                 ρ2 L σ 2

             (12)                          2
                         t             t                     t 2
                                                                             E L(θ t )

              ≤ E L θ + ρ ∇L(θ ) +                     ∇L(θ )      +
                                                 2                    2 B
                       ρ(2 + ρL)L2       ρ2 Lσ 2

             (11)
                                                   E L(θ t )

              ≤ 1+                   +
                             µ            2B
                       6ρL2

             (14)                                   ηµ               5
                                E L(θ t ) ≤ 1 +         E L(θ t ) ≤ E L(θ t ) .

              ≤ 1+
                          µ                          4                4

In the similar way, for L(θ t+1 ), it has the quadratic upper bound:

          L(θ t+1 ) = L θ t − η∇Lξt2 (θ t+1/2 ) = L θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) − ηξ B (θ t+1/2 )


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       (12)
                                D                                     E
       ≤ L θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) − ∇L θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) , ηξ(θ t+1/2 )
                  η 2 L B t+1/2 2
              +         ξ (θ   ) .
                    2           2


Taking the expectation, we obtain the upper bound of E[L(θ t+1 )]:
                       h                            i η 2 L                       2

            t+1               t             t+1/2                  B    t+1/2

      E L(θ ) ≤ E L θ − η∇L(θ                     ) +        E ξ (θ            )
                                                          2
 (13) h                           i η 2 L σ 2 h               i
  ≤ E L θ t − η∇L(θ t+1/2 ) +                    E L(θ t+1/2 )
                                          2 B
 (12)
                    D                          E η2 L                    2

                                                                                η2 L σ2 h             i
             t              t           t+1/2
                                                          ∇L(θ t+1/2 )                  E L(θ t+1/2 )

  ≤ E L θ − η ∇L(θ ), ∇L(θ                    ) +                            +
                                                     2                            2 B
                                               Ei               2    2
                                                                         h
 (11) h             D                                          η Lσ                      i
  ≤ E L θ t − η ∇L(θ t ), ∇L(θ t+1/2 ) + η 2 Lµ +                         E L(θ t+1/2 )

                                                                 2B
 (14) h             D                          Ei 3ηµ h                i
  ≤ E L θ t − η ∇L(θ t ), ∇L(θ t+1/2 ) +                 E L(θ t+1/2 )

                                                      4
       h                                                                         i 3ηµ h                i
                            t 2
  ≤E L θ − η ∇L(θ ) + η ∇L(θ ) ∇L(θ t+1/2 ) − ∇L(θ t ) +
             t                                  t
                                                                                         E L(θ t+1/2 )

                                                                                      4
 (11) h                                                 i 3ηµ h                 i
                                2                     2
  ≤ E L θ t − η ∇L(θ t ) + ηρL ∇L(θ t )                         E L(θ t+1/2 )

                                                         +
                                                             4
 (14)            3η                2     3ηµ h              i
  ≤ E L θt −           ∇L(θ t )        +      E L(θ t+1/2 )
                   4                       4

 (14)      3ηµ                    3ηµ    h           i
                   E L(θ t ) +         E L(θ t+1/2 ) .

  ≤ 1−
             2                      4

Finally, by combining our estimates for E L(θ t+1 ) and E L(θ t+1/2 ) , we obtain:

                                     3ηµ                3ηµ h             i
               E L(θ t+1 ) ≤ 1 −            E L(θ t ) +    E L(θ t+1/2 ) .

                                       2                 4

                     3ηµ                 3ηµ   5                   ηµ
                            E L(θ t ) +       · E L(θ t ) ≤ 1 −          E L(θ t ) ,

              ≤ 1−
                       2                   4   4                    2

which implies the convergence rate:
                                            ηµ  t
                            E L(θ t ) ≤ 1 −      E L(θ 0 ) , ∀t ∈ N.

                                             2

C.4    C OMPARISON BETWEEN TWO D EFINITIONS ON L INEAR S TABILITY

Definition C.1 (Norm/loss-based linear stability). For an update rule θ t+1 = θ t + F (θ t ; ξt ),

   • (Norm-based linear stability) A global minimum θ ⋆ is said to be linearly stable if there exists a
                                                                                                  2
     C > 0 such that it holds for SAM on the linearized model (Equation (5)) that E[∥θ t − θ ⋆ ∥ ] ≤
                   2
     CE[ θ 0 − θ ⋆ ], ∀t ≥ 0.
   • (Loss-based linear stability) A global minimum θ ⋆ is said to be linearly stable if there exists
     a C > 0 such that it holds for SAM on the linearized model (Equation (5)) that E[L(θ t )] ≤
     CE[L(θ 0 )], ∀t ≥ 0.
Lemma C.2. The following two-fold results holds:

   • (L1). If θ ⋆ is norm-based linearly stable, then it must be loss-based linearly stable.
   • (L2). There exists an update rule and a G(θ ⋆ ), such that the converse of (L1) does not hold.


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma C.2.
For (L1), it is straightforward by
                           1                                                     2
                  L(θ t ) =  (θ − θ ⋆ )⊤ G(θ ⋆ )(θ − θ ⋆ ) ≤ ∥G(θ ⋆ )∥ θ t − θ ⋆ .
                           2
Thus, the norm-based linear stability can imply the loss-based linear stability.
For (L2), we only need to consider an example containing degenerated directions. Specifically, let
                                                       1 2
                                              L(θ) =    θ + 0 · θ22 ,
                                                       2 1
with θ ⋆ = 0.
Consider an update rule only occurs on θ2 :
                              θ1t+1 = θ1t ;     θ2t+1 = θ2t + ζt , ζt ∼ N (0, 1),
starting from θ 0 = (1, 1)⊤ . Then it is loss-base linearly stable due to
                                              1 t 2      1
                               L(θ t ) =       (θ ) + 0 = (θ1t )2 ≡ L(θ 0 ).
                                              2 1        2

However, it is norm-base linearly nonstable:
                                                      2
                                                         
      h          i                               t−1
               2                                 X
    E θt           = 1 + E |θ2t |2 = 1 + E  1 +

                                                     ζs  = 2 + t → +∞ when t → +∞.
                                                         s=0


                                                       32
