Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


MMD IS C O : M ULTI -M ODAL D ISCRIMINATOR -G UIDED
C OOPERATIVE D IFFUSION FOR J OINT AUDIO AND
V IDEO G ENERATION
    Akio Hayakawa1      Masato Ishii1          Takashi Shibuya1          Yuki Mitsufuji1,2
 1             2
    Sony AI      Sony Group Corporation
 {akio.hayakawa,masato.a.ishii,takashi.tak.shibuya,yuhki.mitsufuji}@sony.com


                                            A BSTRACT
         This study aims to construct an audio-video generative model with minimal com-
         putational cost by leveraging pre-trained single-modal generative models for au-
         dio and video. To achieve this, we propose a novel method that guides single-
         modal models to cooperatively generate well-aligned samples across modalities.
         Specifically, given two pre-trained base diffusion models, we train a lightweight
         joint guidance module to adjust scores separately estimated by the base mod-
         els to match the score of joint distribution over audio and video. We show that
         this guidance can be computed using the gradient of the optimal discriminator,
         which distinguishes real audio-video pairs from fake ones independently gener-
         ated by the base models. Based on this analysis, we construct a joint guidance
         module by training this discriminator. Additionally, we adopt a loss function
         to stabilize the discriminator’s gradient and make it work as a noise estimator,
         as in standard diffusion models. Empirical evaluations on several benchmark
         datasets demonstrate that our method improves both single-modal fidelity and
         multimodal alignment with relatively few parameters. The code is available at:
         https://github.com/SonyResearch/MMDisCo.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Deep generative modeling has progressed rapidly in the last few years. Diffusion models are one of
the keys to this progress, and they can be applied to various tasks, including image, audio, and video
generation (Yang et al., 2023). Following the success of single-modal data, several attempts have been
made to apply diffusion models to multimodal data (Bao et al., 2023). However, since multimodal
data is more complex and harder to collect than single-modal data, developing multimodal generative
models by simply extending single-modal ones remains challenging. One promising way to alleviate
this problem is to integrate several pre-trained single-modal models to build a multimodal generative
model (Tang et al., 2023; Xing et al., 2024). As there are numerous publicly-available models that
can generate high-quality single-modal data (Rombach et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024),
their effective integration would substantially reduce the computational cost to build multimodal
generative models. In this work, we focus on audio-video joint generation on top of two pre-trained
diffusion models for audio and video.
There are two approaches for audio-video generation that integrate several single-modal models:
training-free and training-based. The training-free approach employs pre-trained single-modal base
generative models with their parameters fixed. It uses an off-the-shelf recognition model to guide
them to generate well-aligned samples across modalities (Xing et al., 2024). While this can improve
multimodal alignment without any training cost, it may degrade the fidelity of a single modality
(Xing et al., 2024). In contrast, the training-based approach extends single-modal generative models
for multimodal data by designing a neural network tailored to it (Ruan et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023).
Although this approach can achieve better performance in terms of both multimodal alignment and
the fidelity of each single modality, it tends to require a significant computational cost for training.
More importantly, their architectures for handling multimodal data heavily depend on those of base
models (i.e., they are not model-agnostic). Therefore, when updating base models, we must manually
redesign them, which requires a lot of trial and error. In short, the existing two approaches involve


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a trade-off between the quality of generated samples and model dependency, which increases the
computational cost.
In this paper, we propose a novel method that is training-based but model-agnostic. Our method does
not require backpropagation through the base models for the optimization. Specifically, we introduce
a lightweight joint guidance module on top of audio and video base models that adjust their outputs
for audio-video joint generation. We assume that pre-trained base models are black box diffusion
models (i.e., we can access only their outputs and do not depend on a specific architecture design like
a cross-attention module to construct a joint generation model). We formulate the joint generation
process as an extension of the classifier guidance (C-guide) for single-modal data (Song et al., 2021;
Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021). We show that this joint guidance can be computed through the gradient
of the optimal discriminator that distinguishes real audio-video pairs from the fake ones independently
generated by base models. We only train the discriminator with proper regularization inspired by
Denoising Likelihood Score Matching (DLSM) (Chao et al., 2022). Extensive experiments on several
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed method can efficiently integrate single-modal
base models for audio and video into a joint generation model, maintaining the performance of each
single-modal generation without incurring a significant computational cost (see Appendix A.9).

2     R ELATED WORK
2.1   AUDIO - VIDEO JOINT GENERATION BY DIFFUSION MODELS

Since an audio-video pair is one of the most popular types of multimodal data, several works train
diffusion models with such pairs to achieve a conditional single-modal generation: video-conditional
audio generation (Luo et al., 2023; Mo et al., 2023; Su et al., 2023; Pascual et al., 2024) or audio-
conditional video generation (Jeong et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Yariv et al., 2024). However, these
works mainly focus on a single modality as a generation target. Extending these works to the joint
generation of audio and video is not trivial due to the high dimensionality and heterogeneous data
structure of audio-video joint data.
Joint generation of audio and video pairs has been addressed in only a few recent studies (Ruan
et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Xing et al., 2024). MM-Diffusion (Ruan et al., 2023) is a multimodal
diffusion model specific for audio-video joint generation. While MM-Diffusion is trained from
scratch on audio-video pairs, CoDi (Tang et al., 2023) integrates several pre-trained single-modal
diffusion models by adopting environment encoders to share modality-specific information across
modalities during the generation process. Since they adopt a novel architecture strongly tied to the
main network of diffusion models, it is difficult to directly apply their method to other architectures,
hindering its applicability. In contrast, our method handles base models as black boxes and depends
only on their outputs. Therefore, our method is widely applicable to any type of architecture used in
base models.
Xing et al. (2024) shares a similar motivation to ours in the sense that they achieve audio-video
cooperative generation from pre-trained single-modal base models. Given multimodal embedding
models (e.g., ImageBind (Girdhar et al., 2023)), they utilize universal guidance (Bansal et al., 2023)
to make the embeddings from two modalities close. Although their approach is model-agnostic
and can be applied to any base model, their guidance roughly ensures semantic alignment in the
space of embeddings learned by ImageBind. Thus, it does not achieve sampling from the actual joint
distribution of audio-video pairs. In contrast, our method is theoretically grounded in adjusting the
scores predicted from base models to the score of the joint distribution, explicitly achieving sampling
from the joint distribution.

2.2   G UIDANCE FOR PRE - TRAINED DIFFUSION MODELS

The guidance (Song et al., 2021; Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021) provides a proper way to update
intermediate representations at each generation step so that the generated samples satisfy a given
condition, even when the model is not trained for that type of conditional generation. Since the
guidance does not require additional training in diffusion models, it is widely used to control the
generation process with additional conditional signals. C-guide (Song et al., 2021; Dhariwal and
Nichol, 2021) was proposed to guide an image generation model by the class label, such as "cat"
or "dog", using an additionally trained classifier. Several works extend this to utilize off-the-shelf


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Unpaired samples                                     Joint Discriminator:
    from gen. data                                                     𝐷𝜃 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑦𝑡 , 𝑡
                                                         Video
                                                         Encoder                          Trained to discriminate
                                                                                          paired samples by ℒ𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐
                                                                                  0/1
                                                         Audio
                          Compute gradient:              Encoder
                                  𝐷𝜃 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑦𝑡 , 𝑡
                           𝛻log
                                1 − 𝐷𝜃 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑦𝑡 , 𝑡
                                                                                                Pre-trained and frozen
                                                                                                Trainable
     Paired samples                              Independently          Predicted
     from real dataset                           predicted noises       residual noises

                            Video
                         Diffusion 𝜖𝜙
                                                                                             Regularized to match
                                                                                             GT noises by ℒ𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒
                            Audio
                         Diffusion 𝜖𝜓



Figure 1: Overview of the training process of our proposed method. We train a joint discriminator on the top
of two base diffusion models to distinguish real video-audio pairs from fake ones generated by base models.
Additionally, we adopt a denoising objective, as in standard diffusion models, to match the gradient of the
discriminator with regard to the inputs to the residual noise between ground truth noises and predicted noises
from base models.


recognition models to achieve beyond class-conditional generation (Graikos et al., 2022; Bansal et al.,
2023). Our proposed method is the first attempt to extend the C-guide for joint multimodal generation.
We derive our methodology from the theory of C-guide, enabling us to sample data from the joint
distribution.
The samples generated with C-guide may suffer from degraded quality without careful tuning of its
scale (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021). Chao et al. (2022) denote this problem as the score mismatch
issue, where the posterior scores estimated by a diffusion model and a classifier are unstable and
deviate from the true ones. They proposed DLSM loss to alleviate this problem. DLSM regularizes
a classifier’s gradient to match the residual error of noise prediction by trained diffusion models,
providing a stable gradient for the generation process. Our work can be seen as an extension of
DLSM for multimodal generation. We employ DLSM to stabilize the gradient of our discriminator.
Kim et al. (2023) proposed Discriminator Guidance, which guides a Text-to-Image (T2I) model
by a discriminator distinguishing real images from generated images to improve the quality of the
generated samples by a pre-trained T2I model. Although Kim et al. (2023) share a similar concept to
ours regarding using a discriminator to bridge the gap between the score predicted by a pre-trained
model and the target score, our goal is to integrate single-modal models into a joint generation
model. Their method is particularly designed to handle the gap within a single modality, and it
cannot be straightforwardly applied to the multimodal generation. In contrast, our method is derived
from directly bridging the gap between a single-modal distribution and a joint one. Moreover, we
show a single discriminator can serve as a guidance module for both domains, resulting in minimal
computational cost for developing a joint generation model.


3    M ETHODOLOGY

In this section, we first briefly review Diffusion models on a single modal data. Here, we follow
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020), broadly used as a standard
definition of diffusion models. Then, we describe our formulation of joint score estimation on top of
two pre-trained diffusion models.


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   P RELIMINARY: D IFFUSION M ODELS

Basics Diffusion models are a family of probabilistic generative models that reverse a diffusion
process from data to pure noise. Specifically, let x0 ∼ p(x0 ) be a sample of a data distribution and
xt be a noisy representation at diffusion timestep t ∈ {0, 1, ..., T }. A forward diffusion process is
defined as a Markov process:
                                                  p
                                q(xt |xt−1 ) = N ( 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I),                             (1)

where βt ∈ (0, 1) controls how fast the data is diffused at each timestep.
                                                                      √         On the basis of Eq. (1),
xt |x0 also follows the Gaussian distribution of p(xt |x0 ) = N ( ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt )I), where ᾱt =
Qt
   s=1 (1 − βs ) is the accumulation of diffusion coefficients, and the noisy sample at the last step xT
would follow the standard Gaussian distribution N (0|I) with an appropriate setting of T and βt . If
βt is small enough (or T is large enough), the reverse process of Eq. (1) can be approximated to be
Gaussian. Diffusion models are trained to estimate its mean by predicting the noise in xt as follows:


               pϕ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (µϕ (xt , t), σt2 I),                                             (2)
                                 1                  βt                        1 − ᾱt−1
               µϕ (xt , t) = √          xt − √            ϵϕ (xt , t) , σt2 =           βt ,        (3)
                               1 − βt             1 − ᾱt                      1 − ᾱt

where ϵϕ represents the noise prediction model with parameters ϕ. This model ϵϕ can be trained by
minimizing the following mean squared error between the noise predicted by the model and that
added to the data:

                                               √        √                 2
                      ϕ∗ = argmin Ex0 ,ϵ,t ϵϕ ( ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, t) − ϵ ,                        (4)
                                ϕ

where ϵ ∼ N (0, I) is a noise, and t ∼ U(1, T ) is a timestep. For generation, we can sample x0
through the iterative sampling from t = T to 1 using Eq. (2) with ϵϕ∗ .
Equation (4) is a form of denoising score matching. Specifically, from Tweedie’s formula (Efron,
2011), the noise added to the data and the score function is equivalent up to a constant factor. On the
basis of this fact, we can approximate the score function by using a noise prediction network trained
by Eq. (4) as:

                                                          1
                               ∇xt log q(xt ) ≈ − √             ϵϕ∗ (xt , t).                       (5)
                                                        1 − ᾱt
From Eq. (5), a noise prediction model trained by Eq. (4) can be considered as a model estimating
score of q(xt ).

Guidance for conditional generation We can extend the generation process of diffusion models
to the conditional one using classifier guidance (C-guide) (Song et al., 2021; Dhariwal and Nichol,
2021). The C-guide can be derived from the perspective of score estimation. By Bayes’ theorem, we
can write the conditional score as:

                        ∇xt log q(xt |c) = ∇xt log q(xt ) + ∇xt log q(c|xt ),                       (6)

where c is a conditional vector. The first term on the right-hand side can be estimated by ϵϕ∗ trained
with Eq. (4). The second term on the right-hand side can be estimated by computing a classifier’s
gradient with respect to its input, where the classifier is trained to predict c given xt .

3.2   J OINT SCORE ESTIMATION ON THE TOP OF PRE - TRAINED DIFFUSION MODELS

We aim to achieve joint generation based on two independently trained diffusion models. Namely,
let x ∈ RDx and y ∈ RDy be samples of two different modalities. We want to sample x and y


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from a joint distribution q(x, y). From the perspective of the score function, we need to estimate
∇xt log q(xt , yt ) and ∇yt log q(xt , yt ). By Bayes rule, we can derive the following equations:


                           ∇xt log q(xt , yt ) = ∇xt log q(xt ) + ∇xt log q(yt |xt ),                                    (7)
                           ∇yt log q(xt , yt ) = ∇yt log q(yt ) + ∇yt log q(xt |yt ).                                    (8)

Similar to the classifier guidance, the first terms in the right-hand side of Eqs. (7) and (8) can be
estimated by the two diffusion models independently trained on the modalities x and y. On the other
hand, modeling the second terms on the right-hand side are not trivial. One can naively construct two
additional generative models of xt |yt and yt |xt and compute the gradient of such models with regard
to condition vectors. However, training them is difficult due to high dimensionality and requires a
significant computational cost. Instead of training additional high-cost generative models, we train
a single lightweight discriminator that distinguishes real pairs of (xt , yt ) from fake ones generated
by pre-trained single-modal base models. We theoretically show that it is sufficient to compute the
gradient of this discriminator to approximate these terms.
Specifically, we propose to train a discriminator between the joint distribution q(xt , yt ) and indepen-
dent distribution q(xt )q(yt ). Let x′ ∼ pϕ (x) and y ′ ∼ pψ (y) be fake paired samples independently
generated by pre-trained diffusion models. Here, we denote these diffusion models independently
                                             (x)       (y)
pre-trained by each modality x and y as ϵϕ and ϵψ , where ϕ and ψ are the parameters of these
models. We train a discriminator Dθ : xt , yt , t → [0, 1] with the following loss function:

                                                                   h                       i
                                                                     (θ)
                    θ∗ = argmin E(x,y)∼q(x,y),x′ ∼pϕ (x),y′ ∼pψ (y) Ldisc (x, y, x′ , y ′ ) ,                            (9)
                                θ
       (θ)
     Ldisc (x, y, x′ , y ′ ) = Eϵ(x) ,ϵ(y) ,ϵ(x′ ) ,ϵ(y′ ) ,t [log Dθ (x′t , yt′ , t) + log (1 − Dθ (xt , yt , t))] ,   (10)

where ϵ(z) and zt are a noise and a noisy sample for z ∈ {x, y, x′ , y ′ }, respectively. The noisy
                                                  √         √
sample zt is derived by a forward process zt = ᾱtz z + 1 − ᾱtz ϵ(z) , where ᾱtz is a coefficient of
the forward diffusion process for each modality, and this is omitted from Eq. (10) for brevity. Note
that this discriminator Dθ is trained to output one for real pairs and zero for fake pairs.
Similar to a discriminator in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), an
optimal discriminator Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t) that minimizes Eq. (10) can be seen as an estimator of the density
               q(xt ,yt )
ratio q(xt ,yt )+p ϕ (xt )pψ (yt )
                                   . Therefore, the second term in the right-hand side of Eqs. (7) and (8) can
be approximated by utilizing Dθ∗ as follows (see Appendix A.1 for details of this derivation):


                                                               Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                ∇xt log q(yt |xt ) ≈ ∇xt log                       ,                                    (11)
                                                             1 − Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                                               Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                ∇yt log q(xt |yt ) ≈ ∇yt log                       .                                    (12)
                                                             1 − Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)

In summary, we can estimate a joint score as the sum of the scores independently estimated by
                 (x)      (y)
base models ϵϕ and ϵψ , and the gradient of an optimal discriminator D∗ shown in Eqs. (11)
and (12).1 In inference, we independently compute the outputs from base models and the gradient of
our discriminator for the intermediate noisy samples xt and yt at each timestep. Then, their sum is
used as a predicted noise for the denoising step. Note that, in the discussion above, we assume that
the distribution of samples generated by base models is equal to the marginal distribution of joint
data for brevity (i.e., q(xt ) = pϕ (xt ) and q(yt ) = pϕ (yt )). However, our proposed method can be
applied even when these are not equal (see Appendix A.2 in the appendix for more details). We also
tested this setting in our experiment.
  1
    In this work, we adopt the most basic form of density ratio estimator. We expect that using advanced ones
may improve the performance of joint guidance, which we leave for future work.


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Training process of Dθ .                    Algorithm 2 Joint inference by Dθ∗ .
              (x) (y)                                                (x)   (y)
Require:     ϵϕ , ϵψ , and paired dataset               Require: ϵϕ , ϵψ , and Dθ∗
  repeat                                                  Initialize xT , yT with Gaussian noise.
     Sample x, y from paired dataset.                     for t in [T , ..., 1] do
                        (x)
     Generate x′ using ϵϕ .                                   Dratio ← log 1−D   Dθ∗ (xt ,yt ,t)
                                                                                                   .
                                                                                   θ ∗ (xt ,yt ,t)
                             (y)
       Generate y ′ using ϵψ .                                           (x)            √
                                                              ϵ̂(x) ← ϵϕ (xt , t) − 1 − ᾱtx ∇x Dratio .
       Compute Ldisc (x, y, x′ , y ′ ) by Eq. (10).                      (y)
                                                              ϵ̂(y) ← ϵψ (yt , t) − 1 − ᾱty ∇y Dratio .
                                                                                       p
       Compute Ldenoise (x, y) by Eq. (13).
       Update θ based on ∇θ Lall .                            Sample (xt−1 , yt−1 ) based on (ϵ̂(x) , ϵ̂(y) ).
    until converged                                       end for
    Return Dθ∗ .                                          Return (x0 , y0 ).


3.3     R ESIDUAL SCORE ESTIMATION FROM AN OPTIMAL DISCRIMINATOR

As we described in Section 3.2, we can sample x and y from a joint distribution using guidance with a
discriminator that can distinguish real paired data from paired samples generated by pre-trained single-
modal diffusion models. However, in our preliminary experiments, using a discriminator trained by
only Eq. (9) degrades the fidelity of generated samples as a single modality. We conjectured that this
is caused by the score estimation mismatch issue mentioned by Chao et al. (2022). They argued that
the score may deviate from the true one when estimating it using a gradient of a classification model.
To alleviate this issue, inspired by Chao et al. (2022), we adopt regularization for the gradient of the
discriminator to match the residual of true noises and noises predicted by the base diffusion models.
Specifically, we define a denoising regularization loss as follows:

                                     h                                                                i
      (θ,ϕ,ψ)                          (θ,ϕ)                            (θ,ψ)
     Ldenoise (x, y) = Eϵ(x) ,ϵ(y) ,t Ldenoise x, y, ϵ(x) , ϵ(y) , t + Ldenoise x, y, ϵ(x) , ϵ(y) , t ,       (13)
                                                                                                        2
     (θ,ϕ)

                                             (x)                                   Dθ (xt , yt , t)
    Ldenoise x, y, ϵ(x) , ϵ(y) , t = ϵ(x) − ϵϕ (xt , t) + 1 − ᾱtx ∇xt log
                                                         p
                                                                                                            , (14)
                                                                                 1 − Dθ (xt , yt , t)
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                   Dθ (xt , yt , t)
                                                         q
     (θ,ψ)                                   (y)
    Ldenoise x, y, ϵ(x) , ϵ(y) , t = ϵ(y) − ϵψ (yt , t) + 1 − ᾱty ∇yt log                                  . (15)
                                                                                 1 − Dθ (xt , yt , t)

Note that the base models’ parameters ϕ, ψ are fixed during training and just used to compute noise
estimation errors. Our final objective (denoted Lall hereinafter) to train the discriminator Dθ is the
sum of the discriminator loss (Eq. (10)) and denoising regularization loss (Eq. (13)):
                                                      h                                          i
                                                        (θ)                        (θ,ϕ,ψ)
       θ∗ = argmin E(x,y)∼q(x,y),x′ ∼pϕ (x),y′ ∼pψ (y) Ldisc (x, y, x′ , y ′ ) + λLdenoise (x, y) ,           (16)
                 θ

where λ is a weight to balance these two losses. We use λ = 1 throughout this paper. The training
and generation process of our proposed method is summarized in Algorithms 1 and 2, respectively.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first show the results of preliminary experiments with toy datasets to confirm our
proposed method can guide the generation process of two independently trained diffusion models to
the desired joint distribution. Then, we show the experimental results with real data.

4.1     P RELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS WITH TOY DATASETS

Datasets To create the training dataset for a base model, we evenly sampled data from five
Gaussian distributions whose means were [−3, −1.5, 0, 1.5, 3], and variances were all 0.01,
resulting in 500 samples. For training the guidance module, we constructed two types of


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       Table 1: Negative log likelihood (NLL) of
         Independent       Guided (IND)        Guided (OOD)            generated samples over target distribution.

                                                                         Dataset     Method           NLL ↓
   GT
                                                                                     GT samples         1.67
                                                                                     No joint          18.80
                                                                         IND         Ldisc              3.29
                                                                                     Ldenoise           2.40
  Gen.                                                                               Lall               1.94
                                                                                     GT samples         1.67
                                                                                     No Joint          22.10
                                                                         OOD         Ldisc             16.60
Figure 2: Visualization of guidance results on toy datasets. The top                 Ldenoise          2.63
row shows samples drawn from ground truth distribution (GT), and                     Lall              2.53
the bottom row shows generated samples (Gen.).


datasets. The first one simulates an in-domain (IND) situation, where the marginal distribu-
tions q(x) and q(y) were equal to the distribution on which the base model had been trained.
This dataset was constructed by sampling from five Gaussian distributions whose means were
[(−3, 1.5), (−1.5, −3), (0, 3), (1.5, 0), (3, −1.5)], respectively. The second one simulates an out-of-
domain (OOD) situation, where the marginal distributions differ from the distribution on which the
base model is trained. This dataset was constructed by sampling from five Gaussian distributions
whose means were [(−2.25, −2.25), (2.25, 2.25), (−2.25, 2.25), (2.25, −2.25), (0, 0)], respectively.
We set the same variance for all Gaussians as 0.01. In the former case, the peaks of the distribution
are a subset of the independent data distribution, and its marginal distributions for x and y are the
same as the data used to train the base model. On the other hand, the peaks are shifted in the latter
case, and the marginal distribution differs from the original. To train our discriminator by Ldisc
(Eq. (9)), we sampled 500 fake pairs in advance from the base model.

Setup We first trained a base diffusion model on scalar value samples from a mixture of five
Gaussian distributions. The base diffusion model outputs a single scalar x ∈ R, and we duplicated
the trained base model to generate a two-dimensional vector (x, y) ∈ R2 by concatenating outputs
from them. Since each x and y has five peaks as a distribution, (x, y) has 25 peaks when x and y
are generated independently, as shown in the leftmost column in Fig. 2. Then, we guided the base
models using our proposed method to generate samples that follow the target joint distribution. We
used a neural network consisting of five fully connected layers for the base diffusion and one with
three layers for the guidance module. See Appendix A.3 for more details about the settings.

Results Figure 2 shows the generated samples from our proposed method. Our proposed model
successfully guides the base models to generate samples from the target distributions in in- and
out-of-domain settings. For an ablation study, we evaluated the effectiveness of each loss by negative
log-likelihood (NLL) against the target distribution (Table 1). We confirmed that both losses, Ldisc
and Ldenoise , contribute to substantially improving NLL. These results demonstrate that our proposed
method effectively guides base models in generating samples of the target joint distribution.

4.2     E XPERIMENTS WITH BENCHMARK DATASETS UNDER THE IN - DOMAIN SETTING

Setup To investigate the applicability of our proposed method to real data, we first applied it to an
in-domain setting. In this setting, we used the same dataset to train the base models and our proposed
model. We trained our discriminator on top of MM-Diffusion (Ruan et al., 2023), which was already
trained to generate audio-video data jointly, and guided it to generate further aligned samples. This
setting is similar to adopting guidance to a conditional diffusion model with a condition that the
diffusion model can directly handle. The discriminator consists of a stack of two-stream ResBlock
layers for each audio and video, followed by a linear layer to output a scalar. The total number of
its parameters is 12.7M, whereas MM-Diffusion has 133M parameters. We used the pre-trained
MM-Diffusion released in the official repository and only trained our discriminator while freezing


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Quantitative evaluation on Landscape and AIST++ datasets for the in-domain adaptation setting. We
use MM-Diffusion trained on Landscape or AIST++ dataset at a 64 × 64 resolution and additionally guide its
outputs by our proposed method.

                      Dataset          Method           FVD ↓    FAD ↓     IB-AV ↑
                                   MM-Diffusion          447      5.78      0.156
                    Landscape
                                   + MMDisCo             405      5.52      0.162
                                   MM-Diffusion          513      2.31      0.0897
                      AIST++
                                   + MMDisCo             450      2.17      0.0909


the parameters of MM-Diffusion. For training, we used the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015)
with a learning rate of 1e-3, and the batch size and the number of epochs were set to 16 and 100,
respectively. For generation, we used DPM-Solver (Lu et al., 2022) and set its number of function
evaluations (NFE) to 20, the standard setting in MM-Diffusion. See Appendix A.3 for more details
about the settings.

Datasets We conducted experiments on the Landscape (Lee et al., 2022) and AIST++ (Li et al.,
2021) datasets. The Landscape dataset contains 928 videos of nine classes of natural scenes, such as
fire crackling and waterfall burbling. The AIST++ dataset contains 1020 video clips of street dance
with 60 copyright-cleared dancing songs. Note that, in this experiment, we do not use these class
labels as input. We trained our discriminator to generate 1.6 second audio-video pairs. Each video
comprises ten frames per second at a 64 × 64 spatial resolution, and the sampling rate of the audio is
16kHz. We followed the MM-Diffusion setting for audio and video preprocessing and training split.

Evaluation metrics We evaluated the generated samples in terms of the cross-modal semantic
alignment as well as the fidelity of each modality. To measure the cross-modal semantic alignment,
we used the ImageBind score (Girdhar et al., 2023) computed for audio and video embeddings
(IB-AV). To evaluate the fidelity of each modality, we used FVD (Unterthiner et al., 2019) for video
and FAD (Kilgour et al., 2019) for audio.

Results Table 2 shows the quantitative evaluation on both the Landscape and AIST++ datasets.
For the fidelity of each single modality, our proposed method improves both FVD and FAD. These
results demonstrate that our proposed guidance module captures the training data distribution well
and bridges the gap between the distribution of the training data and that of the generated samples.
For the alignment score, IB-AV scores are also marginally improved, illustrating our guidance module
properly guides generated samples to be well-aligned across modalities.

4.3   E XPERIMENTS WITH BENCHMARK DATASETS UNDER THE OUT- OF - DOMAIN SETTING

Setup We also applied our proposed method to an out-of-domain setting. In this setting, we used
a different dataset for training our discriminator compared with the base models. Specifically, we
used two pairs of base models, AudioLDM (Liu et al., 2023) / AnimateDiff (Guo et al., 2024) and
Auffusion (Xue et al., 2024) / VideoCrafter2 (Chen et al., 2024), to generate audio and video, each
pre-trained with respective single-modal large-scale datasets. On top of these independent models, we
trained our proposed discriminator using an audio-video dataset to facilitate audio-video alignment
of the generated samples from the base models. Note that these base models can accept text input
as an additional condition. To enable classifier-free guidance (Ho and Salimans, 2021), we also fed
conditional text into our discriminator and trained it with a 10% text dropout rate. We doubled the
channel size of each layer of the discriminator to match the larger size of the base models compared
to the IND case. We trained our model to generate videos with a spatial size of 256 × 256 to match
the outputs of the base models. For generation, we adopted classifier-free guidance with its strength
set to 2.5 for the AudioLDM, 7.5 for the AnimateDiff, and 8 for the Auffusion and the VideoCrafter2,
respectively. See Appendix A.3 for more details.

Dataset We conducted experiments with the Landscape (Lee et al., 2022) and VGGSound (Chen
et al., 2020) datasets. The VGGSound dataset contains nearly 200K video clips of 300 sound classes.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 3: Quantitative evaluation under the OOD setting on the Landscape dataset.

                                                  Video                  Audio         Cross-modal
                 Method                  FVD ↓       IB-TV ↑     FAD ↓      IB-TA ↑      IB-AV ↑
               Grand truth                 207             -      0.16           -         0.247
    AnimateDiff → SpecVQGAN               (852)      (0.308)     10.69       0.050         0.086
    VideoCrafter2 → SpecVQGAN             (700)      (0.309)     11.63       0.049         0.074
      AnimateDiff → DiffFoley             (852)      (0.308)      8.58       0.053         0.113
      VideoCrafter2 → DiffFoley           (700)      (0.309)     9.14        0.045         0.111
       AudioLDM / AnimateDiff              852           0.308    8.26       0.053         0.093
            + MMDisCo                      667           0.303    7.69       0.061         0.102
       Auffusion / VideoCrafter2           700           0.309    8.06       0.103         0.134
             + MMDisCo                     687           0.309    7.86       0.109         0.137


            Table 4: Quantitative evaluation under the OOD setting on the VGGSound dataset.

                                                  Video                  Audio         Cross-modal
                 Method                  FVD ↓       IB-TV ↑     FAD ↓      IB-TA ↑      IB-AV ↑
               Grand truth                 256             -      1.32           -         0.336
    AnimateDiff → SpecVQGAN               (739)      (0.295)      8.65       0.064         0.084
    VideoCrafter2 → SpecVQGAN             (831)      (0.302)      8.91       0.061         0.089
      AnimateDiff → DiffFoley             (739)      (0.295)     14.42       0.046         0.098
      VideoCrafter2 → DiffFoley           (831)      (0.302)     13.11       0.060         0.105
       AudioLDM / AnimateDiff              739           0.295    15.5       0.107         0.121
            + MMDisCo                      754           0.291    12.1       0.116         0.127
       Auffusion / VideoCrafter2           831           0.302    5.32       0.190         0.192
             + MMDisCo                     704           0.302    4.79       0.197         0.201



Following Yariv et al. (2024), we filtered 60K videos with weak audio-video alignment to enhance
the data quality. For both datasets, we resized videos while maintaining the aspect ratio of the spatial
resolution and cropped 256 × 256 center pixels to create the training dataset. Regarding text captions
for the training dataset, we used the original labels for the VGGSound dataset. For the Landscape
dataset, we additionally created captions by applying InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2024) to the first
frame of each video because the original labels are too vague to generate plausible samples (see
Appendix A.4 for more details).


Evaluation metrics We evaluated the generated samples using FAD, FVD, and IB-AV as described
in Section 4.2. Additionally, to measure the correspondence between a generated sample and its text
condition, we computed the ImageBind score for text-video and text-audio pairs (denoted by IB-TV
and IB-TA, respectively).


Baselines We compared our method with existing works that can be reproduced and are publicly
available. Specifically, we used a sequential approach, Text-to-Video (T2V) generation, followed
by Video-to-Audio (V2A) generation, as the baseline for comparison. We used the pre-trained
SpecVQGAN (Iashin and Rahtu, 2021) and Diff-Foley (Luo et al., 2023) released in the official
repository as a V2A model and generated audios conditioned by the videos from AnimateDiff or
VideoCrafter2. For the text conditions of T2V models, we randomly sampled the captions generated
by InstructBLIP for the Landscape dataset and the class labels of the VGGSound dataset, which is
the same setting as the one for our method.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              No joint                                           Ours



Playing
bongo


Playing
table
tennis



Figure 3: Generated samples from AnimateDiff / AudioLDM and ours trained on the VGGSound dataset. We
used the captions shown on the leftmost side and the same random seed for both settings to generate samples.


Results Tables 3 and 4 show the quantitative evaluation results on the Landscape and VGGSound
datasets. For single-modal evaluation, our proposed guidance improves all scores except IB-TV and
FVD for the VGGSound. This result indicates our method properly guides the generation process to
match the distribution of generated samples with the training dataset, even for the OOD setting. Since
IB-TV scores of the base models are substantially higher than IB-TA, we conjecture that the captions
are suitable for video generation. Therefore, the base video model can generate videos well-aligned
with the text captions, possibly resulting in slight degradation of FVD and IB-TV for the setting of
AudioLDM and AnimateDiff but improvement of FAD and IB-TA. For cross-modal metrics, the
IB-AV scores are consistently improved, indicating that our method successfully enhances semantic
audiovisual alignment. Our method generally delivers superior performance in terms of audio fidelity
and IB-AV scores than the T2V followed by V2A generation (T2V → V2A in Tables 3 and 4).
We hypothesize that pre-trained T2A models, trained on larger-scale datasets, have the capacity
to generate not only high-quality but also sufficiently diverse samples to accommodate various,
potentially out-of-domain videos produced by T2V models. Combined with our method, the fidelity
of the generated audio and its semantic alignment with the corresponding generated videos are further
enhanced. Fig. 3 illustrates the effect of our guidance module qualitatively. Although the generated
samples from the base models look reasonable as a single modality, they look unnatural from the
perspective of audio-video joint generation because there is no player, but the sound is generated. In
contrast, our guidance tends to generate players successfully, and the generated audio is temporally
aligned with their motion (see Appendix A.12 for more generated samples).

5    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed a novel training-based but model-agnostic guidance module that
enables base models to generate well-aligned samples across modalities cooperatively. Specifically,
given two pre-trained base diffusion models, we train a lightweight joint guidance module that
modifies the scores estimated by the two base models to match the joint data distribution. We show
that this guidance can be formulated as the gradient of an optimal discriminator that distinguishes
real audio-video pairs from fake pairs generated independently by the base models. We also propose
regularizing this gradient using a denoising objective, as in standard diffusion models, which provides
a stable gradient of the discriminator. On several benchmark datasets, we empirically show that our
proposed method improves alignment scores as well as single-modal fidelity scores without requiring
a huge number of parameters compared with the base models.

Limitation Since our model is built on top of pre-trained models for each modality, the quality of
the generated samples strongly depends on the base models. However, our method benefits from the
advancements in each modality’s generative modeling. It enables us to integrate new state-of-the-art
works into a joint generative model without a huge computational cost.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We sincerely thank Christian Simon, Kazuki Shimada, Michael Yeung, Satoshi Hayakawa, and
Shoukang Hu for their helpful feedback. We used computational resources of AI Bridging Cloud In-
frastructure (ABCI) provided by the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST) and AIST Solutions.

R EFERENCES
Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Georg Heigold, Chen Sun, Mario Lučić, and Cordelia Schmid.
 Vivit: A video vision transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision, 2021.
Arpit Bansal, Hong-Min Chu, Avi Schwarzschild, Soumyadip Sengupta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Universal guidance for diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Fan Bao, Shen Nie, Kaiwen Xue, Chongxuan Li, Shi Pu, Yaole Wang, Gang Yue, Yue Cao, Hang Su,
  and Jun Zhu. One transformer fits all distributions in multi-modal diffusion at scale. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Chen-Hao Chao, Wei-Fang Sun, Bo-Wun Cheng, Yi-Chen Lo, Chia-Che Chang, Yu-Lun Liu, Yu-Lin
  Chang, Chia-Ping Chen, and Chun-Yi Lee. Denoising likelihood score matching for conditional
  score-based data generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2022.
Haoxin Chen, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Menghan Xia, Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, and Ying
  Shan. Videocrafter2: Overcoming data limitations for high-quality video diffusion models. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Honglie Chen, Weidi Xie, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggsound: A large-scale audio-
  visual dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing, 2020.
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale N Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-
 language models with instruction tuning. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2024.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In
  Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Bradley Efron. Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  2011.
Rohit Girdhar, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Zhuang Liu, Mannat Singh, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Armand
  Joulin, and Ishan Misra. Imagebind: One embedding space to bind them all. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Proceedings of the Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014.
Alexandros Graikos, Nikolay Malkin, Nebojsa Jojic, and Dimitris Samaras. Diffusion models as
  plug-and-play priors. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh Agrawala,
  Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models
  without specific tuning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2024.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep
  Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings
  of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Vladimir Iashin and Esa Rahtu. Taming visually guided sound generation. In Proceedings of the
  British Machine Vision Conference, 2021.

Yujin Jeong, Wonjeong Ryoo, Seunghyun Lee, Dabin Seo, Wonmin Byeon, Sangpil Kim, and Jinkyu
  Kim. The power of sound (tpos): Audio reactive video generation with stable diffusion. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.

Kevin Kilgour, Mauricio Zuluaga, Dominik Roblek, and Matthew Sharifi. Fréchet Audio Distance:
  A Reference-Free Metric for Evaluating Music Enhancement Algorithms. In Proceedings of the
  Interspeech, 2019.

Dongjun Kim, Yeongmin Kim, Wanmo Kang, and Il-Chul Moon. Refining generative process
 with discriminator guidance in score-based diffusion models. Proceedings of the International
 Conference on Machine Learnin, 2023.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.

Seung Hyun Lee, Gyeongrok Oh, Wonmin Byeon, Chanyoung Kim, Won Jeong Ryoo, Sang Ho
  Yoon, Hyunjun Cho, Jihyun Bae, Jinkyu Kim, and Sangpil Kim. Sound-guided semantic video
  generation. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision, 2022.

Seungwoo Lee, Chaerin Kong, Donghyeon Jeon, and Nojun Kwak. Aadiff: Audio-aligned video
  synthesis with text-to-image diffusion. CVPR 2023 Workshop on AI for Content Creation, 2023.

Ruilong Li, Shan Yang, David A Ross, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Ai choreographer: Music conditioned
  3d dance generation with aist++. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2021.

Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and Mark D
  Plumbley. AudioLDM: Text-to-audio generation with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast
  ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. In Proceedings of the
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Simian Luo, Chuanhao Yan, Chenxu Hu, and Hang Zhao. Diff-foley: Synchronized video-to-audio
  synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.

Shentong Mo, Jing Shi, and Yapeng Tian. Diffava: Personalized text-to-audio generation with visual
  alignment. CVPR 2023 workshop on Sight and Sound, 2023.

Santiago Pascual, Chunghsin Yeh, Ioannis Tsiamas, and Joan Serrà. Masked generative video-to-
  audio transformers with enhanced synchronicity. In Proceedings of the European conference on
  computer vision, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Ludan Ruan, Yiyang Ma, Huan Yang, Huiguo He, Bei Liu, Jianlong Fu, Nicholas Jing Yuan, Qin
  Jin, and Baining Guo. Mm-diffusion: Learning multi-modal diffusion models for joint audio and
  video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2023.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Kun Su, Kaizhi Qian, Eli Shlizerman, Antonio Torralba, and Chuang Gan. Physics-driven diffusion
  models for impact sound synthesis from videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Zineng Tang, Ziyi Yang, Chenguang Zhu, Michael Zeng, and Mohit Bansal. Any-to-any generation
  via composable diffusion. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphaël Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and
  Sylvain Gelly. FVD: A new metric for video generation. ICLR 2019 Workshop on DeepGenStruct,
  2019.
A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Yongqi Wang, Wenxiang Guo, Rongjie Huang, Jiawei Huang, Zehan Wang, Fuming You, Ruiqi Li,
  and Zhou Zhao. Frieren: Efficient video-to-audio generation with rectified flow matching. In
  Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Yazhou Xing, Yingqing He, Zeyue Tian, Xintao Wang, and Qifeng Chen. Seeing and hearing: Open-
  domain visual-audio generation with diffusion latent aligners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Jinlong Xue, Yayue Deng, Yingming Gao, and Ya Li. Auffusion: Leveraging the power of diffusion
   and large language models for text-to-audio generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01044, 2024.
Ling Yang, Zhilong Zhang, Yang Song, Shenda Hong, Runsheng Xu, Yue Zhao, Wentao Zhang,
  Bin Cui, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods and
  applications. ACM Computing Surveys, 2023.
Guy Yariv, Itai Gat, Sagie Benaim, Lior Wolf, Idan Schwartz, and Yossi Adi. Diverse and aligned
  audio-to-video generation via text-to-video model adaptation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
Sihyun Yu, Jihoon Tack, Sangwoo Mo, Hyunsu Kim, Junho Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo Shin.
  Generating videos with dynamics-aware implicit generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


TABLE OF C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                    1

2   Related work                                                                                    2
    2.1   Audio-video joint generation by diffusion models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      2
    2.2   Guidance for pre-trained diffusion models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2

3   Methodology                                                                                     3
    3.1   Preliminary: Diffusion Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
    3.2   Joint score estimation on the top of pre-trained diffusion models . . . . . . . . . .     4
    3.3   Residual score estimation from an optimal discriminator . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       6

4   Experiments                                                                                     6
    4.1   Preliminary experiments with toy datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
    4.2   Experiments with benchmark datasets under the in-domain setting . . . . . . . . .         7
    4.3   Experiments with benchmark datasets under the out-of-domain setting . . . . . . .         8

5   Conclusion                                                                                     10

6 Acknowledgment                                                                                   11

A Appendix                                                                                         15
    A.1 Proof of discriminator guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
    A.2 Discriminator guidance for the OOD case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15
    A.3 Details of experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
    A.4 Captioning process of Landscape dataset for the OOD setting . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
    A.5 Visualization of the effect by each loss function with toy datasets . . . . . . . . . .    17
    A.6 Ablation study about the loss functions on real data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
    A.7 Validation of the parameter size and the training epoch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
    A.8 Discriminator structure variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    A.9 Computational cost for the training and inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
    A.10 Comparison with baselines on the semantic and temporal cross-modal alignment .            22
          A.10.1 computation of the AV-Align score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22
          A.10.2 Evaluation on the Temporal and Semantic alignment . . . . . . . . . . . .         23
    A.11 Subjective evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    A.12 Generated audio and video pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     P ROOF OF DISCRIMINATOR GUIDANCE

Our discriminator is trained by Eq. (10). This loss function can be decomposed into the loss function
at each timestep as:

      (θ)
    Ldisc,t = Eq(xt ,yt ) [log Dθ (xt , yt , t)] + Epϕ (xt ),pψ (yt ) [log (1 − Dθ (xt , yt , t))]              (17)
              Z
            =        q(xt , yt ) log Dθ (xt , yt , t) + pϕ (xt )pψ (yt ) log (1 − Dθ (xt , yt , t)) dxt dyt .   (18)
                 xt ,yt


Here, q(xt , yt ) is a distribution of real paired data, and pϕ (xt )pϕ (yt ) is that of a fake one learned by
base models. By Proposition 1 in Goodfellow et al. (2014), for any fixed generators, the optimal
discriminator that minimizes Eq. (18) yields:

                                                                  q(xt , yt )
                                 Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t) ≈                                  .                         (19)
                                                       q(xt , yt ) + pϕ (xt )pψ (yt )

Using this optimal discriminator, we can compute the density ratio between a real and fake data
distribution as follows:

                                       q(xt , yt )        Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                                      ≈                       .                                 (20)
                                     pϕ (xt )pψ (yt )   1 − Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)

Assuming the base models perfectly align with the marginal distribution of the real data (i.e.,
q(xt ) = pϕ (xt ) and q(yt ) = pψ (yt )), we can compute ∇xt log q(yt |xt ) and ∇yt log q(xt |yt ) as
follows:


                                                            q(xt , yt )
                               ∇xt log q(yt |xt ) = ∇xt log                                                     (21)
                                                              q(xt )
                                                             q(xt , yt )
                                                  = ∇xt log                                                     (22)
                                                            q(xt )q(yt )
                                                               q(xt , yt )
                                                  = ∇xt log                                                     (23)
                                                            pϕ (xt )pψ (yt )
                                                              Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                                  ≈ ∇xt log                       ,                             (24)
                                                            1 − Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                                            q(xt , yt )
                               ∇yt log q(xt |yt ) = ∇yt log                                                     (25)
                                                              q(yt )
                                                             q(xt , yt )
                                                  = ∇yt log                                                     (26)
                                                            q(xt )q(yt )
                                                               q(xt , yt )
                                                  = ∇yt log                                                     (27)
                                                            pϕ (xt )pψ (yt )
                                                              Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                                  ≈ ∇yt log                       .                             (28)
                                                            1 − Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)

Therefore, Eqs. (11) and (12) hold.

A.2     D ISCRIMINATOR GUIDANCE FOR THE OOD CASE

In Appendix A.1, we assume q(xt ) = pϕ (xt ) and q(yt ) = pψ (yt ) to derive Eqs. (11) and (12). Here,
we prove that they also hold even in the case of q(xt ) ̸= pϕ (xt ) and q(yt ) ̸= pψ (yt ).


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Equations (7) and (8) can be rewritten by using pϕ (xt ) and pψ (yt ) as follows:


             ∇xt log q(xt , yt ) = ∇xt log q(xt ) + ∇xt log q(yt |xt ),                             (29)
                                                               q(xt )                q(xt , yt )
                                 = ∇xt log pϕ (xt ) + ∇xt log           + ∇xt log                   (30)
                                                              pϕ (xt )                q(xt )
                                                              q(xt , yt )
                                 = ∇xt log pϕ (xt ) + ∇xt log                                       (31)
                                                               pϕ (xt )
                                                                Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                 ≈ ∇xt log pϕ (xt ) + ∇xt log                       ,               (32)
                                                              1 − Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
             ∇yt log q(xt , yt ) = ∇yt log q(yt ) + ∇yt log q(xt |yt )                              (33)
                                                               q(yt )               q(xt , yt )
                                 = ∇yt log pψ (yt ) + ∇yt log           + ∇yt log                   (34)
                                                              pψ (yt )                q(yt )
                                                              q(xt , yt )
                                 = ∇yt log pψ (yt ) + ∇yt log                                       (35)
                                                               pψ (yt )
                                                                Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)
                                 ≈ ∇yt log pψ (yt ) + ∇yt log                       .               (36)
                                                              1 − Dθ∗ (xt , yt , t)

Therefore, we can use the optimal discriminator as a joint guidance module for the OOD case as long
as a discriminator is trained to distinguish real paired samples from fake ones generated by the base
models.

A.3    D ETAILS OF EXPERIMENTS

This section provides more details of the settings we used in each experiment.

Experiments with toy dataset Table 5 shows the settings for the toy dataset described in Section 4.1.
As described in Section 3, residual noise prediction for the denoising step is computed through the
gradient of the discriminator with respect to its input, and its dimensionality is two. For evaluation
and visualization, we sample 4000 samples.

Experiments with benchmark datasets Table 6 shows the settings for real benchmark datasets.
We implemented our discriminator based on the official implementation of MM-Diffusion (Ruan
et al., 2023). 2 A notable difference is that we only used its encoder part and removed all attention
layers from the encoder, which is commonly used in the implementation of diffusion models. Our
preliminary experiments found that using attention layers causes unstable discriminator training.
Thus, the architecture of our discriminator is a stack of individual 2-stream ResBlocks followed by
a linear layer. For the OOD case, we constructed our discriminator on the latent space learned by
the base models. To train the discriminator, we sampled 1K samples for the IND settings and 10K
samples for the OOD settings in advance.
For evaluation, we generated 2048 samples and computed quantitative metrics. Specifically, we
utilized the evaluation code provided by StyleGAN-V (Yu et al., 2022) for FVD,3 that provided by
AudioLDM (Liu et al., 2023) for FAD,4 and that of IB-score (Girdhar et al., 2023),5 respectively.
During inference, we add the discriminator’s gradient to the base models’ predictions without scaling.
However, when Auffusion and VideoCrafter2 are used as base models, we observed that the gradient
norm with respect to the noisy video latents was significantly smaller than the predicted noise from
the base models. To address this discrepancy in scale, we apply scaling to the discriminator’s gradient
with respect to the video latents, but only in this particular setting. We determined the scaling factor
by performing a grid search across [1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10], with a scale of 8 producing the best quantitative
results.
   2
     https://github.com/researchmm/MM-Diffusion
   3
     https://github.com/universome/stylegan-v
   4
     https://github.com/haoheliu/audioldm_eval
   5
     https://github.com/facebookresearch/ImageBind


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Hyperparameters for the base model and discriminator in the experiments with toy dataset (used in
Section 4.1).

 Model                       Base model           Discriminator (IND)        Discriminator (OOD)
 Hyperparameters
 Architecture                    MLP                       MLP                         MLP
 Input dim                         1                         2                           2
 # of layers                       5                         3                           3
 Channel sizes            16, 64, 256, 64, 16            64, 32, 8                   64, 32, 8
 Output dim                        1                         1                           1
 Normalization                LayerNorm                 LayerNorm                   LayerNorm
 Activation                      SiLU                     SiLU                        SiLU
 Timestep dim                     256                       64                          64
 Timestep input type           Adaptive                  Adaptive                    Adaptive
 Optimizer                      Adam                      Adam                        Adam
 Learning rate                   0.001                    0.001                       0.001
 Total batch size                 512                      512                         512
 Total # of params               2.2M                     171K                        171K
 Diffusion setup
 Diffusion steps                  500                       500                         500
 Noise schedule                 linear                    linear                      linear
 β0                             0.0001                    0.0001                      0.0001
 βT                              0.02                      0.02                        0.02
 Dataset
 µx of GMM                [-3, -1.5, 0, 1.5, 3]    [-3, -1.5, 0, 1.5, 3]   [2.25, -2.25, 2.25, -2.25, 0]
 µy of GMM                          -              [1.5, -3, 3, 0, -1.5]   [2.25, -2.25, 2.25, -2.25, 0]
 σ of GMM                          0.1                      0.1                         0.1
 # of fake samples                  -                      500                         500
 # of real samples                500                      500                         500


We utilized 16GB Nvidia V100 × 4 GPUs for the IND case and 40GB Nvidia A100 × 8 GPUs for
the OOD case. The training time for the IND case was about 1.5 hours with both Landscape and
AIST++ datasets, and that for the OOD case was about two hours with the Landscape dataset and 30
hours with the VGGSound dataset. All evaluation was performed by 16GB Nvidia V100 × 4 GPUs.
It takes about one hour for the IND case and about five hours for the OOD case.

A.4    C APTIONING PROCESS OF L ANDSCAPE DATASET FOR THE OOD SETTING

We found that the original labels added to the Landscape dataset are too ambiguous for the base
models to generate reasonable samples. For instance, the generated results with the caption "wind
noise" tend to look like just a noise video and audio, and evaluation for these samples is unstable and
not desired. Therefore, we obtained simple captions for each video using InstructBLIP (Dai et al.,
2024) and used them only for the OOD experiment with the Landscape dataset. Specifically, we
extracted the first frame of each video and passed it to the InstructBLIP. As an instruction for the
captioning, we used the sentence: "Write a short sentence for the image starting with ’The image
captures a scene with’." and generated up to 128 characters for each video. Note that these captions
are generated only from videos without audio. They tend to describe only visual content and provide
less information about audio. Therefore, these captions may not be suitable for audio generation by
AudioLDM, as we show in Tables 3 and 4 where IB-TA is worse than IB-TV. These results show that
the text condition strongly affects the quality of generated results. Designing and manipulating the
input condition is also important for the joint generation, which we leave for future work.

A.5    V ISUALIZATION OF THE EFFECT BY EACH LOSS FUNCTION WITH TOY DATASETS

Figure 4 visualizes the effect of each loss function. The top row shows the IND case, and the bottom
shows the OOD case. At each row, the leftmost column shows the samples from the target distribution,


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Hyperparameters used in the experiments with benchmark datasets (used in Sections 4.2 and 4.3). †
We jointly generate audio and video by MM-Diffusion in the IND case.

 Model                                    Discriminator (IND)             Discriminator (OOD)
 Hyperparameters
 Audio base model                            MM-Diffusion†              AudioLDM / Auffusion
 Video base model                            MM-Diffusion†            AnimateDiff / VideoCrafter2
 Architecture                                  ResBlocks                      ResBlocks
 Audio input dims                               1, 25600                       8, 50, 16
 Video input dims                             3, 16, 64, 64                  4, 16, 32, 32
 Video fps                                          10                              8
 Audio fps                                         16k                            16k
 Duration (sec)                                     1.6                           2.0
 # of ResBlocks per resolution                       2                              4
 Audio conv type                                    1d                             2d
 Audio conv dilation size                    1, 2, 4, ..., 210                      1
 Video conv type                                 2d + 1d                        2d + 1d
 Channels                                          128                            256
 Channel multiplier                               1, 2, 4                        1, 2, 4
 Audio downsample factor                             4                           (1, 2)
 Video downsample factor                         (1, 2, 2)                      (1, 2, 2)
 Output dim                                          1                              1
 Normalization                                GroupNorm                      GroupNorm
 Activation                                       SiLU                           SiLU
 Timestep dim                                      128                            256
 Timestep input type                            Adaptive                       Adaptive
 Conditional input                                   -                            Text
 Condition drop rate                                 -                             0.1
 Text embed dim for video                            -                            768
 Text embed dim for audio                            -                            512
 Text embed input type                               -                            Add
 Optimizer                                        Adam                           Adam
 Learning rate                                    0.001                          0.001
 Total batch size                                   16                             32
 Total training epochs                             100              Landscape: 100 / VGGSound: 10
 Total # of params for base models                133M                      2.15B / 2.86B
 Total # of params for discriminator               13M                           132M
 Diffusion setup
 Diffusion steps                                   1000                             1000
 Noise schedule                                   linear                        scaled linear
 β0 and βT for audio                          0.0001 / 0.02                   0.0015 / 0.0195
 β0 and βT for video                          0.0001 / 0.02                   0.00085 / 0.012
 Inference parameters
 Sampler                                      DPM-Solver                     DPM-Solver ++
 NFE                                             20                               50
 Order                                            3                                2
 Audio text guidance scale                        -                            2.5 / 8.0
 Video text guidance scale                        -                            7.5 / 8.0
 Audio joint guidance scale                      1.0                           1.0 / 1.0
 Video joint guidance scale                      1.0                           1.0 / 8.0


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           GT                        ℒ𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐                    ℒ𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒                        ℒ𝑎𝑙𝑙


Figure 4: Visualization of the generated samples across loss functions used to train our guidance module with
the toy dataset. The top row shows the IND setting, and the bottom shows the OOD setting.

                 Table 7: Ablation study about the loss functions on the landscape dataset.

                                     Video                   Audio          Cross-modal
                 Settings     FVD ↓      IB-TV ↑     FAD ↓      IB-TA ↑        IB-AV ↑
                  Dataset      207           -        0.16           -          0.247
                 No Joint      852        0.308       8.26       0.053          0.093
                  Ldisc        818        0.305       7.80       0.060          0.102
                 Ldenoise      700        0.303       7.19       0.064          0.088
                  Lall         667        0.303       7.69       0.061          0.102


and the others show generated samples with our guidance modules trained by different loss functions.
Note that the NNL at each setting has been shown in Table 1. In the IND case, both Ldisc and Ldenoise
work similarly, whereas in the OOD case, the guidance trained by only Ldisc can roughly concentrate
the samples at four corners but struggles to force them be in a single peak. In contrast, combining
with Ldenoise drastically improves this issue, and using both of them yields the best result.

A.6    A BLATION STUDY ABOUT THE LOSS FUNCTIONS ON REAL DATA

We conducted an ablation study about the loss functions on the landscape dataset. Table 7 shows
quantitative results of our model trained with Ldisc , Ldenoise , and Lall . We used AudioLDM /
AnimateDiff as base models in this experiment. The model trained on Ldisc achieves better IB-
AV and shows good performance in terms of the cross-modal semantic alignment, while it shows
moderate improvements in the fidelity scores. On the other hand, the one trained on Ldenoise achieves
better fidelity scores while suffering from lower cross-modal alignment scores. Compared to these,
the one trained on Lall achieves both better fidelity scores and cross-modal alignment, which has the
best of both worlds.

A.7    VALIDATION OF THE PARAMETER SIZE AND THE TRAINING EPOCH

We explored the effect of the parameter size of the discriminator as well as the number of training
epochs in the IND setting with the Landscape dataset.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Ablation study for the channel size C of the discriminator with the number of ResBlocks per resolution
L fixed to 2.

                              Architecture                                  Metrics
                         Settings                # of params     FVD ↓      FAD ↓      IB-AV ↑
             Base model (MM-Diffusion)              133M           447       5.78       0.156
                    C = 32, L = 2                  798K            423       5.60       0.159
                    C = 64, L = 2                  3.2M            410       5.48       0.161
                    C = 128, L = 2                 12.7M           405       5.52       0.162
                    C = 256, L = 2                 50.7M           399       5.46       0.160

Table 9: Ablation study for the number of ResBlocks per resolution L of the discriminator with the channel size
C fixed to 32 and 128.

                              Architecture                                  Metrics
                         Settings                # of params     FVD ↓      FAD ↓      IB-AV ↑
             Base model (MM-Diffusion)              133M           447       5.78       0.156
                     C = 32, L = 1                  401K           421       5.65       0.159
                     C = 32, L = 2                  798K           423       5.60       0.159
                     C = 32, L = 4                  1.6M           425       5.51       0.160
                    C = 128, L = 1                 19.0M           415       5.60       0.161
                    C = 128, L = 2                 12.7M           405       5.52       0.162
                    C = 128, L = 4                 25.3M           407       5.43       0.162


Table 8 shows the effect of increasing the channel size (denoted by C) with the number of ResBlocks
per resolution fixed. As we increase the channel size, performance substantially increases for both
the single-modal fidelity score and the multimodal alignment score. We observed that the multimodal
alignment is slightly degraded at C = 256 and concluded that the setting with C = 128 is the most
appropriate for multimodal guidance, requiring only less than 10% additional parameters. Note that
our proposed method successfully improves the base model’s performance even when we only used
less than 1% additional parameters (the setting with C = 32).
Table 9 shows the effect of increasing the number of ResBlocks per resolution (denoted by L) with the
channel size fixed. We did experiments on the settings with C = 32 and C = 128. For both settings,
increasing L improves FAD mainly, while the differences of other metrics are marginal. We suppose
this may be the effect of the increase in the receptive field. Since MM-diffusion is trained on the raw
data space (pixel for video and waveform for audio), the size of the time axis for audio is extremely
large. Therefore, following the implementation of MM-diffusion, we used dilated convolutions for
the audio branch to capture features at multiple scales. Using more ResBlocks containing dilated
convolutions may improve the audio encoder’s capacity, resulting in improved audio performance.
Figure 5 shows the performance of our guidance module over the number of training epochs. We used
C = 128 and L = 2 for the discriminator and trained it longer. For evaluation, we generated samples
with five different random seeds and computed the average and standard deviation of each metric.
Our guidance module converged around 100 epochs, and we did not observe clear improvement by
training further.

A.8    D ISCRIMINATOR STRUCTURE VARIANTS

Our discriminator basically consists of two modules in terms of functionality: i) feature extraction
module and ii) feature fusion module. We used a stack of ResBlock layers to extract modality-
specific features for i) and channel-wise concatenation of pooled features along the time axis,
followed by an MLP to handle crossmodal interaction for ii). We denote these default structures as
"Res" for i) and "MLP" for ii). To further improve the performance of joint generation, we tested
integrating transformer architecture into our discriminator, inspired by its recent success (Vaswani,


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  FVD                                            FAD                                                IB-AV
 450                                                                                              0.164
 440                                             5.7
                                                                                                  0.162
 430                                             5.6
                                                                                                  0.160
 420                                             5.5
                                                                                                  0.158
 410
                                                 5.4
                                                                                                  0.156
 400
       0    50    100 150 200        250   300         0    50    100 150 200        250    300           0     50    100 150 200        250   300
                   Training epochs                                 Training epochs                                     Training epochs


Figure 5: Ablation study for the training epochs. We trained the discriminator with C = 128 and L = 2 for 300
training epochs. We generated samples with five different random seeds and computed their average and std.

Table 10: Ablation study for the different discriminator designs. For the notation of the architectures, we denote
"i) / ii)" where i) is the architecture of the feature extractor module and ii) is the feature fusion module described
in Appendix A.8. We used "Auffusion / VideoCrafter2" as the base model.

                                                                                       Metrics
             Discriminator architecture                    FVD ↓      IB-TV ↑          FAD ↓              IB-TA ↑         IB-AV ↑
                   No discriminator                         831         0.302              5.32               0.190         0.192
                  Res / MLP (default)                       704         0.302              4.79               0.197         0.201
                 Res / Naive transformer                    709         0.303              4.69               0.200         0.202
                       Res / Frieren                        710         0.302              4.77               0.202         0.205
                        ViT / MLP                           730         0.301              5.07               0.192         0.199
                 ViT / Naive transformer                    716         0.302              5.09               0.194         0.202
                       ViT / Frieren                        720         0.302              5.06               0.194         0.202


2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Peebles and Xie, 2023; Wang et al., 2024). Specifically, we used
two input types for the transformer encoder to replace the module ii). The audio and video features
extracted from i) have shapes (B, Fa , C) and (B, Fv , C), respectively, where B is the batch size, Fa
and Fv are the numbers of frames in audio and video respectively, and C is the channel size. For
the first design, we concatenated these two features along the frame axis to get a crossmodal feature
of the shape (B, Fa + Fv , C) (denoted as "Naive Transformer"). For the second design, following
the design proposed by Wang et al. (2024), we upsampled shorter features and concatenated these
two features along the channel axis to get a crossmodal feature of the shape (B, max(Fa , Fv ), 2C)
(denoted as "Frieren"). For both settings, the input is supplemented with a learnable positional
embedding and a special token, which is used for the final output, and the transformer encoder
with four layers is applied. We implemented the transformer using xFormers6 and trained both
discriminator designs on top of Auffusion / VideoCrafter2 as base models for ten epochs on the
VGGSound dataset. Table 10 shows the results. Overall, both designs improve the fidelity and
crossmodal alignment. This result indicates that a more sophisticated discriminator structure leads to
better performance of crossmodal generation. Although we also briefly tested replacing ResBlock
layers with vision transformer architecture (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Arnab et al., 2021) (the 4D
audio latents are processed by ViT, and the 5D video latents are processed by ViViT) for i), we do
not observe performance improvement (denoted as "ViT" in Table 10). Further exploration of the
discriminator structures would be an interesting direction for future work.

A.9        C OMPUTATIONAL COST FOR THE TRAINING AND INFERENCE

To highlight the computational efficiency of our proposed method, we compared the computation
time for the training and inference of base models, both with and without our method. For this
experiment, we used the same network configurations as described in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, with a
batch size of 8, and conducted all runs on a single Nvidia H100 GPU.

   6
       https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers


                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Computational cost for the training. The Computation time of forward and backward execution for the
base models and our discriminator are shown. Those of the base models include the computation time required
for both audio and video. All numbers except "Speed-up Ratio" show the computation time in seconds.

                                                          Base Models
                        MM-Diffusion       AudioLDM / AnimateDiff          Auffusion / VideoCrafter2
       Base Fwd          0.273 (0.009)            0.254 (0.057)                    0.349 (0.020)
       Base Bwd          0.660 (0.001)            0.505 (0.007)                    0.952 (0.013)
       Disc Fwd          0.054 (0.006)            0.081 (0.007)                    0.081 (0.006)
       Disc Bwd          0.135 (0.009)            0.186 (0.005)                    0.186 (0.007)
   Baseline 1step        0.933 (0.009)            0.759 (0.057)                    1.301 (0.023)
     Ours 1step          0.462 (0.014)            0.521 (0.058)                    0.616 (0.022)
   Speed-up Ratio           202%                     146%                             211%

Table 12: Computation time for the inference with and without the proposed method. All numbers except
"Overhead" show the time in seconds for generating one pair of audio and video ([second / sample]).

                                                      Base Models
                    MM-Diffusion         AudioLDM / AnimateDiff         Auffusion / VideoCrafter2
       w/o ours        1.09 (0.03)               3.10 (0.02)                     4.45 (0.03)
       w/ ours         1.25 (0.04)               3.77 (0.09)                     4.91 (0.04)
       Overhead           15%                       22%                             10%


Table 11 shows the elapsed time for each base model’s forward and backward computations and
our discriminator’s during a single training step. Each configuration was run 500 times, with the
mean and standard deviation for each value reported in the table. As a baseline, we measured the
computation time for the single training step of all base models (represented as the sum of Base
Fwd and Base Bwd in Table 11). Note that this baseline reflects the cost for fine-tuning base models
without incorporating additional learnable layers (Hu et al., 2022) or cross-modal modules (Tang
et al., 2023), thereby serving as a lower-bound estimate for the training costs associated with building
a joint generation model by simply combining base models. Our method accelerates training by
approximately 1.5 to 2 times compared to the baselines. These results demonstrate that our method
integrates base models into a joint model in a computationally efficient manner.
Table 12 shows the time required to sample a pair of audio and video. Due to the additional
computation required by the discriminator, the inference time is slightly longer (around 10 to 20
%) compared to those of the base models. This overhead can be reduced by designing a more
computationally efficient network architecture.

A.10     C OMPARISON WITH BASELINES ON THE SEMANTIC AND TEMPORAL CROSS - MODAL
         ALIGNMENT

In this section, we show the additional quantitative comparison between our method and baselines
in terms of the cross-modal alignment. In addition to the semantic alignment evaluation using
the ImageBind score, we computed the AV-Align score (Yariv et al., 2024) for the temporal align-
ment evaluation. First, we briefly explain the AV-Align score and some adjustments to achieve
stable computation in our experimental settings in Appendix A.10.1. Then, we show the results in
Appendix A.10.2.

A.10.1     COMPUTATION OF THE AV-A LIGN SCORE

The AV-Align score (Yariv et al., 2024) is defined as Intersection-over-Union (IoU) between the
detected audio onsets and the peaks of the optical flow in the video. Let A be a set of the onset peaks
detected from the audio, and V be a set of the peaks of the optical flow in the video.


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Comparison of the cross-modal alignment scores under the OOD setting on the VGGSound dataset.

                                 Method                  AV-Align ↑       IB-AV ↑
                               Grand truth                  0.296          0.336
                     AnimateDiff → SpecVQGAN                0.288          0.084
                     VideoCrafter2 → SpecVQGAN              0.291          0.089
                       AnimateDiff → DiffFoley              0.295          0.098
                       VideoCrafter2 → DiffFoley            0.319          0.105
                        AudioLDM / AnimateDiff              0.320          0.121
                        + MMDisCo (Res / MLP)               0.330          0.127
                        Auffusion / VideoCrafter2           0.268          0.192
                        + MMDisCo (Res / MLP)               0.287          0.201
                       + MMDisCo (Res / Frieren)            0.292          0.205



                                                                               !
                                   1           X                  X
                     AV-Align =                      1[a ∈ V] +         1[v ∈ A] ,                 (37)
                                2|A ∪ V|
                                               a∈A                v∈V


where 1[a ∈ V] and 1[v ∈ A] are the number of the valid peaks of audio and video. The peak is
considered valid if placed within three frames in the other modality.
In the official implementation, the AV-Align score is computed by the following equation:


                                                     |A ∩ V |
                                 AV-Align =                          ,                             (38)
                                               |A| + |V | − |A ∩ V |
                           P
where they use the value of a∈A 1[a ∈ V] for the intersection |A∩V |. By its definition, the value of
the IOU should be in the range of [0, 1]. If the audio peaks
                                                          P do not have one-to-many correspondences
with video peaks, the computed value with |A ∩ V | ← a∈A 1[a ∈ V] is always in [0, 1].
To ensure no one-to-many correspondence occurs, we need to set the peak detection interval properly.
If the interval of the peaks of either modality is sufficiently smaller than the other, one-to-many
correspondences are likely to occur. In the configuration of Yariv et al. (2024), they used 24 fps
videos (the detection interval is about 42 ms) and set the onset detection interval as 32 ms. On the
other hand, we used eight fps videos for the evaluation, which are three times larger intervals than the
official configuration. When we compute the AV-align score with its configuration, the computed
value occasionally exceeds 1. To compensate for this gap, we set the onset detection interval as 96
ms. We did not observe the value exceeding 1 in our experiment with this configuration.

A.10.2    E VALUATION ON THE T EMPORAL AND S EMANTIC ALIGNMENT
We computed AV-align scores for the base models and those with our proposed method on the
VGGSound dataset. All configurations are the same as Section 4.3.
Table 13 shows the AV-Align and the IB-AV scores of our method and base models. For the AV-Align,
"AudioLDM / AnimateDiff + ours (Res / MLP)" achieves the best score among all models. While it
also achieves a better IB-AV score than existing models, the IB-AV score significantly lags behind
GT’s. Using more sophisticated base models ("Auffusion / VideoCrafter2" + ours) significantly
improves the IB-AV score with a comparable AV-Align score to the GT. Notably, our proposed
method successfully improves both AV-Align and IB-AV scores of both base models.
We also observed that using a more sophisticated network structure ("VideoCrafter2 / Auffusion +
ours (Res / Frieren)") further improves both scores. How to design the discriminator to improve the
specific types of alignment would be a possible direction of future work. Additionally, how to create
a dataset would be a possible direction to improve the alignment. For example, Luo et al. (2023)


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 14: Subjective evaluation comparing the generated results of base models (Auffusion / VideoCrafter2)
with those of our method. The evaluation considered four aspects: Video Quality (VQ), Audio Quality (AQ),
Semantic Alignment between audio and video (SA), and Temporal Alignment between audio and video (TA).
"N/A" indicates the percentage of evaluators who were unable to determine which sample was superior.

                           Method                 VQ        AQ         SA        TA
                 Auffusion / VideoCrafter2       4.2%      12.5%      6.9%      9.7%
                       + MMDisCo                94.4%      44.4%     81.9%     80.6%
                           N/A                   1.4%      43.1%     11.1%      9.7%


proposes using time-shifted audio and video pairs to train audio-visual latent space, which is used
for the condition of their generative model, to improve the temporal alignment. In our experiments,
we only used generated samples from base models for the fake samples. Adding such fake pairs as
simulated temporal misalignment for the fake samples would improve the alignment of generated
samples, which we leave for future work.

A.11     S UBJECTIVE EVALUATION

In addition to the objective evaluation, we conducted a user study to assess the perceptual quality. We
generated samples using Auffusion / VideoCrafter2, both with and without our method, employing
10 labels randomly sampled from the VGGSound dataset. This resulted in 10 pairs of two videos,
where one was produced by the base models and the other by the base models with our method. We
asked human evaluators to answer the following four questions per each pair of videos:

       1. Which video is of higher quality regardless of the audio?
       2. Which audio is of higher quality regardless of the video?
       3. Which pair of audio and video has better semantic alignment?
       4. Which pair of audio and video has better temporal alignment?

For each question, evaluators were given three response options: "Video A is better," "Video B is
better," and "N/A." We collected 320 answers in total from 8 evaluators. Table 14 provides a summary
of the results. Our method consistently enhances the quality of generated samples across all aspects,
which aligns with the objective evaluation results presented in Section 4 and Appendix A.10.2.

A.12     G ENERATED AUDIO AND VIDEO PAIRS

This section shows the results generated from the base models and our method. Note that, to evaluate
the effectiveness of our proposed method visually, we used the same random seed for the base models
and our method, with which we can expect them to provide similar samples.
Figure 6 shows the results of unconditional generation from MM-Diffusion and that with our guidance
module. Since MM-Diffusion was already trained by the same dataset (i.e., the IND setting), the
generated pairs of audio and video look well-aligned in their semantics. However, our guidance
module improves the quality of detail at each modality or forces the generated audio and video to be
temporally aligned, which is coherent with the quantitative evaluation results.
Figure 7 shows the results of text-conditional generation from base models (AudioLDM / Animate-
Diff) and our method. In this case, since the base models independently generate audio and video,
the generated audio and video are not always well-aligned (i.e., the OOD setting). Our guidance
module substantially improves the quality of generated samples from base models compared to the
IND setting. As described in Section 4.3, our guidance tends to generate players successfully, and the
generated audios are also temporally aligned with their motion.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      No joint                                                 Ours


Figure 6: More generated samples from MM-Diffusion and ours trained on the Landscape dataset in the IND
setting. We used the same random seed for both settings, and the generated results at each row should be similar.


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              No joint                                       Ours

  Ocean
  burbling


  Man
  speaking


  Driving
  motorcycle


  Arc
  welding


  Playing
  saxophone


  Playing
  harp


  playing
  hockey


Figure 7: More generated samples from AnimateDiff / AudioLDM and our method trained on the VGGSound
dataset in the OOD setting. The captions given for the generation of each sample are shown in the leftmost
column, and we used the same random seed for both settings.


                                                   26
