Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IFF 3DS: G ENERATING V IEW-C ONSISTENT 3D
S KETCH VIA D IFFERENTIABLE C URVE R ENDERING
 Yibo Zhang1 Lihong Wang1 Changqing Zou2,3 Tieru Wu1,4 Rui Ma1,4∗
 1
   Jilin University 2 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 3 Zhejiang Lab
 4
    Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MOE, China
 {ybzhang23, wlh23}@mails.jlu.edu.cn
 {wutr, ruim}@jlu.edu.cn
 aaronzou1125@gmail.com


Figure 1: In this paper, we propose Diff3DS, a novel differentiable rendering framework for generating
view-consistent 3D sketch from flexible inputs such as a single image or text.

                                              A BSTRACT

             3D sketches are widely used for visually representing the 3D shape and structure
             of objects or scenes. However, the creation of 3D sketch often requires users
             to possess professional artistic skills. Existing research efforts primarily focus
             on enhancing the ability of interactive sketch generation in 3D virtual systems.
             In this work, we propose Diff3DS, a novel differentiable rendering framework
             for generating view-consistent 3D sketch by optimizing 3D parametric curves
             under various supervisions. Specifically, we perform perspective projection to
             render the 3D rational Bézier curves into 2D curves, which are subsequently
             converted to a 2D raster image via our customized differentiable rasterizer. Our
             framework bridges the domains of 3D sketch and raster image, achieving end-
             to-end optimization of 3D sketch through gradients computed in the 2D image
             domain. Diff3DS can enable a series of novel 3D sketch generation tasks, including
             text-to-3D sketch and image-to-3D sketch, supported by the popular distillation-
             based supervision, such as Score Distillation Sampling. Extensive experiments
             have yielded promising results and demonstrated the potential of our framework.
             Project page is at https://yiboz2001.github.io/Diff3DS/


1       I NTRODUCTION
3D sketches, which utilize strokes to emphasize abstraction and visually encapsulate the 3D shape and
structure of objects or scenes, serve as indispensable tools for visualizing concepts and ideas. Existing
research efforts have primarily focused on exploring how to enable interactive creation of 3D sketch
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in 3D virtual systems (Wesche & Seidel, 2001; Grimm & Joshi, 2012; Bae et al., 2008) and immersive
environments (Yu et al., 2021a; Xin et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2021; Kim & Bae,
2016; Yu et al., 2021b; Arora & Singh, 2021; Yue et al., 2017). Such interactive 3D sketch creation
tools provide artists with unprecedented freedom, allowing them to draw their inspirations directly in
the immersive 3D environment. However, it usually requires users to possess professional artistic
skills and experience for 3D operation, making the 3D sketch creation less friendly for ordinary
users. There is a notable absence of a user-friendly 3D sketch generation method in the community.
Moreover, in the area of wire art generation, 3D sketch or 3D curves are also widely studied to abstract
the desired visual concepts from diverse inputs, e.g., 3D surfaces (Yang et al., 2021), multi-view
images (Liu et al., 2017) and text (Tojo et al., 2024; Qu et al., 2024). These representations provide
essential shape and structure of the artwork as well as hold significant potential as intermediate
formats for tasks such as 3D reconstruction. However, generating view-consistent 3D sketches from
flexible inputs, such as text or a single image, remains largely unexplored.
In recent years, content reconstruction or generation via differentiable rendering has gained great
attention in the fields of computer graphics and vision research. The goal is to convert the traditional
rendering pipeline into a differentiable image synthesis process and employ the 2D image supervision
to optimize the object or scene representation. For example, NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2021) bridges
the 3D neural representation and raster image domain with a differentiable volume rendering pipeline,
and has contributed to the further development of the 3D generation (Mohammad Khalid et al., 2022;
Tsalicoglou et al., 2024; Jain et al., 2022; Poole et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023) by leveraging the
continuous advancements in multimodal supervision (Radford et al., 2021; Poole et al., 2023). For
the generation of vectorized or parametric content, differentiable rendering has also been investigated
(Li et al., 2020; Schaldenbrand et al., 2022; Frans et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2023; Xing et al., 2023; Qu
et al., 2023; Xing et al., 2024; Banerjee et al., 2024; Vinker et al., 2022; 2023; Thamizharasan et al.,
2024b;a). One representative work is DiffVG (Li et al., 2020), which proposes a differentiable 2D
vector graphics rasterizer to compute gradients from raster images and optimize the vectorized image
(e.g., 2D Bézier curves and other parametric shapes) via back-propagation. For generation of sketch,
CLIPasso generates 2D sketches using DiffVG to optimize the parameters of the 2D Bézier curves
directly with respect to a CLIP-based perceptual loss. Recently, 3Doodle (Choi et al., 2024) generates
view-consistent 3D sketches of the target object by directly optimizing the parameters of 3D strokes
to minimize the perceptual losses for given multi-view images. It also proposes a differentiable 3D
curve rendering pipeline which integrates DiffVG as a key component. Although 3Doodle achieves
promising results for generating 3D sketches, its optimization requires supervision from multiview
images, which makes it more like a reconstruction pipeline instead of a more flexible generation
pipeline. Meanwhile, its performance is constrained by the inherent limitations of DiffVG’s original
design. It relies on an approximate perspective projection to obtain the 2D sketch rendering and
ignores the depth order of the curves, which may lead to color conflicts in the 3D sketch and limit its
effectiveness on more complex tasks like colored sketch generation.
In this paper, we present Diff3DS, a novel differentiable rendering framework for generating view-
consistent 3D sketch from flexible inputs such as a single image or text. Specifically, we represent
the 3D sketch as a set of 3D rational Bézier curves and perform the perspective projection to obtain
the 2D rational Bézier curves. Then, we propose a new differentiable rasterizer based on DiffVG to
accurately render the projected 2D curves based on the depth order, so that more accurate occlusion
relationships between curves can be modeled, especially for colored curves. Our framework supports
end-to-end optimization of 3D curve primitives under flexible supervisions such as the distillation-
based loss. By employing the recent Score Distillation Sampling algorithm to distill prior knowledge
from pre-trained 2D image generation model, we achieve 3D sketch generation from the text or single
image input. We conduct quantitative and qualitative comparisons between Diff3DS and related
methods. The results demonstrate the superiority of our approach in generating view-consistent 3D
sketches. Ablation studies further validate the effectiveness of the key components of our method.
Additionally, analysis of the rasterizer shows its potential for generating colored sketches.
We summarize our contributions as follows: (1) We propose Diff3DS, a novel differentiable rendering
framework for generating view-consistent 3D sketch from flexible inputs such as a single image
or text. (2) We are the first to represent the 3D curve as 3D rational Bézier curve and design a
depth-aware rasterizer that can enable precise and differentiable rendering of both black and colored
3D curves. (3) We conduct comprehensive experiments on novel text-to-3D and image-to-3D sketch
generation tasks and the results demonstrate the superiority of our method.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    R ELATED W ORKS

3D Sketch Generation Existing research on 3D sketch generation mainly focus on interactive
artistic sketch creation within 3D virtual systems (Wesche & Seidel, 2001; Grimm & Joshi, 2012;
Bae et al., 2008), and immersive environments (Yu et al., 2021a; Xin et al., 2008; Jiang et al., 2021;
Kim & Bae, 2016; Yu et al., 2021b; Arora & Singh, 2021). However, these works usually require
users to possess professional artistic skills and 3D operation experience, making it less user-friendly
for ordinary users. The recent 3Doodle (Choi et al., 2024) is able to generate expressive 3D sketches
from multiview image observations, but it is more like multiview reconstruction instead of generation
and the quality of the generated results highly depends on the number of observation viewpoints.
By distilling prior knowledge from pre-trained 2D image generation models using methods like
Score Distillation Sampling (Poole et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023), we achieve user-friendly and
view-consistent 3D sketch generation from flexible text or single image input.

Differentiable Rendering of Curves There have been several works for differentiable rendering of
curves. DiffVG proposes a differentiable rasterizer for the creation of vector graphics represented
by 2D curves and shapes. DRPG (Worchel & Alexa, 2023) investigates differentiable rendering
of 3D parametric curves and surfaces, by piecewisely approximating the continuous parametric
representations with a triangle mesh. 3Doodle (Choi et al., 2024) shares a similar differentiable
rendering pipeline with us, including projecting the 3D Bézier curves to 2D Bézier curves, which
are then rendered by the differentiable rasterizer from DiffVG. However, 3Doodle approximates the
perspective projection as an orthographic projection to obtain 2D projected curves and ignores the
depth ordering between the curves. Instead, we perform perspective projection to the 3D rational
Bézier curves and designs a new DiffVG-based ratersizer which can maintain the depth ordering
between the projected 2D rational Bézier curves.

Multimodal-Driven 3D Content Generation Motivated by the success of the text-to-image
research, pioneering works (Poole et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a) introduce the Score Distillation
Sampling (SDS) algorithm and leverage the pre-trained text-to-image models as prior knowledge
to optimize 3D representations. Subsequent works combine SDS with various differentiable 3D
representations to explore the capabilities of text-to-3D object generation, such as DMTet (Lin
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023) and 3D Gaussians (Tang et al., 2024; Yi et al., 2024). Furthermore,
Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023) proposes an image-guided SDS algorithm that distills the 3D-consistent
priors to optimize 3D representations given the input image, and its pipeline inspires the development
of subsequent image-to-3D object methods (Liu et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2024; Wang & Shi, 2023;
Wu et al., 2023; Sta, 2023). Distinguishing from prior endeavors, our work stands out by focusing on
generating view-consistent 3D sketch by optimizing 3D parametric curve primitives.


3    P RELIMINARY

DiffVG (Li et al., 2020) proposes a differentiable rasterizer for vector graphics that supports converting
2D Bézier curves to the raster image domain and back-propagating the gradient for optimization.
Given the 2D curves parameters Θ, the vector graphics scene is defined as f (x, y, Θ), and the raster
image is defined as the 2D grid sampling over the space of f (x, y, Θ). To compute the color of a 2D
location (x, y) ∈ R2 , DiffVG utilizes the inside-outside test (Neh) to find the curves overlapped with
the location initially. Subsequently, it sorts them according to a user-specified order and calculates the
color using alpha blending (Porter & Duff, 1984). Due to the inside-outside test, the scene function
f is not differentiable with respect to curve parameters. Thus, it uses the anti-aliasing technique to
make the pixel color differentiable. By prefiltering f over a convolution kernel k with support A,
sampling I(x, y) at pixels can yield an alias-free image:
                                      ZZ
                           I(x, y) =         k(u, v)f (x − u, y − v; Θ) du dv .                         (1)
                                         A

Due to the integration over the filter support region, the focus shifts from the color value at the center
point to the average pixel color. The continuous change in the average color induced by the curve
movements makes the function I(x, y) differentiable.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The goal is to compute the gradients of I with respect to Θ:
                                        ZZ
                       ∂I(x, y)       ∂
                                 =            k(u, v)f (x − u, y − v; Θ) du dv .                    (2)
                          ∂Θ         ∂Θ     A
DiffVG proposes two approaches Monte Carlo Sampling and Analytical Prefiltering to evaluate the
pixel integral, which does not have a closed-form solution in general. We focus on the first approach
which performs better. The pixel integral can be discretized with Monte Carlo sampling (Ganacim
et al., 2014):
               ZZ                                           N
                                                         1 X
   I(x, y) =        k(u, v)f (x − u, y − v; Θ) du dv ≈          k(ui , vi )f (x − ui , y − vi ; Θ), (3)
                  A                                      N i
but geometric discontinuities hinder the interchangeability of the integral and differential operators,
                                                                ∂I
which consequently obstructs the direct representation of ∂Θ       as a discretizable integral. Thus, it
rewrites the pixel color as the sum of integrals over multiple sub-regions Ai , and applies the Reynolds
transport theorem to handle all the discontinuous changes on the boundary:
                    ZZ                              XZ
   ∂I(x, y) X                   ∂                                  ∂p(t)
             =                    g(u, v) du dv +                        · n(t) g(p(t)) dp(t) ,      (4)
     ∂Θ          i     Ai (Θ) ∂Θ                     i   ∂Ai (Θ)    ∂Θ
where g(u, v) is the multiplication of the scene function f and kernel k for brevity, ∂Ai is the
boundary of area Ai , n(t) is the outward normal of ∂Ai , and p(t) denotes the 2D points on the ∂Ai .
The first integral is responsible for the differentiation of color and the transparency, while the second
term is responsible for the change of the boundaries, and the boundary integral can be estimated by
the Monte Carlo estimator as:
   XZ                                         1 X (∇Θ pj · nj ) (g(pj + ϵnj ) − g(pj − ϵnj ))
                 (∇Θ p · n)g(p(t)) dp(t) ≈                                                        ,    (5)
    i    ∂Ai (Θ)                              N j                    P (pj |c)P (c)
where ϵ is a small number and P (pj |c)P (c) denotes the probability density of sampling the curve c
and point pj on the boundaries.

4     D IFF 3DS

4.1    OVERVIEW

We propose Diff3DS, a novel differentiable rendering framework for generating view-consistent 3D
sketch by optimizing 3D parametric curves. A 3D sketch Θ̃ is defined as a collection of 3D parametric
curve strokes that reside in 3D space. We particularly focus on the 3D rational Bézier curve and
our derivation supports the 3D linear, quadratic, and cubic rational Bézier curves. The theoretical
trainable parameters include the control point position, curve width, and rgb-alpha color. Follow
the previous methods (Vinker et al., 2022; 2023; Choi et al., 2024), we represent each stroke by a
3D cubic Bézier curve and only optimize the control point position in our current implementation.
Moreover, weights for rational Bézier curves are disregarded to simplify the computation. Fig. 3
illustrates the pipeline.
Diff3DS is designed with three stages. First, to render the 3D rational Bézier curve strokes Θ̃ at a
given viewpoint, we perspectively project these curves onto the camera plane (Sec. 4.2). Then, we
render the projected 2D rational Bézier curves Θ to the raster image using a customized differentiable
rasterizer. (Sec. 4.3). Finally, we will perform back-propagation with the gradient computed from the
rendered image to optimize the 3D sketch parameters (Sec. 4.4).

4.2    3D R ATIONAL B ÉZIER C URVE P ROJECTION

In this section, we primarily explain how to project the 3D rational Bézier curves in camera coordinates
onto the 2D camera focal plane, and detailed proof is provided in Appendix B. Given the control points
P̃i = (P̃ix , P̃iy , P̃iz ) ∈ R3 , the associated non-negative weights w̃i and the Bernstein polynomials
Bi,n (t), for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, define the 3D rational Bézier curve p̃(t) of degree n by:
                                       n
                                             B (t)w̃i
                                          Pn i,n
                                     X
                             p̃(t) =                        P̃i = (x̃(t), ỹ(t), z̃(t)).             (6)
                                      i=0   j=0 Bj,n (t)w̃j


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assume the focal plane is z = f , where f is the focal length, the corresponding projected 2D curve
p(t) under the pinhole camera perspective projection can be defined as:
                                                                                                   x̃(t) ỹ(t)
                                               p(t) = (x(t), y(t)) = (                                  f,     f ).                          (7)
                                                                                                   z̃(t) z̃(t)
Due to rational Bézier curves are projective invariant, the curve p(t) still is identical to the 2D
rational Bézier curve defined by projected control points. Given projected 2D control points Pi =
                     P̃ x   P̃ y
(Pix , Piy ) = ( P̃iz f, P̃iz f ) ∈ R2 and adjusted weights wi = w̃i P̃iz , p(t) can be written as following:
                       i      i

                                                     n
                                                            B (t)wi
                                                          Pn i,n
                                                     X
                                       p(t) =                             Pi = (x(t), y(t)).                                                 (8)
                                                      i=0  j=0 Bj,n (t)wj


4.3          2D R ATIONAL B ÉZIER C URVES D IFFERENTIABLE R ASTERIZATION

This section primarily focuses on the differentiable rasterization of 2D curves Θ obtained through
projection. To render the projected rational Bézier curves and maintain their occlusion relationship
in 3D space, especially for colored curves, we customize a new differentiable rasterizer based on
DiffVG (Li et al., 2020). Given a 2D pixel location (x, y) and projected curves Θ, we first employ a
inside-outside test to identify all the overlapping curves with this pixel location. Then, we sort the
overlapping curve points and calculate the color of this pixel location using alpha blending algorithm.
The inside-outside test identifies a curve as overlapping with a location if the closest distance between
them is less than half of the curve width, and the closest point to the location are considered as the
overlapping point . However, the identification is challenging. For the nth-degree rational curve p(t),
computing the t that minimizes the distance (p(t) − q)2 where q = (x, y) equals to solve the roots of
a polynomial with degree 3n − 2. For the cubic rational curve, a 7th order polynomial needs to be
solved, which does not have a closed-form solution. Inspired by DiffVG, we solve the polynomial
using bisection and the Newton-Raphson method (William H. Press & Flannery., 2007). The iterative
solver obtains its initial guess from isolator polynomials (Sederberg & Chang., 1994) – the real roots
of a 7th order polynomial can be isolated by the roots of two cubic auxiliary polynomials. Please
refer to Appendix C for more details.
The rasterized result should faithfully maintains the occlusion in 3D space. In our task, different
points along the same projected 2D curve may have different depths. Therefore, each point should be
assigned with its own specific order for the color blending process. In the original DiffVG, each curve
is initialized with a user-specific order, meaning all the points along the same curve share this uniform
order. In contrast, our sort order is determined by the depth order among curve primitives. For each
overlapping point, we compute its unprojected z-depth in the 3D space using the corresponding 2D
projected curve control points, and employ it as the primary sort order. To mitigate the z-fighting issue
1
  caused by floating-point errors, we also utilize a user-specified order as the secondary order. After
obtaining the 2D curve scene function f (x, y, Θ), the rendered raster image I will be calculated using
the Monte Carlo Sampling strategy (Sec. 3) with Eq. (3). Fig. 2 shows an example. Our rasterizer
faithfully renders the colored curves and maintains occlusions according to the depth order.

(0, 0) x                             (1023, 0) Curve A
                                                                                                    Figure 2: A rasterized result contains 3
 y                                           Control Points: [(1023, 0), (0, 512), (1023, 1023)]
                                             Point Weights: [1.0, 1.0, 1.0]
                                                                                                    quadratic rational Bézier curves and a line.
                                             Point Depths: [3.0, 2.0, 1.0]                          All curves share the same control point posi-
                                                Curve B                                             tions in pixel space and the depths but with
                                                Control Points: [(1023, 0), (0, 512), (1023, 1023)]
                                                Point Weights: [1.0, 2.0, 1.0]                      different weights. Our rasterizer faithfully
                                                Point Depths: [3.0, 2.0, 1.0]
                                                                                                    renders the curves and maintains occlusions
                                                Curve C
                                                Control Points: [(1023, 0), (0, 512), (1023, 1023)]
                                                                                                    according to the depth order. (e.g., The upper
                                                Point Weights: [1.0, 4.0, 1.0]                      half of each curve has a greater depth than
                                                Point Depths: [3.0, 2.0, 1.0]

                                                Line D
                                                                                                    the line, while the lower half has a lesser
                                                Control Points: [(511.5, 0), (511.5, 1023)]         depth. This difference results in varying
                                                Point Weights: [1.0, 1.0]
 (0, 1023)                         (1023, 1023) Point Depths: [2.0, 2.0]                            color blending outcomes at the overlapping
                                                                                                    regions).

       1
           https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-fighting


                                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



    3D Sketch Θ                    Raster Image I                   Noisy Image It                        Pseudo GT I0

                                                                                       Pre-trained
                          Diff.
                                                                                     Diffusion Model
                        Renderer
                         (Sec.4)

                                                                                             / "dragon"
        Forward
                                                    ϵ ~   (0, I )
        Gradient Flow



Figure 3: We generate the 3D sketch Θ̃, represented as a set of 3D strokes, from the text or image
input. We render the raster image I from the random camera via our differentiable renderer (Sec. 4).
Then, the pre-trained diffusion model, conditioned on the input, diffuses the rendering I and predicts
the pseudo ground truth Iˆ0 . The discrepancies between Iˆ0 and I are used to update the 3D sketch.


4.4      G RADIENTS BACK - PROPAGATION

The rendering framework is fully differentiable since the projection and rasterizer are differentiable.
Thus, the gradients of I with respect to 3D curves parameter Θ̃ can be calculated with the chain rule:
∂I(x, y)     ∂I(x, y) ∂Θ            ∂I
          =                , where      denotes the gradients of I with respect to 2D projected curves
   ∂ Θ̃         ∂Θ ∂ Θ̃             ∂Θ
                                                           ∂Θ
Θ that can be computed using Eq. (4) and Eq. (5), and           denotes the gradients of projected 2D
                                                           ∂ Θ̃
                                          ∂I(x, y)
curves Θ with respect to 3D curves Θ̃.             calculates the gradients of control point positions,
                                            ∂Θ
color, and width for projected 2D curves. The position gradients of 3D curve control points are
                 ∂Θ
calculated with       , which is based on the gradients of the projected 2D control points. The color
                 ∂ Θ̃
and width gradients of 3D curves directly inherit the corresponding gradients of the projected 2D
curves.

5      M ULTIMODAL -D RIVEN 3D S KETCH G ENERATION
Diff3DS supports end-to-end optimization of 3D sketch under flexible supervisions. By employing
the Score Distillation Sampling algorithm, we propose the promising tasks of text-to-3D sketch and
image-to-3D sketch, with the goal of generating 3D sketch from flexible text or single image input.

5.1      T EXT- TO -3D S KETCH

Pioneering works (Poole et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a) propose the Score Distillation Sampling
(SDS) algorithm, utilizing the prior of a pre-trained 2D text-to-image model to optimize 3D represen-
tations. By integrating SDS with Diff3DS, we distill the diffusion prior to generate the 3D sketch
Θ̃ from the input text. Given a pre-trained diffusion model ϵϕ , text embedding y, rendered image I
                √ R and
with our rasterizer       √ the noise timestep t, image I will be added with noise to obtain a noisy
image It : It = ᾱt I + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, where ϵ ∼ N (0, I) and ᾱt is the cumulative product of scaling at
timestep t. Then the gradient of SDS loss on Θ̃ is given by:

                                                                                         ∂I
                    ∇Θ̃ LSDS (ϕ, I = R(Θ̃)) = Et,ϵ ω(t)(ϵ̂ϕ (It ; y, t) − ϵ)                   ,  (9)
                                                                                        ∂ Θ̃
where ω(t) is a weight based on the timestep t, and the predicted noise sampled by classifier-free
guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2021) with weight λ denotes as:
                      ϵ̂ϕ (It ; y, t) = ϵϕ (It ; ∅, t) + λ(ϵϕ (It ; y, t) − ϵϕ (It ; ∅, t)).     (10)
By deriving the pseudo ground truth image Iˆ0 with one-step denoising:
                                           1           √
                                   Iˆ0 = √ (It − 1 − ᾱt ϵ̂ϕ (It ; y, t)),                       (11)
                                            ᾱt
we can transform Eq. (9) into an equivalent form as follows:
                                                                    √
                                                                      ᾱt          ˆ    ∂I
                 ∇Θ̃ LSDS (ϕ, I = R(Θ̃)) = Et,ϵ ω(t)                  √ (I − I0 )             ,  (12)
                                                                1 − ᾱt                ∂ Θ̃

                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which can be regarded as matching the input view I with predicted Iˆ0 .
Similar with (Poole et al., 2023), due to the bias
of 2D text-to-image model, we encounter seri-
ous view inconsistency problem known as the
Janus problem. This problem persists even when
directional prompts (e.g., "the front view of...")
are used to distinguish between different views.
To mitigate this issue, we integrate MVDream
(Shi et al., 2024) with our framework, which
                                                     λ =1   λ =5   λ =7.5 λ =30 λ =50 λ =100 λ =500
is able to generate 3D-aware four view images
using input text and camera poses.                 Figure 4: Pseudo ground truth Iˆ0 visualization. As
The impact of the CFG weight λ on the optimiza- the CFG weight λ decreases, the effective supervi-
tion process has received attention in existing sion region of Iˆ0 also decreases.
text-to-3D methods. By visualizing the pseudo ground truth Iˆ0 after denoising with different levels
of weight λ at large noise timesteps in Fig. 4, we find that as λ decreases, the effective supervision
region of Iˆ0 decreases, hereby impacting the final shape of results.

5.2   I MAGE - TO -3D S KETCH

Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023) proposes an image-guided SDS method that conditions on the input view
image I˜ and relative camera extrinsic (R, T ), based on its view-conditioned model. Our framework
is able to generate 3D sketch Θ̃ from the input reference image I˜ by distilling the 3D consistent prior:

                 ∇Θ̃ LSDS (ϕ, I = R(Θ̃)) = Et,ϵ ω(t)(ϵ̂ϕ (It ; I,˜ R, T, t) − ϵ) ∂I .               (13)
                                                                                  ∂ Θ̃

5.3   DYNAMIC N OISE D ELETION

We find that our framework is affected by the issue of gradient sparsity in the Monte Carlo Sampling
strategy. In Reynolds’ formula, the gradient from pixel space is determined by the curve boundaries.
This results in the loss of information from pixels that are not incident to those boundaries. In cases
where significant displacements of curves are required, the optimization tends to get trapped in a local
optimum state: curves contract the boundaries to minimize the loss function. During our training
process, some curves tend to contract to extremely small lengths as noises. To obtain clean results,
we propose the Dynamic Noise Deletion strategy. We discretize each curve into n line segments
(n = 20) and accumulate their lengths as the total length of the curve. The curve with lengths below
a specified threshold will be considered as noise and removed dynamically.

5.4   T IME A NNEALING S CHEDULE

To further enhance the performance of the results, we employ a time annealing schedule similar with
(Wang et al., 2023b; Zhu et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024). During the optimization
process, we gradually adjust the maximum and minimum time step for SDS in a linear manner. The
large noise timestep focuses on aligning the curves with the semantic content of the input text or
image during the initial training phase. Conversely, the small noise timestep employed during the
later training phase focuses on further enhancing the details.

6     E XPERIMENTS

6.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We implement our rendering framework in C++/CUDA with a PyTorch interface (Paszke et al., 2019).
In the experiment, a user-specified number of curves will be randomly initialized within a sphere
of radius 1.5. We randomly sample the camera position using the radius from 1.8 to 2.0, with the
azimuth in the range of -180 to 180 degrees, the elevation in the range of 0 to 30 degrees and the
field of view (fov) of 60 degrees. For the pre-trained model, we apply Stable Diffusion 2.1 (sta) and


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            "A DSLR photo of a realistic lighthouse, [suffix]."


                                       "A fire phoenix, mythical bird, engulfed in flames, [suffix]."


                                "Higly detailed, majestic royal tall ship, realistic painting..., [suffix]."
      DiffSketcher      DreamGaussian            MVDream                                       Diff3DS (Ours)

Figure 5: Qualitative results of the text-to-3D sketch task. Existing text-to-3D methods fail to generate
sketch-style results, even with the addition of the "sketch in black and white, line drawing" suffix.
   Table 1: Evaluation of text-to-3D sketch task.        Table 2: Evaluation of image-to-3D sketch task.
                                                                                             Novel Views         Reference View
                       CLIP-ScoreT ↑
      Method                                   BLIP-Score ↑               Method            CLIP-ScoreI ↑
                                                                                                                    LPIPS ↓
                     ViT B/16 ViT B/32                                                   ViT B/16 ViT B/32
 DreamGaussian       0.2561       0.2453           0.4990             NEF                  0.6612       0.6605       0.3997
 MVDream             0.2763       0.2653           0.4949             3Doodle              0.6734       0.6746       0.2567
 Diff3DS (Ours)      0.3046       0.3034           0.5038             Diff3DS (Ours)       0.6768       0.6846       0.2647


MVDream (Shi et al., 2024) for the text-to-3D sketch task. And we apply Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al.,
2023) and Stable-Zero123 (Sta, 2023) for the image-to-3D sketch task. The training process requires
1 hour for the text-to-3D sketch task and 2 hours for the image-to-3D sketch task on a single NVIDIA
A10 GPU. More details can be found in the Appendix A.

6.2    T EXT- TO -3D S KETCH

Baselines To the best of our knowledge, we are the first text-to-3D sketch method. We select the
existing text-to-3D object methods DreamGaussian (Tang et al., 2024) and MVDream (Shi et al.,
2024) as compared baselines, and further choose the text-to-2D sketch method DiffSketcher (Xing
et al., 2023) as the additional perceptual reference.

Qualitative Comparisons Fig. 5 shows the qualitative results of the text-to-3D sketch task. We
compared the 3D results of the text-to-3D baseline method with our method, and further provide
the 2D results of DiffSketcher. To encourage baseline methods to generate sketch-style results, we
append the suffix "sketch in black and white, line drawing" to each prompt inputted to the baselines.
From the results, it can be seen, even with the additional suffix, the general text-to-3D baselines
DreamGaussian and MVDream cannot generate the sketch-style content. For DiffSketcher, the results
are more like sketch draws and only in 2D. In contrast, our method can generate 3D view-consistent
sketches with clearly defined curves.

Quantitative Comparisons We collect 35 text prompts from previous works (Poole et al., 2023;
Shi et al., 2024) and websites. Notably, the accurate evaluation of 3D sketch generation is yet to be
resolved due to the absence of ground truth sketches. In this work, we measure the CLIP text-image
similarity (Radford et al., 2021) (CLIP-ScoreT ) and BLIP-Score (Li et al., 2022) metrics to evaluate
the consistency of the rendered views with the input text prompt, following previous work (Xing
et al., 2024). For all metrics, we render the 3D sketch into 8 views and compute the metric between
each view and the input text prompt, and use the averaged value as the final result. Table 1 shows the
evaluation results and our method outperforms all the text-to-3D baselines.


                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Input   CLIPasso           NEF                      3Doodle                      Diff3DS (Ours)


Figure 6: Qualitative results of the image-to-3D sketch task. 3Doodle and NEF fail to extract
reasonable 3D curves from a single input image.

6.3   I MAGE - TO -3D S KETCH

Baselines To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to generate 3D sketch from a single image.
The closest works to ours are Neural Edge Fields (NEF) (Ye et al., 2023) and 3Doodle (Choi et al.,
2024), which generate 3D curves from multiview images. We also choose the image-to-2D sketch
method CLIPasso (Vinker et al., 2022) as the additional perceptual reference.

Qualitative Comparisons Fig. 6 shows the qualitative results of the image-to-3D sketch task. Note
that CLIPasso can only generate 2D sketch and is used as a reference for the results of 2D generation
methods. As the reconstruction methods, 3Doodle and NEF attain reasonable results for the reference
view, but they fail for other views because they lack the ability to predict the unobserved regions from
a single input image. In contrast, our method can generate view-consistent 3D sketches.

Quantitative Comparisons We collect 25 images generated with Imagine (Ima, 2023). Follow
previous works (Qian et al., 2024; Choi et al., 2024), we use CLIP visual similarity (Radford et al.,
2021) (CLIP-ScoreI ) metric to measure the abstract semantic similarity across the reference image
and the rendered novel views, while employing LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) metric in the reference
view to measure structural semantic similarity. For the CLIP-ScoreI , we calculate the metric between
each of the 8 rendered images and the reference image, and use the average value as the final score.
Table 2 reports the evaluation results. On the LPIPS metric, our method significantly outperforms
NEF and achieves a score comparable to 3Doodle, which has optimized for the reference view with
more losses, including the LPIPS and CLIP loss. On the CLIP-Score metric, our method surpasses
all baseline approaches. These results demonstrate the superiority of our method.

User Study We further conduct a user study to evaluate the overall quality of our image-to-
3D sketch results. Specifically, we prepared 25 tasks, each of which is composed of three
randomly-ordered 3D sketches generated using three methods: NEF, 3Doodle and Diff3DS.
 We used the Likert scores as the evaluation metric, with 0          1      2        3     4       5
a range from 1 to 5 where a higher score indicates that the
                                                                           1.78
generated 3D sketch is more preferred by the users. In each
task, the participants were asked to score each 3D sketch
result based on the following two questions: (1) How well                       2.12
does the 3D sketch fit the input image, e.g., in terms of
keeping the similar shape and structure of the input? (2)                                     4.18
How is the quality of the 3D sketch, e.g., whether the 4
rendered views are 3D consistent or whether the sketch              NEF       3Doodle      Diff3DS
is visually pleasing? We distributed questionnaires to
40 participants who are CS, EE and Math students and Figure 7: Bar plots of our user study
researchers, and got 1000 valid scores in total. The results results. The score is of scale 1-5, the
are summarized in Fig. 7, which highlights the superiority higher the better.
of our method. More details can be found in the Appendix D.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.4   A BLATIONS AND A NALYSIS

Effect of Hyperparameters Fig. 8 illustrates the effect of hyperparameters. Fig. 8 (a) illustrates
the effect of different CFG weights λ in the text-to-3D sketch task. A larger weight leads to a stronger
shape prior, while a smaller weight results in shape degradation. Fig. 8 (b) illustrates the effect
of various pre-trained models. The Janus Problem easily arises when using Stable Diffusion, and
MVDream partially mitigates this issue (e.g., the bicycle with three wheels in the bird’s-eye view).
Then Zero-1-to-3 is not sufficiently 3D consistent in certain examples (e.g., the upper part of the
scissors is bent in the side view). Fig. 8 (c) illustrates that increasing the initial curve number can
enhance the details of results, even though the final curve number is automatically determined by
Dynamic Noise Deletion. Too few curves may fail to represent a complete 3D object.


       λ = 7.5              Based Stable Diffusion        Based Zero-1-to-3   •    •         •    •
                                                                              14   28        56   112 Ninit


       λ = 50                 Based MVDream          Based Stable-Zero123               λ = 50
 (a) CFG Weight.                  (b) Pre-trained Models.              (c) Initial Curve Number.
                                  Figure 8: Effect of hyperparameters.
Analysis of Designed Rasterizer
Our rasterizer accurately renders the
blended colors of overlapping curves
and faithfully reproduces occlusion re-
                                                                             3Doodle
lationships between curves, and en-
ables seamless integration with other
3D sketch generation methods like
3Doodle. To assess its effectiveness,        Target Object           3Doodle (+ Our rasterizer)
we conduct an experiment to generate
colored 3D sketches from multi-view                 Figure 9: Analysis of designed rasterizer.
images using both the original 3Doodle and a variant integrated with our rasterizer. As shown in
Fig. 9, the original 3Doodle suffers from noticeable color conflict errors across multiple viewpoints
(e.g., the support base, which is farther from the camera, is incorrectly rendered in the foreground,
occluding the LEGO excavator). These noticeable color conflicts disrupt the object’s visual coherence
and lead to semantic ambiguity. In contrast, our rasterizer consistently reproduces accurate occlusion
relationships between objects, providing clearer visual and spatial semantics. Additional results and
details can be found in the Appendix D.8.

7     C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose Diff3DS, a novel differentiable rendering framework for generating view-
consistent 3D sketch by optimizing 3D parametric curves under various supervisions. By employing
the recent Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) to distill prior knowledge from pre-trained 2D image
generation model, we achieve 3D sketch generation from the flexible text or single image input.
Our proposed rasterizer accurately renders the blended colors in overlapping regions and faithfully
reproduces occlusion relationships between curves, showcasing its strong potential for generating
colored 3D sketches. One limitation of Diff3DS is it inherits the sparse gradient issue from DiffVG
and can only optimize continuous parameters. Also, the initial curve number is set manually to
achieve a balance between the approximation accuracy and complexity of the results. Moreover, our
current implementation does not distinguish between the view-independent curve (e.g., feature lines)
and the view-dependent curve (e.g., contours of smooth surface boundaries), limiting the expressive
capacity of the overall shape of a 3D object, which is extensively discussed in 3Doodle. Incorporating
the diverse curve representations of 3Doodle to Diff3DS is a promising future work. Also, one future
direction is to extend our framework for scene-level generation task, such as text-to-3D scene sketch.



                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (62202199).

R EFERENCES
Random-access rendering of general vector graphics. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
  1409060.1409088.
Stable  diffusion 2.1.                         https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/
  stable-diffusion-2-1.
Imagine. https://imagine.meta.com, 2023.
Stable zero123. https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-zero123, 2023.
Rahul Arora and Karan Singh. Mid-air drawing of curves on 3d surfaces in virtual reality. ACM
  Transactions on Graphics, 2021.
Seok-Hyung Bae, Ravin Balakrishnan, and Karan Singh. Ilovesketch: as-natural-as-possible sketching
  system for creating 3d curve models. In Proceedings of the Annual ACM Symposium on User
  Interface Software and Technology, 2008.
Ayan Banerjee, Nityanand Mathur, Josep Lladós, Umapada Pal, and Anjan Dutta. Svgcraft: Be-
  yond single object text-to-svg synthesis with comprehensive canvas layout. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.00412, 2024.
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and appear-
  ance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.
Changwoon Choi, Jaeah Lee, Jaesik Park, and Young Min Kim. 3doodle: Compact abstraction of
  objects with 3d strokes. ACM Trans. Graph., 2024.
Blender Online Community. Blender - a 3D modelling and rendering package. Blender Foundation,
  2018. URL http://www.blender.org.
Kevin Frans, Lisa Soros, and Olaf Witkowski. Clipdraw: Exploring text-to-drawing synthesis through
  language-image encoders. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Francisco Ganacim, Rodolfo S. Lima, Luiz Henrique de Figueiredo, and Diego Nehab. Massively-
  parallel vector graphics. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2014.
Cindy Grimm and Pushkar Joshi. Just drawit: A 3d sketching system. In Proceedings of the
  International Symposium on Sketch-Based Interfaces and Modeling, 2012.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
Yukun Huang, Jianan Wang, Yukai Shi, Boshi Tang, Xianbiao Qi, and Lei Zhang. Dreamtime:
  An improved optimization strategy for diffusion-guided 3d generation. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided
  object generation with dream fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Ajay Jain, Amber Xie, and Pieter Abbeel. Vectorfusion: Text-to-svg by abstracting pixel-based
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2023.
Ying Jiang, Congyi Zhang, Hongbo Fu, Alberto Cannavò, Fabrizio Lamberti, Henry Y K Lau, and
  Wenping Wang. Handpainter - 3d sketching in vr with hand-based physical proxy. In Proceedings
  of the ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yongkwan Kim and Seok-Hyung Bae. Sketchingwithhands: 3d sketching handheld products with
  first-person hand posture. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
  Technology, 2016.
Yongkwan Kim, Kyuhyoung Hong, and Junwon Yang. Feather: 3d sketchbook light as a feather. In
  ACM SIGGRAPH Appy Hour, SIGGRAPH ’23, 2023.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Tzu-Mao Li, Michal Lukáč, Michaël Gharbi, and Jonathan Ragan-Kelley. Differentiable vector
  graphics rasterization for editing and learning. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2020.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2023.
Lingjie Liu, Duygu Ceylan, Cheng Lin, Wenping Wang, and Niloy J Mitra. Image-based reconstruc-
  tion of wire art. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2017.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.
David Loffredo. Fundamentals of step implementation. STEP Tools, Inc, 1999.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Proceedings of
  the European Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
Nasir Mohammad Khalid, Tianhao Xie, Eugene Belilovsky, and Tiberiu Popa. Clip-mesh: Gener-
  ating textured meshes from text using pretrained image-text models. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia
  Conference Proceedings, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Thomas Porter and Tom Duff. Compositing digital images. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference
  on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’84, 1984.
Guocheng Qian, Jinjie Mai, Abdullah Hamdi, Jian Ren, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Bing Li, Hsin-Ying
  Lee, Ivan Skorokhodov, Peter Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, and Bernard Ghanem. Magic123: One
  image to high-quality 3d object generation using both 2d and 3d diffusion priors. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Zhiyu Qu, Tao Xiang, and Yi-Zhe Song. Sketchdreamer: Interactive text-augmented creative sketch
  ideation. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference, 2023.
Zhiyu Qu, Lan Yang, Honggang Zhang, Tao Xiang, Kaiyue Pang, and Yi-Zhe Song. Wired perspec-
  tives: Multi-view wire art embraces generative ai. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peter Schaldenbrand, Zhixuan Liu, and Jean Oh. Styleclipdraw: Coupling content and style in
  text-to-drawing translation. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2022.

Thomas W Sederberg and Geng-Zhe Chang. Isolator polynomials. In Algebraic Geometry and Its
  Applications, 1994.

Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Long Mai, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. MVDream: Multi-
  view diffusion for 3d generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.

Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang Zeng. Dreamgaussian: Generative
   gaussian splatting for efficient 3d content creation. In Proceedings of the International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2024.

Vikas Thamizharasan, Difan Liu, Shantanu Agarwal, Matthew Fisher, Michaël Gharbi, Oliver Wang,
  Alec Jacobson, and Evangelos Kalogerakis. Vecfusion: Vector font generation with diffusion. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024a.

Vikas Thamizharasan, Difan Liu, Matthew Fisher, Nanxuan Zhao, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and
  Michal Lukac. Nivel: Neural implicit vector layers for text-to-vector generation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024b.

Kenji Tojo, Ariel Shamir, Bernd Bickel, and Nobuyuki Umetani. Fabricable 3d wire art. In ACM
  SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings, SIGGRAPH ’24, 2024.

Christina Tsalicoglou, Fabian Manhardt, Alessio Tonioni, Michael Niemeyer, and Federico Tombari.
  Textmesh: Generation of realistic 3d meshes from text prompts. In Proceedings of the International
  conference on 3D vision, 2024.

Yael Vinker, Ehsan Pajouheshgar, Jessica Y Bo, Roman Christian Bachmann, Amit Haim Bermano,
  Daniel Cohen-Or, Amir Zamir, and Ariel Shamir. Clipasso: Semantically-aware object sketching.
  ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2022.

Yael Vinker, Yuval Alaluf, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Ariel Shamir. Clipascene: Scene sketching with
  different types and levels of abstraction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision, 2023.

Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jacobian
  chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023a.

Peng Wang and Yichun Shi. Imagedream: Image-prompt multi-view diffusion for 3d generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02201, 2023.

Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolific-
  dreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.

Gerold Wesche and Hans-Peter Seidel. Freedrawer: a free-form sketching system on the responsive
  workbench. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology,
  2001.

William T. Vetterling William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky and Brian P. Flannery. Numerical recipes
 3rd edition: The art of scientific computing (3 ed.). cambridge, 2007.

Markus Worchel and Marc Alexa. Differentiable rendering of parametric geometry. ACM Transactions
 on Graphics, 2023.

Tong Wu, Zhibing Li, Shuai Yang, Pan Zhang, Xingang Pan, Jiaqi Wang, Dahua Lin, and Ziwei Liu.
  Hyperdreamer: Hyper-realistic 3d content generation and editing from a single image. In ACM
  SIGGRAPH Asia Conference Proceedings, 2023.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Min Xin, Ehud Sharlin, and Mario Costa Sousa. Napkin sketch: handheld mixed reality 3d sketching.
 In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, 2008.
XiMing Xing, Chuang Wang, Haitao Zhou, Jing Zhang, Qian Yu, and Dong Xu. Diffsketcher: Text
  guided vector sketch synthesis through latent diffusion models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.
Ximing Xing, Haitao Zhou, Chuang Wang, Jing Zhang, Dong Xu, and Qian Yu. Svgdreamer: Text
  guided svg generation with diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Zhijin Yang, Pengfei Xu, Hongbo Fu, and Hui Huang. Wireroom: model-guided explorative design
  of abstract wire art. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2021.
Yunfan Ye, Renjiao Yi, Zhirui Gao, Chenyang Zhu, Zhiping Cai, and Kai Xu. Nef: Neural edge fields
  for 3d parametric curve reconstruction from multi-view images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Junjie Wang, Guanjun Wu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian,
  and Xinggang Wang. Gaussiandreamer: Fast generation from text to 3d gaussians by bridging 2d
  and 3d diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Emilie Yu, Rahul Arora, Tibor Stanko, J. Andreas Bærentzen, Karan Singh, and Adrien Bousseau.
 Cassie: Curve and surface sketching in immersive environments. In Proceedings of the ACM CHI
 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2021a.
Xue Yu, Stephen DiVerdi, Akshay Sharma, and Yotam Gingold. Scaffoldsketch: Accurate industrial
  design drawing in vr. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
 Technology, 2021b.
Ya-Ting Yue, Xiaolong Zhang, Yongliang Yang, Gang Ren, Yi-King Choi, and Wenping Wang.
  Wiredraw: 3d wire sculpturing guided with mixed reality. In Proceedings of the ACM CHI
  Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2017.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Junzhe Zhu, Peiye Zhuang, and Sanmi Koyejo. HIFA: High-fidelity text-to-3d generation with
  advanced diffusion guidance. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S UPPLEMENTARY

OVERVIEW
This supplementary material is structured into multiple sections that offer further details and analysis
pertaining to our Diff3DS research. Concretely, it will hone in on the topics that follow:

           • In section A,we provide the implementation details of Diff3DS.
           • In section B, we provide a detailed proof for the 3D rational Bézier curve projection.
           • In section C, we provide a detailed analysis for finding the closest distance between a point
            and a rational Bézier curve.
           • In section D, we provide more analysis and experiment results.
           • In section E, we provide more high quality sketch results.

A        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We implement our rendering framework in C++/CUDA with the PyTorch interface, and follow the
STEP standard (ISO 10303-21) (Loffredo, 1999) to format and save our 3D curve results. In the
experiment, a user-specified number of curves will be randomly initialized within a sphere of radius
1.5. The default curve number is set to 56. We randomly sample the camera position using the radius
from 1.8 to 2.0, with the azimuth in the range of -180 to 180 degrees, the elevation in the range of 0
to 30 degrees and the field of view (fov) of 60 degrees. Notice that Stable-Zero123 abnegates the
relative distance for simplifying 2 , we fix its radius at 2.0.
For the pre-trained model, we apply Stable Diffusion 2.1 (sta) and MVDream (Shi et al., 2024) for the
text-to-3D sketch task, with the CFG weight of 50. And we apply Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023) and
Stable-Zero123 (Sta, 2023) for the image-to-3D sketch task, with the CFG weight of 7.5 followed by
(Liu et al., 2023; Sta, 2023) .
For all tasks, the total number of training steps is 4000. Starting from step 2000, we dynamically
delete the noise every 100 steps. The training process requires 1 hour for the text-to-3D sketch task
and 2 hours for the image-to-3D sketch task on a single NVIDIA A10 GPU with a batch size of
4. To optimize the control point positions, we use the Adam optimizer and set the learning rate of
the optimizer to 0.002. For the time annealing schedule, we prefer to decrease the maximum and
minimum time steps from 0.85 to 0.3 and 0.1, respectively, over the first 3600 steps. Due to limited
resources, not all possible combinations of the hyper-parameters related to the time steps have been
fully explored, and there may be other configurations that could produce better results.
For the Dynamic Noise Deletion, only the curves with lengths below a specified threshold will be
considered as noise and removed dynamically. The trade-off between noise removal and detail
preservation can be balanced by adjusting the threshold. Currently, the threshold is empirically set to
0.1 which is below the 10% of the average curve length.

B        3D R ATIONAL B ÉZIER C URVE P ROJECTION

Given the control points P̃i = (P̃ix , P̃iy , P̃iz ) ∈ R3 , the associated non-negative weights w̃i and the
Bernstein polynomials Bi,n (t), for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, define a nth-degree 3D rational Bézier curve p̃(t) by:
                                       n
                                             B (t)w̃i
                                           Pn i,n
                                       X
                             p̃(t) =                        P̃i = (x̃(t), ỹ(t), z̃(t)).
                                       i=0  j=0 Bj,n (t)w̃j

Assume the focal plane is z = f , where f is the focal length, the corresponding projected 2D curve
p(t) under the pinhole camera perspective projection can be defined as:
                                                                 x̃(t) ỹ(t)
                                       p(t) = (x(t), y(t)) = (        f,     f ).
                                                                 z̃(t) z̃(t)
    2
        https://github.com/threestudio-project/threestudio/issues/360


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Due to rational Bézier curves are projective invariant, the projected 2D curve p(t) still is identical to
the rational Bézier curve defined by projected control points. Given projected 2D control points
                                                          P̃ix P̃iy
                                  Pi = (Pix , Piy ) = (       f,    f ) ∈ R2 ,
                                                          P̃iz P̃iz
p(t) can be written as a 2D rational Bézier curve with adjusted weights wi = w̃i P̃iz :
                  x̃(t) ỹ(t)
         p(t) = (       f,      f)
                  z̃(t) z̃(t)
                  Pn                     x
                                                Pn                  y
                      i=0 Bi,n (t)w̃i P̃i         i=0 Bi,n (t)w̃i P̃i
              = ( Pn                      z
                                            f,  P n                  z
                                                                       f)
                     j=0 Bj,n (t)w̃j P̃j          j=0 Bj,n (t)w̃j P̃j
                   n
                                                            ! n                                        !
                 X          Bi,n (t)(w̃i P̃iz )      P̃ix      X         Bi,n (t)(w̃i P̃iz )     P̃iy
              =(       Pn                       z
                                                          f  ,          n                             f )
                                                     P̃iz                                    z   P̃iz
                                                                     P
                  i=0      j=0 Bj,n (t)(w̃j P̃j )              i=0      j=0 Bj,n (t)(w̃j P̃j )
                  n                           n
                       B (t)wi                     B (t)wi
                     Pn i,n                      Pn i,n
                X                            X
              =(                       Pix ,                      Piy )
                 i=0  j=0 B j,n (t)w j       i=0  j=0 B j,n (t)wj

              = (x(t), y(t))
                 n
                        B (t)wi
                    Pn i,n
                X
              =                       Pi .
                i=0    j=0 Bj,n (t)wj


C     C LOSEST D ISTANCE BETWEEN A P OINT AND A R ATIONAL B ÉZIER C URVE

Given a point q ∈ R2 and a nth-degree rational Bézier curve
                                           Pn
                                                 Bi,n (t)wi Pi
                                  p(t) = Pi=0 n                ,
                                              j=0 Bj,n (t)wj
we want to find the closest distance between them and the closest point t⋆ on the curve p. The closest
distance is defined as (p(t⋆ ) − q)2 , and t⋆ is defined as:
                                         t⋆ = argt min(p(t) − q)2 .
To solve the t⋆ , we take the derivative of the squared distance with respect to t and set it to zero:
                                        2(p(t) − q)p′ (t) = ρ(t) = 0,
which equal to solve the roots of a polynomial with degree 3n − 2. For the quadratic rational curve
and the cubic rational curve, a 4th order polynomial and a 7th order polynomial need to be solved
respectively. We provide the detail separately in section C.1 and section C.2.
To solve all real roots of these polynomials, inspired by DiffVG, we solve the polynomial using
bisection and the Newton-Raphson method (William H. Press & Flannery., 2007). The Newton-
Raphson solver obtains its initial guess for intervals from isolator polynomials (Sederberg & Chang.,
1994). For the polynomial ρ(t) with two adjacent real roots t1 and t2 , given any two lower order
other polynomials b(t) and c(t), define
                                         a(t) = b(t)ρ′ (t) + c(t)ρ(t),
where ρ′ (t) is the derivative, (Sederberg & Chang., 1994) proofs that a(t) or b(t) must has at least
one real root in the closed interval [t0 , t1 ]. Since ρ(t0 ) = ρ(t1 ) = 0, we know a(t0 )a(t1 ) =
b(t0 )b(t1 )ρ′ (t0 )ρ′ (t1 ). Since t0 and t1 are roots of ρ and ρ′ (t0 )ρ′ (t1 ) ≤ 0. Thus either a(t0 )a(t1 ) ≤
0 or b(t0 )b(t1 ) ≤ 0. Please see the original paper for discussions on multiple roots.
After solving all the real roots of a and b within the (0, 1), the intervals for finding the real roots of
ρ are then determined. We can then use bisection and the Newton-Raphson method to find all the
roots of ρ within these intervals. The key operation is the selection of the polynomials b(t) and c(t),
(Sederberg & Chang., 1994) prefer to find the b(t) and c(t) which follow Degree(a) + Degree(b) =
Degree(ρ) − 1. In the upcoming paragraphs, we will discuss the cases of the 4th order polynomial
and the 7th order polynomial in section C.3 and section C.4.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1   C LOSEST D ISTANCE OF Q UADRATIC R ATIONAL C URVE C ASE

The quadratic rational curve p(t) can be reorganized using variables A through F as follows:
                        (1 − t)2 w0 P0 + 2(1 − t)tw1 P1 + t2 w2 P2   At2 + Bt + C
               p(t) =               2                    2
                                                                   =              ,
                            (1 − t) w0 + 2(1 − t)tw1 + t w2          Dt2 + Et + F
we can further calculate p(t) − q and p′ (t) as:
                                (A − Dq)t2 + (B − Eq)t + (C − F q)
                     p(t) − q =
                                          Dt2 + Et + F
                                        2
                              (AE − BD)t + (2AF − 2CD)t + (BF − CE)
                     p′ (t) =
                                           (Dt2 + Et + F )2

By reorganizing them using variables a through f :
                                                   at2 + bt + c
                                     p(t) − q =
                                                 Dt2 + Et + F
                                                  2
                                                dt  + et + f
                                     p′ (t) =                   ,
                                              (Dt + Et + F )2
                                                 2

we can rewrite the target polynomial ρ(t) as below:
                                                    (at2 + bt + c)(dt2 + et + f )
                     ρ(t) = 2(p(t) − q)p′ (t) = 2                                 ,
                                                         (Dt2 + Et + F )3
whose numerator is a 4th order polynomial in the variable t. Note that the denominator of ρ(t) is
strictly positive, due to the definition of the rational Bézier curve. Therefore, finding the real roots
of the equation ρ(t) = 0 is equivalent to finding the real roots of the 4th order polynomial in the
numerator.

C.2   C LOSEST D ISTANCE OF C UBIC R ATIONAL C URVE C ASE

The cubic rational curve p(t) can be reorganized using variables A through H as follows:
                      (1 − t)3 w0 P0 + 3(1 − t)2 tw1 P1 + 3(1 − t)t2 w2 P2 + t3 w3 P3
              p(t) =
                            (1 − t)3 w0 + 3(1 − t)2 tw1 + 3(1 − t)t2 w2 + t3 w3
                      At + Bt2 + Ct + D
                         3
                   =                          ,
                      Et3 + F t2 + Gt + H
we can further calculate p(t) − q and p′ (t) as:
                       (A − Eq)t3 + (B − F q)t2 + (C − Gq)t + (D − Hq)
           p(t) − q =
                                     Et3 + F t2 + Gt + H
                         2
                      3A + 2Bt + C        (3Et2 + 2F t + G)(At3 + Bt2 + Ct + D)
           p′ (t) =   3     2
                                       −
                    Et + F t + Gt + H              (Et3 + F t2 + Gt + H)2

By reorganizing them using variables a through i:
                                                at3 + bt2 + ct + d
                                  p(t) − q =
                                               Et3 + F t2 + Gt + H
                                           et + f t3 + gt2 + ht + i
                                             4
                                  p′ (t) =                          ,
                                           (Et3 + F t2 + Gt + H)2

we can write the target polynomial ρ(t) as below:
                                          (at3 + bt2 + ct + d)(et4 + f t3 + gt2 + ht + i)
           ρ(t) = 2(p(t) − q)p′ (t) = 2                                                   ,
                                                     (Et3 + F t2 + Gt + H)3
whose numerator is a 7th order polynomial in the variable t. Note that the denominator of ρ(t) is
strictly positive, due to the definition of the rational Bézier curve. Therefore, finding the real roots
of the equation ρ(t) = 0 is equivalent to finding the real roots of the 7th order polynomial in the
numerator.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3      I SOLATOR P OLYNOMIALS OF THE 4 TH ORDER P OLYNOMIAL C ASE

We aim to isolate the real roots of the 4th order polynomial ρ(t) by the roots of two lower order
polynomials a(t) and b(t). To keep Degree(a) + Degree(b) = Degree(ρ) − 1, we select a(t) as the
2nd order polynomial and b(t) as the linear polynomial.
Define ρ(t) and ρ′ (t) as follows:

                                        ρ(t) = t4 + Bt3 + Ct2 + Dt + E
                                        ρ′ (t) = 4t3 + 3Bt2 + 2Ct + D,

and we know a(t) = c(t)ρ(t) − b(t)ρ′ (t). Let c(t) = 1, a(t) can be written as a(t) = ρ(t) − b(t)ρ′ (t)
By doing a long division between ρ and ρ′ , we obtain the isolator polynomials as follows:

                                    C     3B 2 2     3D CB            DB
                             a(t) = (  −      )t + (    −   )t + (e −    )
                                     2     16         4   8           16
                                   1     B
                             b(t) = t +
                                   4     16

C.4      I SOLATOR P OLYNOMIALS OF THE 7 TH ORDER P OLYNOMIAL C ASE

We aim to isolate the real roots of the 7th order polynomial ρ(t) by the roots of two lower order
polynomials a(t) and b(t). To keep Degree(a) + Degree(b) = Degree(ρ) − 1, we select a(t) and
b(t) both be the cubic polynomial.
Define ρ(t) and ρ′ (t) as follows:

                                        ρ(t) = t7 + p6 t6 + .... + p1 t + p0
                                        ρ′ (t) = 7t6 + 6p6 t5 + .... + p1 ,

and we know a(t) = c(t)ρ(t) − b(t)ρ′ (t). We wish a and b to both be cubic polynomials. Note that
b(t)p′ (t) is a 9th order polynomial, so we assume c(t) to be a 2nd order polynomial to ensure that
c(t)p(t) is a 9th order polynomial too. Let b(t) = (t3 + Ct2 + Dt + E) and c(t) = (7t2 + At + B),
we can obtain two 9th order polynomials, and their difference a(x) is a cubic polynomial:

                          c(t)ρ(t) = (t7 + p6 t6 + .... + p1 t + p0 )(7t2 + At + B)
                          b(t)ρ′ (t) = (7t6 + 6p6 t5 + .... + p1 )(t3 + Ct2 + Dt + E).

By setting the coefficients of the 8th to 4th order terms of a(t) to 0, we can obtain a system of 5 linear
equations in variables A through E. By solving this system of equations, we can determine the values
of variables A through E. We can then proceed to find b(t), c(t), and a(t). Please refer to our code
for the specific details.


D      M ORE ANALYSIS AND EXPERIMENTS

D.1      A BLATION S TUDY OF D ESIGNED C OMPONENTS

We evaluate the contributions of the Time Annealing Schedule and Dynamic Noise Deletion compo-
nents, as shown in Fig. 10. The omission of Time Annealing Schedule affects the conformity of the
generated results with the semantic meaning of the input text or the level of detail in the reference
image, and the omission of Dynamic Noise Deletion leads to the retention of some noise in the results.

    A brightly
colored mushroom
 growing on a log


     Input          Our         W/o TAS        W/o DND          Input         Our     W/o TAS   W/o DND

Figure 10: Ablation study on Time Annealing Schedule (TAS) and Dynamic Noise Deletion (DND).

                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2    U SER S TUDY

We provide details of our user study. Specifically, our user study includes 25 tasks, which cover a
diverse range of object types, e.g., flamingo, unicorn, windmill, lighthouse, boat, bike, sword, bow,
scissor, flower etc. Each task is composed of three 3D sketches generated using three methods: NEF,
3Doodle and Diff3DS. We used the Likert scores as the evaluation metric, with a range from 1 to 5
where a higher score indicates that the generated 3D sketch is more preferred by the users.
In each task, the order of sketches presented to the users was randomized. Specifically, for each
method, the 3D sketch is rendered in four views and organized in the form shown in Fig. 11. Then,
for each task, it contains three randomly-ordered rows, while each row represents the results of one
method. The participants were asked to score each 3D sketch output based on the following two
questions:

      1. How well does the 3D sketch fit the input image, e.g., in terms of keeping the similar shape
         and structure of the input?
      2. How is the quality of the 3D sketch, e.g., whether the 4 rendered views are 3D consistent or
         whether the sketch is visually pleasing?

We distributed questionnaires to 40 participants who are CS, EE and Math students and researchers,
and finally collected total 1000 valid scores.


                Figure 11: Screenshot of an example question used in our user study


D.3    E FFICIENCY OF THE INITIAL NUMBER OF CURVES

The effect of the initial curve number have reported in Fig. 8 (c). To further evaluate the efficiency of
the curve number, we have conducted a new ablation study on the initial curve number, and the results
are shown in Table 3. The results show that as the number of initial curve increases, CLIP-Score
performance shows a consistent increase while the average optimization time keeps getting longer.
Meanwhile, when the initial number reaches 56, further increasing it to 112 does not result in a
significant performance improvement due to the Dynamic Noise Deletion process.

                  Metric \ Number           num=112      num=56      num=28      num=14
              CLIP-ScoreT (ViT B/16)         0.3074       0.3046      0.2920      0.2785
              CLIP-ScoreT (ViT B/32)         0.3032       0.3034      0.2883      0.2786
               Average Training Time         80min        60min       45min       35min

                           Table 3: Efficiency of the initial curve number.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4      E FFECT OF NOISE SAMPLE SCHEDULE

The choice of noise sampling schedule has a significant impact on the results. For our task, the large
noise timestep focuses on aligning the curves with the semantic content of the input condition during
the initial training phase. Conversely, the small noise timestep employed during the later training
phase focuses on further enhancing the details. In the current implementation, we have employed
a biased sampling that decreases the maximum and minimum time steps from 0.85 to 0.3 and 0.1,
whereas original DreamFusion randomly samples noises from 0.98 to 0.02. Based on our experience,
further reducing the sampling of high-level noise would lead to a significant decline in the geometric
quality of the results. We have provided relevant results in the Fig. 12.


                             Figure 12: Effect of noise sample schedule.

D.5      E FFECT OF CURVE INITIALIZATION

In the current implementation, the initial curves are randomly initialized within a sphere of radius 1.5.
Based on our observations, the quality of the results is generally insensitive to minor variations in the
curve initialization radius. However, significantly reducing the radius can still degrade the quality of
the results, as shown in the Fig. 13. We recommend adjusting the radius to ensure the projected curve
remains fully visible within the image and occupies a reasonable area.



radius = 1.5



radius = 0.5
                                                                                                   time

                               Figure 13: Effect of curve initialization.

D.6      E FFECT OF OPTIMIZING COLOR , OPACITY AND WIDTH

Our proposed differentiable rasterizer
supports the optimization of the con-
trol point position, color, opacity and
curve width. We report the optimiza-
tion results in different modes, as
shown in Fig. 14, including Position,
RGB, RGBA (both color and opacity),
Alpha, and Width. Notably, we ob-
serve that optimizing the curve width
results in unstable outcomes. We hy-
pothesize that this instability stems
                                           Position     RGB         RGBA         Alpha         Width
from the rendered image semantics
being highly sensitive to variations in    Figure 14: Effect of optimizing color, opacity and width.
curve width, and plan to explore this
topic in our future work.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.7    C OMPARISON WITH 3D SKETCH RECONSTRUCTION METHODS UNDER MULTI - VIEW
       SUPERVISION

We further compare our approach with the 3D sketch reconstruction method under multi-view
supervision. Specifically, we employ MVDream and Stable-Zero123 to generate 3D objects from
input text and a single view, rendering 120 horizontal views as training data. Notably, we report
comparisons only between Diff3DS and 3Doodle, as NEF failed to converge and produce reasonable
results in our experiments. To ensure a fair comparison, 3Doodle adopts the same setup as our
method, optimizing only the 3D curves and randomly initializing the positions of the curve control
points. For the text-to-3D and image-to-3D sketch tasks, 3Doodle requires 3 hours (1 hour for object
generation) and 2.5 hours (0.5 hours for object generation), respectively. In contrast, our method only
requires 1 hour and 2 hours, respectively.
As illustrated in Fig. 15, our method achieves performance comparable to the baseline within a more
efficient training time.


        Mystical elven
       bow, enchanted
          arrows


        A quill pen,
       European style,
        neat feathers



       Higly detailed,
      majestic royal ship


       A fire phoenix,
        mythical bird,
      engulfed in flames

            Input           3D Object     3Doodle (120 views, ~3h)          Diff3DS (~1h)
                                        (a) Text-to-3D sketch task.


            Input           3D Object     3Doodle (120 views, ~2.5h)        Diff3DS (~2h)
                                        (b) Image-to-3D sketch task.
   Figure 15: Comparison with 3D sketch reconstruction method under multi-view supervision.



                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.8    A NALYSIS OF DESIGNED RASTERIZER

We conduct an experiment generating colored 3D sketches from given multi-view images using both
the original 3Doodle and its variant integrated with our rasterizer. For the training dataset, we use the
"toyhorse" and "toycar" from the 3Doodle-provided dataset, along with "hotdog", "ship", and "lego"
from the Nerf Synthesis dataset (Mildenhall et al., 2021). As shown in Fig. 16, the original 3Doodle
suffers from noticeable color conflicts across multiple viewpoints (e.g., the plate’s curve incorrectly
appears over the hotdog), disrupting the visual coherence of the object and leading to semantic
ambiguity. In contrast, our rasterizer consistently reproduces accurate occlusion relationships between
objects, providing clearer visual and spatial semantics.


                                                          3Doodle


                                                 3Doodle (+ Our rasterizer)


                                                         3Doodle


                                                 3Doodle (+ Our rasterizer)


                                                          3Doodle


                                                 3Doodle (+ Our rasterizer)


                                                          3Doodle


      Target Object                              3Doodle (+ Our rasterizer)

Figure 16: Analysis of designed rasterizer. In the figure, the red arrow points to the curves which has
incorrect depth order, e.g., the curve of the plate falsely appears over the hotdog.


D.9    S KETCH STYLIZATION

The style of our generated sketches can be altered by applying different brushes to the vector strokes.
We rendered the 3D sketch in the vector graphics format and used various brush styles from Adobe
Illustrator to demonstrate the diverse styles of the generated sketches, as shown in Fig. 17.


                                    Figure 17: Sketch stylization.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     M ORE H IGH Q UALITY R ESULTS

E.1   M ORE R ESULTS OF THE T EXT- TO -3D S KETCH TASK


        “Mystical elven bow, ethereal craftsmanship, enchanted arrows, forest protector."


                          "A DSLR photo of a time clock, clear pointer."


             "A flower on a office table, solid wood, minimalist, straight table legs."


            "A quill pen, vintage, European style, three-dimensional, neat feathers."


                    "Castle in the clouds, ethereal fortress, sky-high citadel."

                      Figure 18: More results of the text-to-3D sketch task.


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2   M ORE R ESULTS OF THE I MAGE - TO -3D S KETCH TASK


       Input                                   Generated Results
                    Figure 19: More results of the image-to-3D sketch task


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3   M ORE 3D S KETCH R ESULTS R ENDERED USING B LENDER C OMMUNITY (2018)


                          Figure 20: More rendered 3D sketch results.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Figure 21: More rendered 3D sketch results.
                                               26
