Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D EX T RACK : T OWARDS G ENERALIZABLE N EURAL
T RACKING C ONTROL FOR D EXTEROUS M ANIPULA -
TION FROM H UMAN R EFERENCES

    Xueyi Liu1,2 , Jianibieke Adalibieke2 , Qianwei Han2 , Yuzhe Qin4 , Li Yi1,3,2
 1
    Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 UC San Diego
    Project website: meowuu7.github.io/DexTrack



              Timestamp


                                                                                References
                                                                                Kinematic
 Kinematic                …                                             …
 References
               Goal 0           Goal n        Goal n+1       Goal n+2
                                                                                  Results
                                       Observation at timestep n                References
                                                                                Kinematic


                              Object         State n            Goal n+1
 Neural Tracking
                                                       Update
   Controller
                                                                                  Results


                    Action              Environ-
                                         ment
                                                                                            Timestamp                                                  Timestamp
                                                         Result n (State n+1)                (b) Mimicking intricate manipulations with thin objects      (c) Tracking noisy interactions with unreachable
          (a) Inference flow of the neural tracking controller                                       and intriguing in-hand re-orientations                     goal states and real-world evaluations

Figure 1: DexTrack learns a generalizable neural tracking controller for dexterous manipulation from human
references. It generates hand action commands from kinematic references, ensuring close tracking of input
trajectories (Fig. (a)), generalizes to novel and challenging tasks involving thin objects, complex movements
and intricate in-hand manipulations (Fig. (b)), and demonstrates robustness to large kinematics noise and utility
in real-world scenarios (Fig. (c)). Kinematic references are illustrated in orange rectangles and background.

                                                                                                   A BSTRACT

                We address the challenge of developing a generalizable neural tracking controller
                for dexterous manipulation from human references. This controller aims to man-
                age a dexterous robot hand to manipulate diverse objects for various purposes
                defined by kinematic human-object interactions. Developing such a controller is
                complicated by the intricate contact dynamics of dexterous manipulation and the
                need for adaptivity, generalizability, and robustness. Current reinforcement learn-
                ing and trajectory optimization methods often fall short due to their dependence
                on task-specific rewards or precise system models. We introduce an approach that
                curates large-scale successful robot tracking demonstrations, comprising pairs of
                human references and robot actions, to train a neural controller. Utilizing a data
                flywheel, we iteratively enhance the controller’s performance, as well as the num-
                ber and quality of successful tracking demonstrations. We exploit available track-
                ing demonstrations and carefully integrate reinforcement learning and imitation
                learning to boost the controller’s performance in dynamic environments. At the
                same time, to obtain high-quality tracking demonstrations, we individually op-
                timize per-trajectory tracking by leveraging the learned tracking controller in a
                homotopy optimization method. The homotopy optimization, mimicking chain-
                of-thought, aids in solving challenging trajectory tracking problems to increase
                demonstration diversity. We showcase our success by training a generalizable
                neural controller and evaluating it in both simulation and real world. Our method
                achieves over a 10% improvement in success rates compared to leading baselines.
                The project website with animated results is available at DexTrack.


1      I NTRODUCTION
Robotic dexterous manipulation refers to the ability of a robot hand skillfully handling and manipu-
lating objects for various target states with precision and adaptability. This capability has attracted


                                                                                                               1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


significant attention because adept object manipulation for goals such as tool use is vital for robots to
interact with the world. Many efforts have been devoted previously to push the ability of a dexterous
hand toward human-level dexterity and versatility (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2023; 2021;
Akkaya et al., 2019; Christen et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Wu
et al., 2023; Gupta et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2023; Mordatch et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2024a; Li et al.,
2024). This also aligns with our vision.
Achieving human-level robotic dexterous manipulation is challenging due to two main difficul-
ties: the intricate dynamics of contact-rich manipulation, which complicates optimization (Pang
& Tedrake, 2021; Pang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a; Jin, 2024), and the need for robots to master
a wide range of versatile skills beyond specific tasks. Previous approaches mainly resort to model-
free reinforcement learning (RL) (Chen et al., 2023; 2021; Akkaya et al., 2019; Christen et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Gupta et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2023) or model-based trajectory optimization (TO) (Pang & Tedrake, 2021; Pang et al.,
2023; Jin, 2024; Hwangbo et al., 2018). While RL requires task-specific reward designs, limiting
its generalization, TO depends on accurate dynamics models with known contact states, restricting
adaptability to new objects and skills. A promising alternative is to leverage human hand-object ma-
nipulation references, widely available through videos or motion synthesis, and focus on controlling
a dexterous hand to track these references. This approach separates high-level task planning from
low-level control, framing diverse skill acquisition as the development of a universal tracking con-
troller. However, challenges remain due to noisy kinematic references, differences in morphology
between human and robotic hands, complex dynamics with rich contacts, and diverse object geome-
try and skills. Existing methods struggle with these issues, often limiting themselves to simple tasks
without in-hand manipulation (Christen et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Xu et al.,
2023; Luo et al., 2024; Singh et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024) or certain specific skills (Qin et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2024a; Rajeswaran et al., 2017).
In this work, we aim to develop a general-purpose tracking controller that can follow hand-object
manipulation references across various skills and diverse objects. In particular, given a collection of
kinematics-only human hand-object manipulation trajectories, the controller is optimized to drive a
robotic dexterous hand to manipulate the object so that the resulting hand and object trajectories can
closely mimic their corresponding kinematic sequences. We expect the tracking controller to exhibit
strong versatility, generalize well to precisely track novel manipulations, and have strong robustness
towards large kinematics noises and unexpected reference states.
To achieve the challenging goal above, we draw three key observations: 1) learning is crucial for
handling heterogeneous reference motion noises and transferring data prior to new scenarios, sup-
porting robust and generalizable tracking control; 2) leveraging large-scale, high-quality robot track-
ing demonstrations that pair kinematic references with tracking action sequences can supervise and
significantly empower neural controllers, as demonstrated by data-scaling laws in computer vision
and NLP (OpenAI, 2023; Brown et al., 2020); 3) acquiring large and high-quality tracking demon-
strations is challenging but we could utilize the data flywheel (Chiang et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2023) to
iteratively improve the tracking controller and expand the demonstrations in a bootstrapping manner.
Based upon the previous observations, we propose DexTrack, a novel neural tracking controller
for dexterous manipulation, guided by human references. Specifically, given a collection of human
hand-object manipulation trajectories, we first retarget the collection to kinematic robotic dexterous
hand sequences to form a set of reference motions as data preparation. Our method then alternates
between mining successful robot tracking demonstrations and training the controller with the mined
demonstrations. To make sure the data flywheel functions effectively, we introduce two key designs.
First, we carefully integrate reinforcement and imitation learning techniques to train a neural con-
troller, ensuring its performance improves with more demonstrations while maintaining robustness
against unexpected states and noise. Second, we develop a per-trajectory tracking scheme that uses
the trained controller to mine diverse and high-quality tracking demonstrations through a homotopy
optimization method. The scheme transfers the tracking prior from the controller to individual tra-
jectories to ease per-trajectory tracking for better demonstration quality. Moreover, the scheme will
convert a tracking reference into a series of gradually simplified reference motions so that track-
ing these references from simple to complex could help better track the original reference motion.
This is akin to chain-of-thought and is very suitable for tracking complex reference motions to in-
crease the demonstration diversity. The two designs above together with the iterative training enable
DexTrack to successfully track novel and challenging human references.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We demonstrate the superiority of our method and compare it with previous methods on challenging
manipulation tracking tasks in two datasets, describing expressive hand-object interactions in daily
and functional tool-using scenarios, involving complex object movements, difficult and subtle in-
hand re-orientations, interactions with thin objects, and frequent hand-object rich contact variations.
We conduct both extensive experiments in the simulator, i.e., Isaac Gym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021),
and evaluations in the real world, to demonstrate the efficacy, generalization ability, and robustness
of our tracker to accomplish a wide range of manipulation tracking tasks and even excellently track
novel manipulation trajectories (Figure 1). Our approach successfully surpasses the previous meth-
ods both quantitatively and qualitatively, achieving more than 10% success rate than the previous
best-performed method. Besides, we conduct further analysis and demonstrate the various recov-
ery behaviors of our controller, demonstrating its robustness to unexpected situations. Thorough
ablations are conducted to validate the efficacy of our designs.
Our contributions are threefold:

       • We present a generalizable neural tracking controller that progressively improves its per-
         formance through iterative mining and incorporating high-quality tracking demonstrations.
       • We introduce a training method that synergistically combines reinforcement learning and
         imitation learning. This approach leverages abundant high-quality robot tracking demon-
         strations to produce a controller that is generalizable, versatile, and robust.
       • We develop a per-trajectory optimization scheme that employs our tracking controller
         within a homotopy optimization framework. We propose a data-driven way to generate
         homotopy paths, enabling solving challenging tracking problems.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Equipping robots with human-level dexterous manipulation skills is crucial for future advancements.
Previous approaches either rely on model-based trajectory optimization or model-free reinforce-
ment learning (RL). Model-based methods face challenges due to the complexity of dynamics, often
requiring approximations (Pang et al., 2023; Jin, 2024; Pang & Tedrake, 2021). Model-free ap-
proaches, using RL (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2023; 2021; Christen et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Gupta et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2023;
Mordatch et al., 2012), focus on goal-driven tasks with task-specific rewards, limiting their gener-
alization across diverse tasks. Our work explores a general controller for dexterous manipulations.
Besides, learning via mimicking kinematic trajectories has recently become a popular train to equip
the agent with various expressive skills (Jenelten et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023b;a). DTC (Jenelten
et al., 2023) proposes a strategy that can combine the power of model-based motion planning and
RL to overcome the sample inefficiency of RL. In the humanoid motion tracking space, PHC (Luo
et al., 2023b) proposes an effective RL-based training strategy to develop a general humanoid mo-
tion tracker. Recently, OmniGrasp (Luo et al., 2024) proposes to train a universal grasping and
trajectory following policy. The policy can generalize to unseen objects as well as track novel mo-
tions. However, their considered motions are still restricted in grasping and trajectory following,
leaving the problem of tracking more interesting and difficult trajectories such as those with subtle
in-hand manipulations largely not explored. In this paper, we focus on these difficult and challeng-
ing manipulations. Moreover, we are also related to recent trials on combining RL with imitation
learning. To overcome the sample inefficiency problem of RL and to facilitate the convergence,
various approaches have been developed aiming to augment RL training with demonstrations (Sun
et al., 2018; Hester et al., 2017; Booher et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023). In our work, we wish to
leverage high-quality demonstrations to guide the agent’s explorations. Unlike previous work where
demonstrations are readily available, acquiring a sufficient amount of high-quality robot tracking
demonstrations remains a significant challenge in our task.

3   M ETHOD
Terminologies and notations. Dexterous manipulation “tracking” involves controlling a robotic
hand to mimic a kinematic hand-object state sequence, the goal trajectory, denoted as {ŝn }N n=0 .
These “kinematic references” are retargeted from human manipulation trajectories, with ŝn rep-
resenting the robot hand state and object pose at timestep n. A “tracking demonstration” pairs a
kinematic reference {ŝn } with an expert action sequence {aL
                                                            n }, guiding the robot from s0 = ŝ0 to


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



 Mining High-Quality Robot Tracking Demonstrations                          Learning a Neural Tracking Controller from Demonstrations
                                                                                    Goal Sate 𝒔'#$%                            State 𝒔#
                   Homotopy         Robot Tracking Demonstrations
                  Optimization                                                                            Neural
                                                       Expert Action
                                                        Trajectory                                       Tracking             Action 𝒂!   Environment
   Human                                         t {𝒂"! , … , 𝒂"# , … }             Demo (Expert)       Controller 𝜋
                Single Trajectory       Kinematic                                                                             Reward 𝑟!
  Kinematic                             References                                          "!
                                                                                     Action 𝒂
                    Tracking
  References
                                                 Improving demonstrations via the tracking controller             Imitation Loss

Figure 2: DexTrack learns a generalizable neural tracking controller for dexterous manipulation from human
references. It alternates between training the tracking controller using abundant and high-quality robot tracking
demonstrations and improving the data via the tracking controller through a homotopy optimization scheme.

achieve a state sequence {sn }N                        N
                               n=0 aligned with {ŝn }n=0 . A “robust” controller can tolerate distur-
bances like kinematics noise and unreachable states. It demonstrates high “generalization ability” if
it performs well on unseen scenarios such as new objects and novel motions, and has “adaptivity” if
it maintains effectiveness despite shifting contexts, such as changing contacts and dynamics.
Given a collection of kinematic human-object manipulation trajectories, we wish to learn a gener-
alizable neural tracking controller for a dexterous robotic hand. The problem is challenging due
to the difficulty in precise dexterous manipulation, which is challenged by the underlying complex
dynamics, and the high demands for the controller’s generalizability and robustness.
We address these challenges by combining reinforcement learning (RL) and imitation learning (IL)
to train a generalizable tracking controller, jointly easing the difficulty in solving the complex prob-
lem via supervision from high-quality and diverse robot tracking demonstrations and improving the
policy’s robustness via RL explorations. We introduce a single trajectory tracking scheme to mine
tracking demonstrations, composed of paired kinematic references and action sequences. For each
kinematic reference, we use RL to train a trajectory-specific policy that generates actions to track
the reference. To overcome RL’s limitations, we propose to leverage the tracking controller through
a homotopy optimization scheme to enhance the demonstration quality and diversity. By iteratively
mining better demonstrations and refining the controller in a bootstrapping manner, we develop an
effective, generalizable tracking controller. We will explain how we learn the neural tracking con-
troller from demonstrations in Section 3.1, how we mine high-quality demonstrations in Section 3.2,
and how we iterate between learning controller and mining demonstrations in Section 3.3.

3.1    L EARNING A N EURAL T RACKING C ONTROLLER FROM D EMONSTRATIONS
Given a collection of human-object manipulation trajectories and a set of high-quality robot track-
ing demonstrations, our goal is to learn an effective and generalizable neural tracking controller. In
the beginning, we retarget human hand-object manipulation to a robotic hand as a data preprocess-
ing step. We combine RL and IL to develop a generalizable and robust neural tracking controller.
Taking advantage of imitating diverse and high-quality robot tracking demonstrations, we can ef-
fectively let the tracking controller master diverse manipulation skills and also equip it with high
generalization ability. Jointly leveraging the power of RL, the controller avoids overfitting to suc-
cessful tracking results limited to a narrow distribution, thereby maintaining robust performance in
the face of dynamic state disturbances. Specifically, we design an RL-based learning scheme for
training the tracking controller, including the carefully-designed action space, observations, and the
reward tailored for the manipulation tracking task. We also introduce an IL-based strategy that lets
the tracking controller benefit from imitating high-quality demonstration data. By integrating these
two approaches, we effectively address the complex problem of generalizable tracking control.
Neural tracking controller. In our formulation, the neural tracking controller acts as an agent that
interacts with the environment according to a tracking policy π. At each timestep n, the policy
observes the observation on and the next goal ŝn+1 (designated as the target state for the robotic
hand and the object). The policy then computes the distribution of the action. Then the agent sample
an action an from the policy, i.e., an ∼ π(·|on , ŝn+1 ). The observation on primarily contains the
current state sn and the object geometry. Upon executing the action with the robotic dexterous
hand, the hand physically interacts with the object, leading both the hand and the object to transition
into the next state according to the environment dynamics, represented as sn+1 ∼ p(·|sn , an ). An
effective tracking controller should ensure that the resulting hand and object states closely align with
their respective next goal states.
Reinforcement learning. In the RL-based training scheme, the agent receives a reward rn =
r(sn , an , ŝn+1 , sn+1 ) after each transition. The training objective is to maximize the discounted


                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cumulative reward:
                                                         "N −1          #
                                                          X
                                                                    n
                                          J = Ep(τ |π)             γ rn ,                                    (1)
                                                             n=0
                           QN −1
where p(τ |π) = p(s0 ) n=0 p(sn+1 |on , an )π(an |sn , ŝn+1 ) is the likelihood of a transition tra-
jectory of the agent τ = (s0 , a0 , r0 , ..., sN −1 , aN −1 , rN −1 , sN ). The discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1)
determines the effective horizon length of the policy. In the tracking control problem, the next goal
state ŝn+1 typically comprises the subsequent hand state and the object state from the kinematic
reference sequence. We control the robotic hand using a proportional derivative (PD) controller,
following previous literature (Luo et al., 2024; 2023b; Christen et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023).
The action an contains the target position commands for all hand joints. To enhance the sample
efficiency of RL, rather than allowing the tracking policy to learn the absolute positional targets, we
introduce a residual action space. Specifically, we introduce a baseline hand trajectory and train the
policy to learn the residual relative target ∆an at each timestep. The baseline trajectory is consis-
tently available for the tracking problem and can be trivially set to the  Pkinematic reference trajectory.
                                                                             n
In each timestep n, we compute the position target via an = sbn + k=0 ∆ak , where sbn is the n-th
step hand state in the baseline trajectory. The observation at each timestep n encodes the current
hand and object state, the baseline trajectory, actions, velocities, and the object geometry:
                                    on = {sn , ṡn , sbn , an , featobj , auxn },                            (2)
where featobj is the object feature generated by a pre-trained object point cloud encoder. We also
introduce an auxiliary feature auxn , computed based on available states, to provide the agent with
more informative context. Further details will be explained in Appendix A. Our reward for ma-
nipulation tracking encourages the transited hand state and the object state to closely match their
respective reference states, as well as promoting hand-object affinity:
                 r = wo,p ro,p + wo,q ro,q + wwrist rwrist + wfinger rfinger + waffinity raffinity ,         (3)
where ro,p , ro,q , rwrist , rfinger , raffinity represent rewards for object position, object orientation, hand
wrist, hand fingers, and hand-object affinity, respectively, while wo,p , wo,q , wwrist , wfinger , waffinity are
their corresponding weights. Details regarding the reward computation are deferred to Appendix A.
Imitation learning. The RL-based learning scheme, hindered by sample inefficiency and its in-
ability to handle multiple tracking problems, struggles to solve the generalizable tracking control
problem, as demonstrated by our early experiments. Therefore, we propose an IL-based strat-
egy to distill successful, abundant, and diverse “tracking knowledge” into the tracking controller.
Specifically, we train the tracking agent to imitate a large number of high-quality robot tracking
demonstrations. This approach effectively guides the agent to produce “expert actions” that can
successfully track the reference state. Additionally, by imitating diverse tracking demonstrations,
the agent can avoid repeatedly encountering low rewards in challenging tracking scenarios, while
also preventing over-exploitation of easier tasks. Formally, a robot tracking demonstration of length
N consists of a kinematic reference sequence (ŝ0 , ..., ŝN ) and an expert’s state-action trajectory
(sL    L         L       L       L
  0 , a0 , ..., sN −1 , aN −1 , sN ). In addition to the actor loss, we incorporate an action supervision
loss to bias the policy’s predictions at each timestep towards the corresponding expert action in the
demonstration:
                                     La = Ean ∼π(·|on ,ŝn+1 ) ∥an − aL
                                                                      n ∥.                                   (4)
This guidance allows the policy’s exploration to be informed by these demonstrations, ultimately
speeding up convergence and enhancing performance in complex problems. From the perspective
of IL, the RL exploration introduces noise into the states, making the imitation more robust, in a
similar flavor to DART (Laskey et al., 2017). Since the agent should not and will not explore states
too far from the reference states in the tracking control task, it is feasible to optimize the policy using
both the imitation loss and RL reward simultaneously.
3.2   M INING H IGH -Q UALITY ROBOT T RACKING D EMONSTRATIONS U SING N EURAL
      C ONTROLLER THROUGH A H OMOTOPY O PTIMIZATION S CHEME
To prepare a demonstration from a kinematic reference trajectory (ŝ0 , ..., ŝN ) for training the track-
ing controller, we need to infer the action sequence (aL         L
                                                       0 , ..., aN −1 ) that successfully tracks the ref-
erence sequence. A straightforward approach is to leverage RL to train a single-trajectory tracking


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


policy π and use its resulting action sequence directly. However, relying solely on this strategy of-
ten fails to provide a diverse and high-quality dataset of tracking demonstrations, as RL struggles
with the inherent challenges of dexterous manipulation. To enhance both the diversity and quality
of robot tracking demonstrations, we propose utilizing the tracking controller in conjunction with a
homotopy optimization scheme to improve the per-trajectory tracking results.
RL-based single trajectory tracking. A basic approach to acquiring demonstrations is to leverage
RL to address the per-trajectory tracking problem, using the resulting action sequence as the demon-
stration. Given a kinematic reference trajectory, our goal is to optimize a tracking policy π that can
accurately track this reference trajectory. At each timestep, π observes the current state sn and the
next goal state ŝn+1 , and it predicts the distribution of the current action an . The policy π is opti-
mized to minimize the difference between the transited state sn+1 ∼ p(·|sn , an ) at each timestep
n and the goal state ŝn+1 . Similar to our design for the RL-based learning scheme for the tracking
controller, we adopt a residual action space. For each tracking task, we introduce a baseline trajec-
tory (sb0 , ..., sbN ) and only learn a residual policy using RL. The observations and rewards follow the
same design as for the tracking controller (see Eq. 8 and Eq. 10). Once π has been optimized, we
can sample the action an from π at each timestep. By iteratively transitioning to the next state using
the predicted action and querying the policy π to generate a new action, we can obtain the expert
action sequence (aL                L
                         0 , ..., aN −1 ) for the input kinematic reference trajectory.

Transferring “tracking prior”. To improve the demonstrations, we devise a strategy that takes
advantage of the tracking controller, which has already encoded “knowledge” that can track lots of
trajectories (named as “tracking prior”), to improve trajectory-specific tracking policies. Specifi-
cally, to track a reference trajectory (ŝ0 , ..., ŝN ), we first utilize the tracking controller to track it,
with the baseline trajectory set to thew reference sequence. We then adjust the baseline trajectory
to the resulting action sequence and re-optimize the residual policy using the RL-based single tra-
jectory tracking method. This approach can help us find a better baseline trajectory, facilitating
single-trajectory tracking policy learning and improving the per-trajectory tracking results.
A homotopy optimization scheme. Training the controller with data mined from itself can intro-
duce biases and reduce diversity, hindering its generalization capabilities. To address this issue, we
propose a homotopy optimization scheme to improve the per-trajectory tracking performance and
to tackle previously unsolvable single-trajectory tracking problems. For the tracking problem T0 ,
instead of solving it directly, the homotopy optimization iteratively solves each tracking task in an
optimization path, e.g., (TK , TK−1 , ..., T0 ), and finally solves T0 , in a similar flavor to “chain-of-
thought” (Wei et al., 2022). In the beginning, we leverage the RL-based tracking method to solve
TK . After that, we solve each task Tm via the RL-based tracking method with the baseline trajectory
set to the tracking result of Tm+1 . This transfer of tracking results from other tasks helps us establish
better baseline trajectories, ultimately yielding higher-quality tracking outcomes.
Finding effective homotopy optimization paths. While leveraging the homotopy optimization
scheme to solve previously unsolvable problems has proven effective for many tasks, it depends
on identifying effective optimization paths. A straightforward approach is brute-force searching.
Specifically, given a set of kinematic references, we first optimize their per-trajectory tracking out-
comes. We then identify neighbors for each task based on the similarity between pairs of kinematic
reference trajectories. Next, we iteratively transfer optimization results from neighboring tasks and
re-optimize the residual policy for each tracking task. For a specific task, we consider a neighbor
that provides a better baseline trajectory than its kinematic trajectory as an effective “parent task”.
After reaching the maximum number of iterations, K, we can find effective homotopy paths for a
task, i.e., T0 , by starting from T0 and backtracing effective “parent tasks”. We define (TK , ..., T0 ) as
an effective homotopy path for T0 if, for each 0 ≤ m ≤ K, Tm+1 is an effective parent task for Tm .
Learning a homotopy generator for efficient homotopy path planning. Finding effective homo-
topy optimization paths for tracking each trajectory is computationally expensive and impractical
during inference. To address this, we propose learning a homotopy path generator M from a small
dataset, enabling efficient generation of effective homotopy paths for other tracking tasks. The key
problem in identifying homotopy paths lies in finding effective “parent tasks”. We reformulate this
problem as a tracking task transformation problem, aiming for a generator M that provides a dis-
tribution of effective “parent tasks” for each tracking task T0 : M(·|T0 ), considering the fact that a
single tracking task may have multiple effective “parent tasks”. Once M is trained, we can find a
homotopy path by iteratively finding parent tasks. We propose training a conditional diffusion model


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as the tracking task transformer, leveraging its strong distribution modeling capability. Given a set
of tracking tasks, characterized by the kinematic reference trajectories of the hand and object, as
well as object geometry, we first train a diffusion model to capture the distribution of tracking tasks.
To fine-tune this diffusion model into a conditional model, we first search for effective homotopy
paths within the tracking task dataset. This yields a set of paired data of the tracking task Tc and
their corresponding effective “parent task” Tp . We then use this data to tune the diffusion model into
a conditional diffusion model, such that Tp ∼ M(·|Tc ). A well-trained M can efficiently propose
an effective homotopy path for a tracking task, i.e., T0 , by starting from T0 and recursively finding
the parent task, resulting in (TK , ..., T0 ), where Tm+1 ∼ M(·|Tm ) for all 0 ≤ m ≤ K − 1.
3.3   I MPROVING THE T RACKING C ONTROLLER VIA I TERATIVE O PTIMIZATION
We adopt an iterative approach that alternates between training the tracking controller with abun-
dant robot tracking demonstrations and curating more diverse, higher-quality demonstrations using
the controller. Our method is divided into three stages. In the first stage, we sample a small set of
tracking tasks and generate an initial demonstration set by applying RL to obtain single-trajectory
tracking results for each task. Using these demonstrations, we train the tracking controller with both
RL and IL. At this stage, we do not train the homotopy path generator, as the model’s generalization
ability would be limited by the small number of effective homotopy paths available for training. In
the second stage, we sample a dataset of trajectories from the remaining tasks, weighted according
to the controller’s tracking error. We then use RL, incorporating tracking priors, to optimize per-
trajectory tracking, search for homotopy paths, and train a homotopy path generator based on the
resulting data. The best tracking results from all successfully tracked trajectories are curated into
a new demonstration set, which is used to re-train the tracking controller. In the third stage, we
resample tracking tasks from the remaining set and leverage RL, the tracking controller, and the ho-
motopy generator to curate another set of tracking demonstrations. This final set is used to optimize
the tracking controller, resulting in our final model.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness, generalizability, and robustness of
our tracking controller. Tested on two HOI datasets featuring complex daily manipulation tasks, our
method is assessed through both simulation and real-world evaluations (see Sec. 4.1). We compare
our approach to strong baselines, showing its superiority. Our controller successfully handles novel
manipulations, including intricate movements, thin objects, and dynamic contacts (see Sec. 4.2),
while previous methods fail to generalize well. On average, our method improves the tracking suc-
cess rate by over 10% compared to the best prior methods. Additionally, we analyze its robustness
to significant kinematic noise, such as unrealistic states and large penetrations (see Sec. 4.3).
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
Datasets. We test our method on two public human-object interaction datasets: GRAB (Taheri
et al., 2020), featuring daily interactions, and TACO (Liu et al., 2024b), containing functional
tool-use interactions. In simulation, we use the Allegro hand, with URDF adapted from Isaac-
GymEnvs (Makoviychuk et al., 2021), and in real-world experiments, the LEAP hand (Shaw et al.,
2023), due to hardware constraints. Human-object interaction trajectories are retargeted to create
robot hand-object sequences using PyTorch Kinematics (Zhong et al., 2024). We fully retargeted
the GRAB and TACO datasets, producing 1,269 and 2,316 robot hand manipulation sequences,
respectively. The evaluation on GRAB focus on testing the model’s generalization to unseen inter-
action sequences. Specifically, we use sequences from subject s1 (197 sequences) as the test data
while the remaining trajectories as the training set. For the TACO dataset, we follow the gener-
alization evaluating setting suggested by the authors (Liu et al., 2024b) and split the dataset into a
training set with 1,565 trajectories and four distinct test sets at different difficulty levels. The primary
quantitative results are reported on the first-level set. More details are provided in Appendix C.
Metrics. We introduce five metrics to evaluate the tracking accuracy and task success: 1) Per-frame
                                               PN
average object rotation error: Rerr = N1+1 n=0 Diff Angle(qn , q̂n ), where q̂n and qn are refer-
                                                                                                  PN
ence and tracked orientation. 2) Per-frame average object translation error: Terr = N1+1 n=0 ∥tn −
t̂n ∥, where tn and t̂n are the tracked and reference translations. 3) Per-frame average wrist position
                                     PN
and rotation error: Ewrist = N1+1 n=0 0.5 Diff Angle(qwrist               wrist        wrist

                                                                   n , q̂n ) + 0.5∥tn        − t̂wrist
                                                                                                 n ∥ , where
qwrist
  n     and q̂wrist
              n     are wrist orientations, and twrist
                                                 n     and t̂wrist
                                                             n      are translations. 4) Per-frame per-joint


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Quantitative evaluations. Bold red and italic blue values for best and the second best-performed
ones respectively. “Ours (w/o) data” and “Ours (w/o data, w/o homotopy)” are two ablated versions w.r.t.
quality of robot tracking demonstrations used in imitation learning (see Section 5 for details).
Dataset            Method                          Rerr (rad, ↓)   Terr (cm, ↓)   Ewrist (↓)   Efinger (rad, ↓)   Success Rate (%, ↑)
                   DGrasp                            0.4493            6.75        0.1372          0.6039            34.52/52.79
                   PPO (OmniGrasp rew.)              0.4404            6.69        0.1722          0.6418            35.53/54.82
                   PPO (w/o sup., tracking rew.)     0.3945            6.11        0.1076          0.5899            38.58/54.82
 GRAB
                   Ours (w/o data, w/o homotopy)     0.3443            7.81        0.1225          0.5218            39.59/57.87
                   Ours (w/o data)                   0.3415            4.97        0.1483          0.5264            43.15/62.44
                   Ours                              0.3303            4.53        0.1118          0.5048            46.70/65.48
                   DGrasp                            0.5021            5.04        0.1129          0.4737            38.42/47.78
                   PPO (OmniGrasp rew.)              0.5174            5.43        0.1279          0.4945             33.5/46.31
                   PPO (w/o sup., tracking rew.)     0.4815            4.82        0.1195          0.4682            34.98/57.64
 TACO
                   Ours (w/o data, w/o homotopy)     0.4444            2.33        0.1782          0.5438            44.83/67.00
                   Ours (w/o data)                   0.4854            2.21        0.1698          0.4772            47.78/72.41
                   Ours                              0.4953            2.10        0.1510          0.4661            48.77/74.38

                                          PN
average position error: Efinger = N1+1 n=0 d1 ∥θnfinger − θ̂nfinger ∥1 , where θ denotes finger joint
positions, d is the degrees of freedom. 5) Success rate: A tracking attempt is successful if Terr , Rerr ,
and 0.5Ewrist + 0.5Efinger are all below the thresholds. Success is calculated with two thresholds:
10cm-20◦ -0.8 and 10cm-40◦ -1.2.
Baselines. To our knowledge, no prior model-based methods have directly tackled tracking control
for dexterous manipulation. Most existing approaches focus on single goal-driven trajectory opti-
mization with simplified dynamics models (Jin, 2024; Pang et al., 2023; Pang & Tedrake, 2021),
limiting their adaptability for our framework’s generalizable tracking controller. Thus, we primarily
compare our method with model-free approaches: 1) DGrasp (Christen et al., 2022): Adapted to
track by dividing sequences into subsequences of 10 frames, with each subsequence solved incre-
mentally. 2) PPO (OmniGrasp rew.): We re-implemented OmniGrasp’s reward (Luo et al., 2024) to
train a policy for tracking object trajectories. 3) PPO (w/o sup., tracking rew.): We trained a policy
using PPO with our proposed tracking reward and observation design.
Training and evaluation settings. We use PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), implemented in
rl games (Makoviichuk & Makoviychuk, 2021), with Isaac Gym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021) for
simulation. Training is performed with 8192 parallel environments for both the per-trajectory tracker
and the tracking controller. For the dexterous hand, the position gain and damping coefficient are
set to 20 and 1 per finger joint. Evaluation results are averaged across 1000 parallel environments,
and for real-world evaluations, we use LEAP (Shaw et al., 2023) with a Franka arm and Foundation-
Pose (Wen et al., 2023) for object state estimation. Additional details are provided in Appendix C.

4.2         G ENERALIZABLE T RACKING C ONTROL FOR D EXTEROOUS M ANIPULATION
            Timestamp



Kinematic
Reference


  Ours



Figure 3: Robustness w.r.t. unreasonable states. Please check our website and video for animated results.
We demonstrate the generalization ability and robustness of our tracking controller on unseen trajec-
tories involving challenging manipulations and novel, thin objects. Our controller has no difficulty in
handling intricate motions, subtle in-hand re-orientations, and expressive functional manipulations,
even when dealing with thin objects. As shown in Table 1, we achieve significantly higher success
rates, calculated under two different thresholds, compared to the best-performing baseline across
both datasets. Figure 4 provides qualitative examples and comparisons. We show the real-world
effectiveness of our method and the superiority over best-performing baselines (Figure 4,Table 2).
For animated results, please visit our project website and the accompanying video.
Intriguing in-hand manipulations. Our method effectively generalizes to novel, complex, and
challenging functional manipulations, featured by subtle in-hand re-orientations, essential for pre-
cise tool-use tasks. For instance, in Figure 4a, the shovel is lifted, tilted, and reoriented with intricate
finger movements to complete a stirring motion. Similarly, in Figure 4c, the small shovel is reori-


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Table 2: Real-world quantitative comparisons. Bold red numbers for best values.
Method                         apple        banana             duck          elephant        flashlight                flute        hammer             hand            phone         waterbottle
PPO (w/o sup., tracking rew)    0/0/0      25.0/25.0/0.0    50.0/25.0/0      50.0/0.0/0.0       50.0/0/0          0/0/0              25.0/0/0       66.7/33.3/0        25.0/0/0       33.3/33.3/0
Ours                           25.0/0/0   50.0/50.0/25.0   75.0/50.0/25.0   75.0/50.0/50.0   50.0/25.0/25.0   25.0/25.0/25.0      50.0/50.0/50.0   66.7/33.3/33.3   50.0/50.0/25.0   50.0/33.3/33.3

ented using minimal wrist adjustments. These results demonstrate the robustness and generalization
of our controller, outperforming the PPO baseline, which struggles with basic lifting.
Intricate manipulations with thin objects. Our method also generalizes well to challenging
manipulations involving thin objects. In Figure 4b, despite the thin shovel’s complexity and
missing CAD model parts, our method successfully lifts and controls it using a firm grasp with the
second and third fingers. Similarly, in Figure 4e, our controller adeptly lifts and manipulates a thin
flute, while the best-performing baseline struggles with the initial grasp. These results highlight
the advantages of our approach in handling complex and delicate manipulations.
Real-world evaluations and comparisons. We directly transfer tracking results to the real world
to assess tracking quality and evaluate the robustness of the state-based controller against noise
in the state estimator. Success rates are measured under three thresholds and compared with the
best baseline. Table 2 summarizes the per-object success rates averaged over their manipulation
trajectories in the transferred controller setting. As demonstrated in Figures 4f and 4g, we enable
the robot to track complex object movements and successfully lift a hard-to-grasp round apple in
real-world scenarios. While the baseline fails. Further details can be found in Appendix B.2.
4.3        F URTHER A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSIONS
Robustness to noise in the kinematic reference motions. Despite severe hand-object penetrations
in Figure 4c (frames 2 and 3) and Figure 4a (frame 2), the hand still interacts effectively with the
object, highlighting the resilience of our tracking controller in challenging scenarios.
Robustness to unreasonable references. As shown in Figure 3, our method remains unaffected
by significant noise in the kinematic references with unreasonable states. We effectively track the
entire motion trajectory, demonstrating the controller’s robustness in handling unexpected noise.
5        A BLATION S TUDIES
Diversity and quality of robot tracking demonstrations. We propose enhancing the diversity and
quality of tracking demonstrations using the tracking controller and homotopy generator. We ablate
these strategies by creating two variants: “Ours (w/o data, w/o homotopy)”, where the dataset is
built by optimizing each trajectory without prior knowledge, and “Ours (w/o data)”, which uses only
the homotopy optimization scheme to improve demonstrations. Despite using the same number of
demonstrations, both variants produce lower-quality data. As shown in Table 1, they underperform
compared to our full method, underscoring the importance of data quality in training the controller.
Scaling the number of demonstrations. To in-                         Scaling the number of demonstrations 74.38
vestigate the relationship between the tracking con-        75
                                                                                                            72.91
troller’s performance and the number of demonstra-
tions, we vary the size of the demonstration dataset        70
                                                                                                               Success Rate (%)


during training and tested performance on the TACO                                       67.0
dataset. Specifically, in the final training iteration,
we down-sampled the dataset to 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, and           65
0.9 of its original size and re-trained the model. As                         62.07
shown in Figure 5, there is a clear correlation be-         60      59.61
tween the amount of demonstrations and model per-              57.64
formance. Since the curve has not plateaued, we hy-             0.0       0.2        0.4      0.6       0.8       1.0
pothesize that increasing the amount of high-quality                   Proportion of Total Demonstrations Used
data could further improve performance.                 Figure 5: Scaling the amount of demonstrations.

6        C ONCLUSIONS AND L IMITATIONS
We propose DexTrack to develop a generalizable tracking controller for dexterous manipulation.
Leveraging high-quality tracking demonstrations and a pre-trajectory tracking scheme, we refine
the controller through bootstrapping. Extensive experiments confirm its effectiveness, establishing
a strong foundation for future advancements. Limitations. A key limitation is the time-consuming
process of acquiring high-quality demonstrations. Future work could explore faster, approximate
methods for homotopy optimization to speed up training.


                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Timestamp


  Retargeted
  Kinematic
  Trajectory

     PPO
  (tracking
     rew.)


    Ours


                                                    (a) Manipulating a shovel. (Challenges: difficult to grasp, in-hand re-orientations using fingers, complex object movements)


  Retargeted
  Kinematic
  Trajectory


      PPO
   (tracking
      rew.)


     Ours


                                          (b) Manipulating an extremely thin shovel. (Challenges: difficult to hold from the end, in-hand re-orientations using fingers, complex object movements)

  Retargeted
  Kinematic
  Trajectory


     PPO
  (tracking
     rew.)


    Ours


                                           (c) Waving a small shovel. (Challenges: difficult to grasp, in-hand re-orientations using fingers, complex object movements, noisy kinematic reference)

  Retargeted
  Kinematic
  Trajectory


     PPO
  (tracking
     rew.)


    Ours


                                                                       (d) Using a hammer. (Challenges: difficult to grasp, complex object movements)

Retargeted
Kinematic
Trajectory


    PPO
 (tracking
    rew.)


   Ours

               Timestamp                                                                                            Timestamp
                                                           (e) Playing a flute. (Challenges: difficult to grasp, in-hand  re-orientations using fingers)


 Kinematic
 Retargeted
 Reference
 Kinematic
 Trajectory

    PPO
    PPO
 (tracking
 (tracking
    rew.)
   rew.)



   Ours
   Ours


              Timestamp         (a) Complex
                            (f) Complex     object
                                        object     movements
                                               movements     with
                                                          with    in-handsubtle
                                                                in-hand   subtle re-orientations
                                                                                  re-orientations                  Timestamp              (b) Lifting
                                                                                                                                         (g)  Lifting an
                                                                                                                                                      anapple
                                                                                                                                                         applethat
                                                                                                                                                               thatisishard
                                                                                                                                                                        hardto to
                                                                                                                                                                               grasp andand
                                                                                                                                                                                  grasp  lift up
                                                                                                                                                                                              lift up



Figure 4: Qualitative comparisons. Please check our website and the accompanying video for animated
results.



                                                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019. 2
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenhang
   Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Luo Ji, Mei Li, Junyang Lin, Runji Lin, Dayiheng
   Liu, Gao Liu, Chengqiang Lu, K. Lu, Jianxin Ma, Rui Men, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren,
   Chuanqi Tan, Sinan Tan, Jianhong Tu, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Wei Wang, Shengguang Wu,
   Benfeng Xu, Jin Xu, An Yang, Hao Yang, Jian Yang, Jian Yang, Shusheng Yang, Yang Yao,
   Bowen Yu, Yu Bowen, Hongyi Yuan, Zheng Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, Xing Zhang, Yichang Zhang,
   Zhenru Zhang, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Xiaohuan Zhou, and Tianhang Zhu. Qwen techni-
   cal report. ArXiv, abs/2309.16609, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
   CorpusID:263134555. 2
Jonathan Booher, Khashayar Rohanimanesh, Junhong Xu, Vladislav Isenbaev, Ashwin Balakrishna,
  Ishan Gupta, Wei Liu, and Aleksandr Petiushko. Cimrl: Combining imitation and reinforcement
  learning for safe autonomous driving. ArXiv, abs/2406.08878, 2024. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270440413. 3
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Ma teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
  Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. ArXiv, abs/2005.14165, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:218971783. 2
Tao Chen, Jie Xu, and Pulkit Agrawal. A system for general in-hand object re-orientation. Confer-
  ence on Robot Learning, 2021. 2, 3
Tao Chen, Megha Tippur, Siyang Wu, Vikash Kumar, Edward Adelson, and Pulkit Agrawal. Visual
  dexterity: In-hand reorientation of novel and complex object shapes. Science Robotics, 8(84):
  eadc9244, 2023. doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.adc9244. URL https://www.science.org/
  doi/abs/10.1126/scirobotics.adc9244. 2, 3
Zerui Chen, Shizhe Chen, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Vividex: Learning vision-based
  dexterous manipulation from human videos. ArXiv, abs/2404.15709, 2024. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269330215. 2
Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li,
 Dacheng Li, Hao Zhang, Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Sto-
 ica. Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference. ArXiv,
 abs/2403.04132, 2024.    URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
 268264163. 2
Sammy Christen, Muhammed Kocabas, Emre Aksan, Jemin Hwangbo, Jie Song, and Otmar
  Hilliges. D-grasp: Physically plausible dynamic grasp synthesis for hand-object interactions.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  20577–20586, 2022. 2, 3, 5, 8
Abhishek Gupta, Clemens Eppner, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning dexterous manip-
  ulation for a soft robotic hand from human demonstrations. In 2016 IEEE/RSJ International
  Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 3786–3793. IEEE, 2016. 2, 3
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerı́k, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan,
  John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, John P. Agapiou, Joel Z.
  Leibo, and Audrunas Gruslys. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2017. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  10208474. 3


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jemin Hwangbo, Joonho Lee, and Marco Hutter. Per-contact iteration method for solving contact
  dynamics. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 3(2):895–902, 2018. 2
Fabian Jenelten, Junzhe He, Farbod Farshidian, and Marco Hutter. Dtc: Deep tracking control.
  Science Robotics, 9, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  263152143. 3
Wanxin Jin. Complementarity-free multi-contact modeling and optimization for dexterous manip-
 ulation. 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271874325.
 2, 3, 8
Michael Laskey, Jonathan Lee, Roy Fox, Anca Dragan, and Ken Goldberg. Dart: Noise injection
 for robust imitation learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 143–156. PMLR, 2017. 5
Zhongyu Li, Xue Bin Peng, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, Glen Berseth, and Koushil
  Sreenath. Reinforcement learning for versatile, dynamic, and robust bipedal locomotion
  control. ArXiv, abs/2401.16889, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:267320454. 2
Xingyu Liu, Deepak Pathak, and Kris M Kitani. Herd: Continuous human-to-robot evolution for
  learning from human demonstration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04359, 2022. 2, 3
Xuefeng Liu, Takuma Yoneda, Rick L. Stevens, Matthew R. Walter, and Yuxin Chen. Blending
  imitation and reinforcement learning for robust policy improvement. ArXiv, abs/2310.01737,
  2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263609068. 3
Xueyi Liu, Kangbo Lyu, Jieqiong Zhang, Tao Du, and Li Yi. Quasisim: Parameterized quasi-
  physical simulators for dexterous manipulations transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07988,
  2024a. 2
Yun Liu, Haolin Yang, Xu Si, Ling Liu, Zipeng Li, Yuxiang Zhang, Yebin Liu, and Li Yi.
  Taco: Benchmarking generalizable bimanual tool-action-object understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.08399, 2024b. 7, 21
Zhengyi Luo, Jinkun Cao, Josh Merel, Alexander Winkler, Jing Huang, Kris Kitani, and
  Weipeng Xu. Universal humanoid motion representations for physics-based control. ArXiv,
  abs/2310.04582, 2023a.  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  263829555. 3
Zhengyi Luo, Jinkun Cao, Alexander W. Winkler, Kris Kitani, and Weipeng Xu. Perpetual humanoid
  control for real-time simulated avatars. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  2023b. 3, 5
Zhengyi Luo, Jinkun Cao, Sammy Joe Christen, Alexander Winkler, Kris Kitani, and Weipeng
  Xu. Grasping diverse objects with simulated humanoids. ArXiv, abs/2407.11385, 2024. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271217823. 2, 3, 5, 8
Denys Makoviichuk and Viktor Makoviychuk. rl-games: A high-performance framework for rein-
  forcement learning. https://github.com/Denys88/rl_games, May 2021. 8
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021. 3, 7, 8
Igor Mordatch, Zoran Popović, and Emanuel Todorov. Contact-invariant optimization for hand
  manipulation. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium on computer
  animation, pp. 137–144, 2012. 2, 3
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:257532815. 2
Tao Pang and Russ Tedrake. A convex quasistatic time-stepping scheme for rigid multibody systems
  with contact and friction. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 6614–6620. IEEE, 2021. 2, 3, 8


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tao Pang, HJ Terry Suh, Lujie Yang, and Russ Tedrake. Global planning for contact-rich manipula-
  tion via local smoothing of quasi-dynamic contact models. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2023.
  2, 3, 8
Yuzhe Qin, Yueh-Hua Wu, Shaowei Liu, Hanwen Jiang, Ruihan Yang, Yang Fu, and Xiaolong
  Wang. Dexmv: Imitation learning for dexterous manipulation from human videos. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 570–587. Springer, 2022. 2, 3
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
  Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement
  learning and demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017. 2, 3
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proxi-
  mal policy optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:28695052. 8
Kenneth Shaw, Ananye Agarwal, and Deepak Pathak. Leap hand: Low-cost, efficient, and an-
  thropomorphic hand for robot learning. ArXiv, abs/2309.06440, 2023. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259327055. 7, 8
Himanshu Gaurav Singh, Antonio Loquercio, Carmelo Sferrazza, Jane Wu, Haozhi Qi, Pieter
  Abbeel, and Jitendra Malik. Hand-object interaction pretraining from videos. 2024. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:272600324. 2
Wen Sun, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Byron Boots. Truncated horizon policy search: Combining
 reinforcement learning & imitation learning. ArXiv, abs/1805.11240, 2018. URL https://
 api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3533333. 3
Omid Taheri, Nima Ghorbani, Michael J Black, and Dimitrios Tzionas. Grab: A dataset of whole-
 body human grasping of objects. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
 Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV 16, pp. 581–600. Springer, 2020. 7, 21
Yinhuai Wang, Jing Lin, Ailing Zeng, Zhengyi Luo, Jian Zhang, and Lei Zhang. Physhoi: Physics-
  based imitation of dynamic human-object interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04393, 2023. 2,
  3
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Huai hsin Chi, F. Xia, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language mod-
  els. ArXiv, abs/2201.11903, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:246411621. 6
Bowen Wen, Wei Yang, Jan Kautz, and Stanley T. Birchfield. Foundationpose: Unified 6d
  pose estimation and tracking of novel objects. 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 17868–17879, 2023. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266191252. 8, 22
Yueh-Hua Wu, Jiashun Wang, and Xiaolong Wang. Learning generalizable dexterous manipulation
  from human grasp affordance. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 618–629. PMLR, 2023. 2,
  3
Yinzhen Xu, Weikang Wan, Jialiang Zhang, Haoran Liu, Zikang Shan, Hao Shen, Ruicheng
  Wang, Haoran Geng, Yijia Weng, Jiayi Chen, et al. Unidexgrasp: Universal robotic dexterous
  grasping via learning diverse proposal generation and goal-conditioned policy. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.00938, 2023. 2
Hui Zhang, Sammy Christen, Zicong Fan, Luocheng Zheng, Jemin Hwangbo, Jie Song, and Otmar
  Hilliges. Artigrasp: Physically plausible synthesis of bi-manual dexterous grasping and articula-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03891, 2023. 2, 3, 5
Sheng Zhong, Thomas Power, Ashwin Gupta, and Peter Mitrano. PyTorch Kinematics, February
  2024. 7, 15


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Overview. The Appendix provides a list of materials to support the main paper.

      • Additional Technical Explanations (Sec. A). We give additional explanations to comple-
        ment the main paper.
          – Detailed Method Overview Figure. We include an overview figure for the method
              (Figure 6) that illustrates the method more detailed than the figure in the method sec-
              tion.
          – Data Preprocessing (Sec. A.1). We present details of the kinematics retargeting strat-
              egy we leverage to create a dexterous kinematic robot hand manipulation dataset from
              human references.
          – Tracking Controller Training (Sec. A.2). We explain additional details in the RL-
              based training scheme design, including the observation space and the reward. We
              also explain the control strategy for a floating base dexterous hand.
          – Homotopy Generator Learning (Sec. A.3). We explain details in the homotopy gener-
              ator learning.
          – Additional Details (Sec. A.4). We present additional details w.r.t. the techniques.
      • Additional Experimental Results (Sec. B). We include more experimental results in this
        section to support the effectiveness of the method, including
          – Dexterous Manipulation Tracking Control (Sec. B.1). We present additional experi-
              ments of our methods as well as additional comparisons, including results achieved
              by using different training settings and additional qualitative results. We will also
              discuss more generalization ability evaluation experiments.
          – Real-World Evaluations (Sec. B.2). We include more results of the real-world evalua-
              tions. We will discuss failure cases in the real-world evaluation as well.
          – Analysis on the Homotopy Optimization Scheme (Sec. B.3). We present qualitative
              results achieved by the proposed homotopy optimization method and comparisons to
              demonstrate the capability of the homotopy optimization as well as the effectiveness of
              the homotopy optimization path generator. Additionally, we discuss the generalization
              ability of the homotopy path generator.
          – Failure Cases (Sec. B.4). We discuss the failure cases for a comprehensive evaluation
              and understanding w.r.t. the ability of our method.
      • Experimental Details (Sec. C). We illustrate details of datasets, models, training and eval-
        uation settings, simulation settings, real-world evaluation settings, and the running time as
        well as the complexity analysis. Additionally, we attempt to ground some key properties of
        the tracking controller computationally and present quantified evaluations regarding these
        properties.

We include a video and an website to introduce our work. The website and the video contain
animated results. We highly recommend exploring these resources for an intuitive understanding of
the challenges, the effectiveness of our model, and its superiority over prior approaches.

A     A DDITIONAL T ECHNICAL E XPLANATIONS
Overview figure of the method with details. In figure 6, to present a comprehensive overview of
our method, we draw a detailed overview figure that includes more important details than the figure
of the original method in Section 3.

A.1   DATA P REPROCESSING

Kinematic retargeting. We curate kinematic robot-object interaction data from human references
by retargeting robot hand manipulation sequences from human hand trajectories. For instance, given
a human hand-object interaction trajectory describing the human hand pose sequences represented
in MANO and the object pose sequences (Hhuman ), O as well as the description of the articulated
robot hand, we retarget Hhuman to acquire the robot hand trajectory H. We manually define corre-
spondences between the robot hand mesh and the MNAO hand mesh. After that, the sequence of the
robot hand DoF positions is optimized so that the resulting robot hand mesh sequence is close to the


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Learning a Neural Tracking Controller from Demonstrations                                                               Mining High-Quality Robot Tracking Demonstrations

                                                                                                                                                 Single Trajectory             Expert Action
                                          Tracking               Action                                                                                                          Trajectory
                                                                                    Environment                                                  Tracking Policy
   Object State 𝒔! Goal 𝒔"!"#
                                         Controller 𝜋             𝒂!                                                                t                                          {𝒂%$ , … , 𝒂%! , … }                 t
                                                                                                            Tracking     Kinematic                                                                    Expert Tracking
                                                                                                           Result 𝒔!"#   References                                                                      Results

     Imitation Loss                                           Reinforcement Learning Objectives                                          Tracking              Tracking Results from              Single Trajectory
                                                                Actor      Critic    Bound
     ℒ! = 𝔼𝒂! ∼$(⋅|𝒐! ,𝒔+!"#) ‖𝒂- − 𝒂-. ‖                                                      …                                        Controller 𝜋          the Tracking Controller             Tracking Policy
                                                               Loss ℒ&    Loss ℒ'    Loss ℒ(

 Robot Tracking Demonstrations                                                                                                                                            Task A         Task B            Task C
                                                                                                                                    Homotopy Optimization                                                               …
               …                     …         𝒂%$ …   𝒂%!   𝒂%!"# …                  …                    …                           Path Generator
                                                                                                                                                                          Tracking        Tracking         Tracking
          𝒔"$         𝒔"!    𝒔"!"#                                             𝒔%$         𝒔%!    𝒔%!"#                                                                                    Result
                                                                                                                                                                           Result                           Result
             Kinematic References            Expert Action Trajectory            Expert Tracking Results                 Tracking           Kinematic References,
                                                                                                                           Task             Object Shape                An Effective Homotopy Optimization Path


Figure 6: DexTrack learns a generalizable neural tracking controller for dexterous manipulation from human
references. It alternates between training the tracking controller using abundant and high-quality robot tracking
demonstrations, and improving the data via the tracking controller through a homotopy optimization scheme.


                                                Table 3: Weights of different reward components.
                                                                  wo,p              wo,q       wwrist · wtrans               wwrist · wornt                wfinger
                                              Weight               1.0              0.33                   0.3                      0.05                     0.05



human hand sequence. Formally, let Khuman and K denote the human hand keypoint sequence and
the robot hand keypoint sequence respectively, the optimization objective is:

                                                                               minimize∥K − Khuman ∥.                                                                                                                    (5)
We use PyTorch Kinematics (Zhong et al., 2024) to calculate the forward kinematics. Specifically,
given the robot hand per-joint DoF position θn at the timestep n, we calculate hn and kn as follows:
                                                             hn = Forward Kinematics(θn ),                                                                                                                               (6)
                                                             kn = KeyPoints(Forward Kinematics(θn )),                                                                                                                    (7)
where Forward Kinematics(·) computes the forward kinematics using the function provided in Py-
Torch Kinematics, KeyPoints(·) reads out keypoints from the converted articulated mesh. We use a
second-order optimizer, i.e., L-BFGS implemented in PyTorch, to solve the optimization problem 5.


A.2       T RACKING C ONTROLLER T RAINING

Controlling a floating-base articulated hand. The articulated hand is represented in the reduced
coordinate θfinger . We additionally add three translation joints and three revolute joints to control the
global position and orientation of the hand, resulting in θ = (θ)trans , θrot , θrot ). For the Allegro hand
and the LEAP hand that we use in our experiments, θfinger is a 16-dimensional vector. Therefore, θ
is a 22-dimensional vector.
Observations. The observation at each timestep n encodes the current hand and object state, the
next goal state, baseline trajectory, actions, and the object geometry:

                                                             on = {sn , ṡn , ŝn+1 , sbn , an , featobj , auxn }.                                                                                                       (8)
where auxn is the auxiliary features, computed as follows:
                                                                         auxn = {ŝn+1 , fn , ŝn+1 ⊖ sn , },                                                                                                            (9)
where ŝn+1 ⊖ sn calculates the difference between two states, including the hand state difference
and the object state difference, fn indicates the hand finger positions in the world space.
Reward. Our reward for manipulating tracking encourages the transited hand state and the object
state to be close to their corresponding reference states and the hand-object affinity:
                             r = wo,p ro,p + wo,q ro,q + wwrist rwrist + wfinger rfinger + waffinity raffinity ,                                                                                                        (10)


                                                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Quantitative evaluations and comparisons. Bold red numbers for best values. Models
are trained on training tracking tasks from both the GRAB and the TACO datasets.
Dataset     Method                          Rerr (rad, ↓)   Terr (cm, ↓)   Ewrist (↓)   Efinger (rad, ↓)   Success Rate (%, ↑)
            PPO (w/o sup., tracking rew.)     0.5813           6.03         0.1730          0.5439            36.04/55.84
 GRAB
            Ours                              0.4515           4.82        0.14574          0.4574            42.64/61.42
            PPO (w/o sup., tracking rew.)     0.6751           6.37         0.1264          0.5443            21.67/50.25
 TACO
            Ours                              0.4782           3.94        0.1329          0.4228             32.02/62.07


where ro,p , ro,q , rwrist , rfinger are rewards for tracking object position, object orientation, hand wrist,
hand fingers, wo,p , wo,q , wwrist , wfinger , waffinity are their weights. ro,p , ro,q , rwrist , rfinger are computed
as follows:
                      ro,p = 0.9 − ∥pon − p̂on ∥2 ,                                                                         (11)
                      ro,q = np.pi − Diff Angle(qon − q̂on )),                                                              (12)
                     rwrist = −(wtrans ∥shn [: 3] − ŝhn [: 3]∥1 + wornt ∥shn [3 : 6] − ŝhn [3 : 6]∥1                      (13)
                   rfinger = −wfinger ∥shn [6 :] − ŝhn [6 :]∥1                                                             (14)
where pon and qon denote the position and the orientation, represented in quaternion, of the current
object, shn denotes the current hand state. In addition to these rewards, we would add an additional
bonus reward 1 if the object is accurately tracked, i.e., with the rotation error kept in 5-degree and
the translation error kept in 5-cm. Table 3 summarizes weights of different reward components we
use in our experiments.
Pre-processing object features. We train PonintNet-based auto-encoder on all objects from the two
datasets we considered, namely GRAB and TACO. After that, we use the latent embedding of each
object as its latent feature feeding into the observation of the tracking controller. The object feature
dimension is 256 in our experiments.

A.3       H OMOTOPY G ENERATOR L EARNING

Mining effective homotopy optimization paths. The maximum number of iterations K is set to 3
in our method to balance between the time cost and the effectiveness.
We need to identify neighbors for each tracking task so that we can avoid iterating over all tasks and
reduce the time cost. We use the cross-kinematic trajectory similarity to filter neighboring tasks. We
pre-select Knei =10 neighbouring tasks for each tracking task.

A.4       A DDITIONAL E XPLANATIONS

In the reward design, we do not include the velocity-related terms since it is impossible for us to
get accurate velocities from kinematic references. One can imagine calculating the finite differences
between adjacent two frames as the velocities. However, it may not be accurate. Therefore, we do
not use them to avoid unnecessary noise.

B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
B.1     D EXTEROUS M ANIPULATION T RACKING C ONTROL

Training the tracking controller on two datasets. In the main experiments, the training data and
the test data come from the same dataset. We adopt such a setting considering the large cross-
dataset trajectory differences. Specifically, GRAB mainly contains manipulation trajectories with
daily objects, while TACO mainly covers functional tool-using trajectories. However, jointly us-
ing the trajectories from such two datasets to train the model can potentially offer us a stronger
controller considering the increased labeled data coverage. Therefore, we additionally conduct this
experiment where we train a single model using trajectories provided by the two datasets and test
the performance on their test sets respectively. Results are summarized in Table 4, which can still
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                   Table 5: Generalizability evaluations on the TACO dataset.
                        Test set     Rerr (rad, ↓)     Terr (cm, ↓)     Ewrist (↓)    Efinger (rad, ↓)    Success Rate (%, ↑)
                        S1             0.5787             2.43           0.1481           0.4703             35.97/67.63
                        S2             0.6026             2.46           0.1455           0.4709             30.83/65.00
                        S3             0.6508             8.06           0.1513           0.4683             10.18/46.32



Table 6: Performance comparisons across models trained with different amount of demonstration
data.
                        Proportion     Rerr (rad, ↓)     Terr (cm, ↓)    Ewrist (↓)    Efinger (rad, ↓)   Success Rate (%, ↑)
                        0.0               0.4985            4.42           0.1435          0.4767             31.03/57.64
                        0.1               0.4730            3.86           0.1502          0.4921             36.45/59.61
                        0.3               0.4903            2.94           0.1256          0.4804             40.89/62.07
                        0.5               0.4749            2.51           0.1680          0.4682             41.38/67.00
                        0.9               0.4776            2.29           0.1437          0.4839             44.83/72.91
                        1.0               0.4953            2.10           0.1510          0.4661             48.77/74.38



Comparisons with labeling the whole dataset for training the controller. In our method we only
try to label a small fraction of data in a progressive way leveraging the power of the tracking prior
provided by the tracking controller and the homotopy paths proposed by the homotopy generator
so that we can get high-quality demonstrations within an affordable time budget. One may wonder
whether it is possible to label all the training dataset trajectories and train the tracking controller
using those demonstrations. And if possible, what’s the performance of the model trained via this
approach? We therefore manage to label each trajectory in the training dataset of the GRAB dataset
by running the per-trajectory tracking experiments in parallel in 16 GPUs using two machines. We
complete the optimization within one week. After that, we use the resulting demonstrations to train
the trajectory controller. The final model trained in this way achieves 42.13% and 60.41% success
rates under two thresholds. The performance can still not reach our original method where we only
try to optimize high-quality demonstrations for part of the data (see Table 1 for details). We suppose
it is the quality difference between the two labeled datasets that causes the discrepancy. This further
validates our assumption that both the quantity and the quality of the labeled dataset matter to train
a good tracking controller.
            Timestamp


Kinematic
Reference


  Ours


Figure 7: Robustness towards out-of-distribution objects and manipulations. Please refer to
our website and the accompanying video for animated results.

Further generalization ability evaluations on TACO dataset. We further evaluate the model’s
generalization ability across various test sets within the TACO dataset. As shown in Table 5, the
controller performs well in the category-level generalization setting (S1), where object categories
are known but manipulation trajectories and object geometries are novel. Performance on S2, in-
volving novel interaction triplets, is satisfactory, demonstrating the controller’s capacity to handle
new manipulation sequences. However, results from S3 reveal challenges when dealing with new
object categories and unseen interaction triplets. For instance, generalizing from interactions with
shovels and spoons to using bowls for holding objects is particularly difficult. As shown in Figure 7,
despite unfamiliar objects and interactions, we successfully lift the knife and mimic the motion,
though execution is imperfect, highlighting areas for improvement and adaptability in challenging
scenarios.
Additional results. We present additional qualitatively results in Figure 8 to further demonstrate
the capability of our method.
Scaling the number of demonstration data. In Table 6, we present the full evaluation results on
all five types of metrics of each model traiend in the ablation study regarding the influence of the
amount of demonstration data on model’s performance (see section 5 for details).


                                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Timestamp


 Retargeted
 Kinematic
 Trajectory


     PPO
  (tracking
     rew.)


    Ours


                                                      (a) Waving a water scoop. (Challenges: in-hand re-orientations using fingers, complex object movements)


Retargeted
Kinematic
Trajectory


    PPO
 (tracking
    rew.)


    Ours


                                                                       (b) Lifting a hand model. (Challenges: complex object movements)


Figure 8: Additional qualitative comparisons. Please refer to our website and the accompany-
ing video for animated results.


    Table 7: Real-world quantitative comparisons (GRAB dataset). Bold red numbers for best values.
Method                            apple           banana             duck          elephant        flashlight         flute           hammer             hand            phone         waterbottle
PPO (w/o sup., tracking rew)       0/0/0         25.0/25.0/0.0    50.0/50.0/0      25.0/0.0/0.0     50.0/25.0/0         0/0/0        25.0/25.0/0      33.3/33.3/0      25.0/25.0/0        33.3/0/0
Ours                           50.0/50.0/25.0   50.0/50.0/25.0   75.0/50.0/50.0   50.0/50.0/50.0   75.0/50.0/25.0   25.0/25.0/0.0   50.0/25.0/25.0   66.7/66.7/66.7   25.0/25.0/25.0   50.0/50.0/50.0


B.2           R EAL -W ORLD E VALUATIONS

 Timestamp                                                                                            Timestamp


Figure 9: Additional real-world qualitative results. Please refer to our website and the accom-
panying video for animated results.

Success thresholds. We define three levels of success rates. The first level of success is defined as
reaching the object, finding a good grasp pose, and exhibiting the potential movements to lift the
object up, i.e., one side of the object is successfully lifted up from the table. The second level of
success is defined as finding a way to manage to lift the whole object up from the table. The third
level of success is lifting the object up, followed by keeping tracking the object’s trajectory for more
than 100 timesteps.
More results. For direct tracking results transferring setting, we present the quantitative success
rates evaluated on our method and the best-performed baseline in Table 7 (for the dataset GRAB)
and Table 8 (for the dataset TACO). As observed in the table, the tracking results achieved by our
method can be well transferred to the real-world robot, helping us achieve obviously better results
than the baseline methods. It validates the real-world applicability of our tracking results.
Please refer to the main text (Sec. 4) for the quantitative comparisons between the transferred con-
trollers. We include more qualitative results in Figure 9 to demonstrate the real-world application
value of our method.


                                                                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Table 8: Real-world quantitative comparisons (TACO dataset). Bold red numbers for best values.
                     Method                                   soap            shovel                brush                  roller                  knife         spoon
                     PPO (w/o sup., tracking rew)            33.3/0/0        25.0/0.0/0.0         25.0/0/0                25.0/25.0/0.0           0/0/0          25.0/0/0
                     Ours                                 100.0/66.7/66.7   50.0/25.0/25.0      25.0/25.0/0.0            50.0/25.0/25.0       25.0/25.0/0.0   50.0/50.0/25.0



                                                                                                                            Object about
                                                                                                                              to drop


                                                                                                                                           Object about
                                                                                                                                             to drop

                                              Timestamp


Figure 10: Failure cases in real-world experiments. Please refer to our website for animated
results.


Failure cases. A typical fail mode is that the object tends to drop from the hand as contact varies
when attempting the in-hand manipulations, as shown in Figure 10.

B.3          A NALYSIS ON THE H OMOTOPY O PTIMIZATION S CHEME

               Timestamp



  Retargeted
  Kinematic
  Trajectory


    w/o
  Tracking
 Curriculum


     w/
  Tracking
 Curriculum

                                                                                             (a) Lifting a thin flute.

 Retargeted
 Kinematic
 Trajectory


   w/o
 Tracking
Curriculum


    w/
 Tracking
Curriculum

                                                                                        (b) Passing a small sphere.

 Retargeted
 Kinematic
 Trajectory


   w/o
 Tracking
Curriculum


    w/
 Tracking
Curriculum

                                                                                        (c) Grasping an apple.


Figure 11: Effectiveness of the homotopy optimization scheme. Please refer to our website and
the accompanying video for animated results.

We conduct further analysis of the proposed homotopy optimization scheme and the homotopy path
generator to demonstrate their effectiveness. As shown in Figure 11, by optimizing through the
homotopy optimization path, we can get better results in per-trajectory tracking.
Lifting thin objects. As demonstrated in Figure 11a, for the originally unsolvable tracking problem
where we should manage to lift a very thin flute up from the table, we can finally ease the tracking


                                                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Table 9: Generalization experiments on the homotopy path generator.
                                              Homotopy test (a)   Homotopy test (b)    Homotopy test (c)   Homotopy test (d)
                    Effectiveness Ratio (%)         64.0                56.0                 28.0                52.0


difficulty by gradually solving each tracking problem in the homotopy optimization path proposed
by the generator.
Grasping small objects. As shown in Figure 11b, the original per-trajectory tracker fails to find
a proper way to grasp the small sphere and lift it up from the table. However, empowered by the
homotopy optimization, we can finally find a way to lift it up from the table.
Lifting a round apple. Figure 11c demonstrates an effective homotopy optimization path that can
let us lift an apple up from the table which would previously challenge the policy due to the round
surface.
Generalization experiments on the homotopy path generator. To further understand the general-
ization ability of the homotopy generator, we conduct the following tests:

            • (a) Train the path generator via homotopy paths mined from GRAB’s training set and eval-
              uate it on the first test set that contains 50 tracking tasks uniformly randomly selected from
              remaining tracking tasks in GRAB’s training set that are not observed by the homotopy
              generator.
            • (b) Evaluate the path generator trained in (a) on the second test set that contains 50 tracking
              tasks uniformly randomly selected from the test tracking tasks of GRAB’s test set.
            • (c) Evaluate the path generator trained in (a) on 50 tracking tasks uniformly randomly
              selected from the test tracking tasks of TACO’s first-level test set.
            • (d) Train the path generator via homotopy paths mined from both GRAB’s and TACO’s
              training set and evaluate it on the test set used in (c).

For each tracking task, if the tracking results obtained by optimizing through the optimization path
are better than the original tracking results produced by RL-based per-trajectory tracking, we regard
the generated homotopy optimization path as an effective one. Otherwise, we regard it as ineffective.
We summarize the ratio of the effective homotopy optimization paths in Table 9.
In summary:

            • (a) the homotopy path generator can perform relatively well in the in-distribution test set-
              ting;
            • (b) the performance would decrease slightly as the manipulation patterns shift a bit (please
              refer to section 4.1 for the difference between GRAB’s training split and the test split);
            • (c) the path generator would struggle to generalize to relatively out-of-distribution tracking
              tasks involving brand new objects with quite novel manipulation patterns;
            • (d) Increasing the training data coverage for the homotopy path generator would let it get
              obviously better.

Timestamp                                                                  Timestamp


Figure 12: Failure Cases. Please refer to our website and the accompanying video for animated
results.

B.4         FAILURE C ASES

Our method may fail to perform well in some cases where the object is from a brand new category
with challenging thin geometry, as demonstrated in Figure 12.


                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS


           Figure 13: Examples of novel objects from the seen object category (TACO).


               Figure 14: Examples of objects from new object categories (TACO).

Datasets. Our dexterous robot hand-object manipulation dataset is created by retargeting two public
human-object datasets, namely GRAB Taheri et al. (2020), containing single-hand interactions with
daily objects, and TACO Liu et al. (2024b), featured by functional tool using interactions. We
retarget the full GRAB dataset and the fully released TACO dataset, obtaining 1269 and 2316 robot
hand manipulation sequences respectively. For GRAB, we use sequences of the subject s1, with
197 sequences in total, as the test dataset. The training dataset is constructed by remaining sequences
from other subjects. For the TACO dataset, we create one training set with four distinct test sets with
different generalization levels for a detailed evaluation of the model’s generalization performance.
Specifically, the whole dataset is split into 1) a training dataset, containing 1565 trajectories, 2) test
set S0 where both the tool object geometries and the interaction triplets are seen during training
containing 207 trajectories in total, 3) test set S1 where the tool geometry is novel but the interaction
triplets are seen during training with 139 trajectories, 3) test set S2 with novel interaction triplets but
seen object categories and geometries, containing 120 trajectories in total, and 4) test set S3 with 285
trajectories where both the object category and interaction triplets are new to the training dataset.
Figure 13 and Figure 14 draw the examples of unseen objects from seen categories and the objects
from new categories respectively. The original data presented in TACO often contains noisy initial
frames where the hand penetrates through the table or the object. Such noise, though seems subtle,
would affect the initial dynamics, however. For instance, if the hand initially penetrates through the
table, a large force would be applied to the hand at the beginning, which would severely affect the
simulation in subsequent steps. Moreover, if the hand initially penetrates through the object, the
object would be bounced away at the start of the simulation. To get rid of such phenomena, we
make small modifications to the original sequences. Specifically, we interpolate the phone pass
sequence of the subject s2 from the GRAB dataset with such TACO sequences as the final modified
sequence. Specifically, we take hand poses from the initial 60 frames of the GRAB sequence. We
then linearly interpolate the hand pose in the 60th frame of the GRAB sequence with the hand pose
in the 60th frame of the TACO sequence. For details, please refer to code in the supplementary
material (refer “README.md” for instructions).
                                                      Table 10:       Total training time consumption
Training and evaluation settings. For both (TACO dataset).
GRAB and TACO, in the first stage, we                                       Ours
first sample 100 trajectories from the training                 PPO                      Ours
                                                                         (w/o prior.,               Ours
dataset. We train their per-trajectory trackers to            (w/o sup)               (w/o prior)
                                                                         w/o curri.)
obtain their action-labeled data to construct our Time ∼1 day             ∼2 days      ∼4 days    ∼4 days
first version of the labeled dataset. After that,
the first tracking controller is trained and evaluated on all trajectories. We then additionally sam-
ple 100 trajectories from the remaining trajectories using the weights positively proportional to the
tracking object position error. These sampled trajectories and those sampled in the first stage then
form our second version of the dataset to label. We leverage both per-trajectory tracker optimization
and the tracking prior from the first version of the trained tracking controller to label the data aim-
ing to get high-quality labeled trajectories. After that, we search tracking curricula from such 200
trajectories and train a tracking curriculum scheduler using the mined curricula. We then construct


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the second version of the action-labeled dataset using the final best-optimized trajectories. We then
re-train the tracking controller and evaluate its performance on each trajectory. In the third stage,
we sample additionally 200 trajectories from the remaining not selected trajectories. We then label
them using the joint power of per-trajectory tracking optimization, tracking prior from the tracking
controller, and the curriculum scheduled by the curriculum scheduler. After that, our third version is
constructed using best-optimized labeled trajectories. We then re-train the tracking controller using
this version of the labeled dataset. When training the tracking controller, we set a threshold in the
reward, i.e., 50. Only trajectories with a reward above the threshold is used to provide supervision.
Both the simulation and the policy run at 60Hz. The hand’s gravity is ignored in the simulation.
Please refer to the code in the supplementary materials for detailed settings. We train all models in
a Ubuntu 20.04.6 LTS with eight NVIDIA A10 cards and CUDA version 12.5. All the models are
trained in a single card without multi-gpu parallelization.


                                                                      3D Printed Objects & Daily Objects
                                                RealSense            from the Real World (bottle and cube)
                                                 Camera


                                   Leap Hand

                      Franka Arm


                                   Figure 15: Real-world experiment setup.


Real world experiment setup. We use the Franka arm and LEAP hand to conduct real-world
evaluations (Figure 15). When transferring the state-based policy, we use FoundationPose Wen et al.
(2023) to estimate object poses. We use finite difference to estimate both the hand joint velocities
as well as the object linear and angular velocities. Considering the gap between the control strategy
we use in the simulator and the control of the Franka arm and the LEAP hand, we devise a strategy
to mitigate the discrepancy between these two control methods. Specifically, instead of directly
applying the control signal to the LEAP hand and the Franka arm, we set up a simulator with
physical and control-related parameters same as our simulation settings during training. Then, in
each timestep, we first apply the control commands to the simulated LEAP hand. We then simulate
the hand. After that, we read the simulated state out from the simulator. We then calculate the
positional target signal that should be applied to the real LEAP hand using the current obtained state
from the simulator and the current state of the real LEAP hand. The calculated positional target
signal is then directly fed to the real LEAP hand controller. In our observation, once the real hand
has been commanded, it can almost reach exactly the same position in the command. Thereby, in
practice, we directly use the state obtained from the simulator as the positional target command fed
to the real LEAP controller. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of this control strategy.
Time consumption and time complexity. Table 10 summarizes the total time consumption of
different methods on the TACO dataset. Directly training PPO without any supervision is the most
efficient approach while the performance lagged behind due to no proper guidance. Solving the
per-trajectory tracking problem for providing high-quality data for training the general tracking
controller would additionally increase the time consumption due to the requirement in optimizing
per-trajectory trackers. Since we only select a subset from the whole training dataset, the time
consumption is still affordable. Improving the per-trajectory trackers via mining tracing curricula
would introduce additional time costs. Since the number of trajectories we consider for learning
the curriculum scheduler is still controlled to a relatively small value. The final time cost is still
relatively affordable. Experiments are conducted on a Ubuntu 20.04 machine with eight A10 GPU
cards. For per-trajectory tracker optimization, we train eight trackers in parallel at one time.
The overall time complexity of the training process is O(|S| + KKnei |S|). S denotes the training
dataset.
“Robustness”, “Generalization Ability”, and “Adaptivity”. We try to give computational defi-
nitions of some crucial characteristics of the neural tracking controller. Please note that there is no
standard formal computational definitions of such concepts, to our best knowledge. The definition
and the quantification we present here is only from our perspective.


                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Table 11: Generlaization score (GRAB dataset). Bold red numbers for best values.
                                PPO                     PPO                          Ours              Ours
         Method   DGrasp                                                                                          Ours
                           (OmniGrasp rew.)   (w/o sup., tracking rew.)   (w/o data, w/o homotopy)   (w/o data)
         sg       2.424         2.389                  2.688                       2.725               3.050      3.251



       Table 12: Robustness score (GRAB dataset). Bold red numbers for best values.
                                             PPO
                        Method                               Ours
                                   (w/o sup., tracking rew.)
                               sr                           2.665                     3.276


      • To quantify the “generalization ability”, we need to first quantify 1) the distribution gap
        between two trajectory distributions, so that we can define the levels of generalization, 2)
        the generalization ability from the training distribution to the test distribution via the gap
        between the model performance:
        Denote E as the distribution of the tracking task of the training set, and D as the test
        distribution, we define their gap as follows:

                      d(D; E) = ET∼D        min (Tracking Task Diff(T, Ttrain )) ,                (15)
                                                  Ttrain ∼E

        where Tracking Task Diff(·, ·) measures the differnece between two manipulation trajec-
        tory tracking problem. For a trajectory tracking task described by the kinematic hand
        state sequence {shn }N                                             o    o N
                             n=0 , the kinematic object pose sequence {pn , qn }n=0 , and the ob-
        ject geometry PC, e.g., represented as the point cloud, we calculate the trajectory tracking
                                                                                             A
        task difference between two tracking tasks, i.e., TA = {{sh,A         o,A   o,A
                                                                    n }, {pn , qn }, PC } and
                                           B
        TB = {{sh,B         o,G   o,G
                   n }, {pn , qn }, PC }, as a weighted sum of the hand trajectory difference,
        object pose sequence difference and the object geometry difference:
                                                           N
                                                      1 X h                        o,p
        Tracking Task Diff(TA , TB ) =                       (w    ∥sh,A − sh,B            o,A  o,B
                                                                            n ∥ + wdif f ∥pn − pn ∥
                                                    N + 1 n=0 dif f n
                                                                                                (16)
                                                                         o,q     o,A  o,B
                                                                      + wdif f ∥qn − qn ∥)                                (17)
                                                                         pc                       A    B
                                                                      + wdif f Chamfer-Distance(PC , PC ),
                                                                                                                          (18)
               h             o,p         o,q           pc
        where wdif f = 0.1, wdif f = 1, wdif f = 0.3, wdif f = 0.5. For a tracking policy π, define
        its performance on tracking tasks from the distribution E via the expectation of tracking
        errors:
                                  LE (π) = ET∼E [Tracking Errorπ (T)] ,                         (19)
        where Tracking Errorπ (·) evaluates the tracking error of the tracking policy π on a trajec-
        tory tracking problem. It is a weighted sum of the difference between the tracking result
        and the reference trajectory of the robot hand and that of the object:
                                o,p        o,q        h,wrist          h,f inger
         Tracking Errorπ (T) = werr Terr +werr Rerr +werr     Ewrist +werr       Ef inger , (20)
                 h,wrist          h,f inger           o,p         o,q
        where werr       = 0.1, werr        = 0.1, werr   = 1.0, werr = 0.3.
        Therefore, the genralization ability of the policy π trained to solve the trajectories from
        trianing distribution E to the test distribution D is measured as:
                                                      d(D; E)
                                                     sg =         ,                           (21)
                                                  min(LD (π), ϵ)
        where ϵ is a small value to avoid numerical issue. The score sg increases as the train-test
        distribution gap increases or the tracking error on the test distribution decreases.
        Using the above quantification w.r.t. the tracking task distribution gap and the general-
        ization ability score, we summarize the generalization ability score of different kinds of
        models achieved on the GRAB dataset in Table 11.


                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Table 13: Adaptativity score (GRAB dataset). Bold red numbers for best values.
                                            PPO
                        Method                                      Ours
                                  (w/o sup., tracking rew.)
                        sa            0.317/0.098/0.0         0.537/0.415/0.293


      • To quantify the “robustness”, since it is quite difficult to analyze the dynamic function with
        a neural controller, we measure the robustness by the performance discrepancy between the
        tracking policy’s performance on the tracking tasks with relatively high-quality kinematic
        trajectories to those with disturbed kinematic references.
        To measure the “quality” of kinematic manipulation trajectories, we introduce three trends
        of quantities:
           – Smoothness: it calculates the difference between state finite differentiations :
                                         N −1
                                    1 X 1 ws · (si+1 − si ) ws · (si − si−1 )
                       ts (T) :=                                        −                    ,    (22)
                                 N − 1 i=1 ∆t               ∆t                    ∆t
            where ws is the weight vector of each state DoF, ∆t is the time between two neigh-
            bouring frames.
          – Consistency: it calculates the hand object motion consistency:
                                                  N
                                             1 X poi − poi−1  ph − phi−1
                               tc (T) :=                     − i         ,                       (23)
                                           N − 1 i=1 ∆t          ∆t

            where poi is the object position at frame i while phi is the hand wrist position at the
            frame i.
          – Penetrations: it calculates the penetration between hand and object across all frames:
                                                      N
                                                 1 X
                                   tp (T) :=             Pene Depth(si , Po ),                   (24)
                                               N + 1 i=0
             where Po represents the object point cloud, Pene Depth calculates the maximum pen-
             etration depth between hand and the object.
        “Quality” of kinematic manipulation references can be grounded using such three measure-
        ments. Combining the above quantities, define the overall “quality” of the test distribution
        L as:
                                                    ts (T) + tc (T) + tp (T)
                             squality (L) = ET∼L                               .                (25)
                                                                3
        The “robustness” can be measured by the performance gap of the model on tracking
        tasks with “high-quality” references and those with “perturbed” thus “low-quality” track-
        ing tasks. Denote the “high-qualtiy” tracking task distribution as H while those with low
        quality as L. Thus we can quantify the “robustness” as:
                                                        squality (L)
                                           sr (π) :=                 .                           (26)
                                                      min(LL (π), ϵ)
        As the quality of the trajectory distribution gets worse and the tracking error decreases, the
        “robustness score” would increase.
        To evaluate this, we construct a disturbed test set by adding random noise to the hand
        trajectory and the object position trajectory to test the trajectories of the GRAB dataset.
        After that, we test the performance of our method and the best-performed baseline, PPO
        (w/o sup., tracking rew.). We summarize the results in Table 12.
      • We mainly focus on the real-world adaptivity to evaluate the “adaptivity” of the tracking
        controller. Since it is hard to quantitatively measure the discrepancy between the real-world
        dynamics and that in the simulator, we use the model’s performance gap as the metric to
        directly evaluate the adaptivity. We use real-world per-trajectory average success rate to
        measure the “adaptivity”. For our real-world test on trajectories from the GRAB dataset,
        we summarize the result in Table 14.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 14: Generlaization score (GRAB dataset). Bold red numbers for best values.
                                       PPO
                   Method                                   Ours
                             (w/o sup., tracking rew.)
                      sa              0.317/0.098/0.0                0.537/0.415/0.293


                             Table 15: Trajectory difficulty statistics.
                                   sosmooth (m · s−2 )    vcontact    sshape (cm−1 )
                           GRAB          3.426             1.641          0.275
                           TACO          1.978             2.285          0.497



Computational interpretation of “hard-to-track”. The most direct quantification is defining a
score related to the tracking method’s performance. For the tracking method M and the trajectory
T, define π is the best tracking policy that we can optimize for the trajectory T (i.e., π = M(T).
Given the tracking error Tracking Errorπ (T), the “hard-to-track” score could be defined as: sht =
            1
min(Tracking Error (T),ϵ) , where ϵ is a small value to avoid numerical issue.
               π

Besides, we can use some statistics of the hand and object kinematic trajectories to quantify the
“hard-to-track” characteristic. Here we introduce three types of statistics: 1) object movement
smoohtness sosmooth : it quantifies the motion smoothness by calculating the per-frame average ob-
                                             PN −1 1 poi+1 −poi        po −po
ject accelerations, i.e., sosmooth = N 1−1 i=1 ∥ ∆t       ( ∆t     − i ∆ti−1 )∥, 2) hand-object con-
tact shifting velocity vcontact : it quantifies the per-frame velocity of the contact map change, i.e.,
vcontact = N1 i=1 ∥ ciN−c
               PN             i−1
                            p ∆t
                                  ∥, where ci ∈ {0, 1}Np is the binary contact map which encodes the
contact flag between sampled points from the hand surface and the object, Np is the number of
points sampled from the hand, 3) object shape score sshape : it is the z-axis extent of the object’s
                                                                      1
bounding box to quantify the shape of the object: sshape = min(extent     z ,ϵ)
                                                                                , where extent ∈ R3 is the
extent of the bounding box of the object. We can jointly use these three trends of scores to quantify
the “hard-to-track” characteristic. As sosmooth increases, vcontact increases, and sshape increases,
the trajectory would get more “difficult”, thus “hard” to train a policy to track it. As shown in Ta-
ble 15, the test trajectories in GRAB are more “difficult” than those in TACO w.r.t. the trajectory
smoothness, while test trajectories in TACO are more difficult than those in GRAB regarding the
contact velocity and the shape difficulty.
Additional details. For tracking error metrics, we report the medium value of per-trajectory result
in the test set, under the consideration that the average value may be affected by outliers.


                                                     25
