Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARD U NDERSTANDING I N - CONTEXT                                                        VS .      IN-
WEIGHT L EARNING

 Bryan Chan1∗ , Xinyi Chen2∗ , András György2 , Dale Schuurmans1,2
 1
  University of Alberta 2 Google DeepMind
 bryan.chan@ualberta.ca {xinyic,agyorgy,schuurmans}@google.com

                                                 A BSTRACT
              It has recently been demonstrated empirically that in-context learning emerges in
              transformers when certain distributional properties are present in the training data,
              but this ability can also diminish upon further training. We provide a new theo-
              retical understanding of these phenomena by identifying simplified distributional
              properties that give rise to the emergence and eventual disappearance of in-context
              learning. We do so by first analyzing a simplified model that uses a gating mech-
              anism to choose between an in-weight and an in-context predictor. Through a
              combination of a generalization error and regret analysis we identify conditions
              where in-context and in-weight learning emerge. These theoretical findings are
              then corroborated experimentally by comparing the behaviour of a full transformer
              on the simplified distributions to that of the stylized model, demonstrating aligned
              results. We then extend the study to a full large language model, showing how
              fine-tuning on various collections of natural language prompts can elicit similar
              in-context and in-weight learning behaviour.


1        I NTRODUCTION
In-context learning (ICL) is an interesting and useful property exhibited by large language models
(LLMs), wherein a model is able to successfully learn and generalize from new information given
in its input, without ever having seen related data during training. Radford et al. (2019) and Brown
et al. (2020) were among the first to demonstrate the in-context learning capability of large-language
models. Since then, numerous empirical studies have attempted to understand the emergence of ICL
in LLMs (Olsson et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024). However,
ICL is not limited to natural language processing (NLP), and many synthetic settings have been
constructed to better understand this phenomenon (Garg et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2023; Von
Oswald et al., 2023; Gupta et al., 2023; Edelman et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024).
A recent line of work (Chan et al., 2022a; Reddy, 2024; Singh et al., 2023) has explored the emer-
gence of ICL through the lens of data-distributional properties. In particular, Chan et al. (2022a)
first proposed the importance of common and rare classes as driving in-context learning and in-
weight learning (IWL). Both Chan et al. (2022a) and Reddy (2024) empirically identified that ICL
can emerge in a transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) when there is a large within-class vari-
ation and a large number of classes. Chan et al. (2022a;b) further observed that both ICL and
IWL can emerge simultaneously when the distribution over classes is Zipfian, while Singh et al.
(2023); Reddy (2024); Panwar et al. (2024) subsequently noticed that ICL can become transient in
an asymptotic training regime.
The work in this paper is inspired by a similar distributional perspective, but we investigate in greater
depth how the distributional properties of the data affect the ability of a transformer model to learn
and implement in-weight (IW) and in-context (IC) predictors over different parts of the input space.
In particular, we provide insights on the emergence of ICL in synthetic settings with theory and
experiments, and bridge the gap to practice by demonstrating that similar phenomena continue to
hold in a simple NLP task with a real LLM, Gemini Nano 1 (Gemini Team, Google, 2023).
Contributions. We present a simple theoretical model in which ICL both emerges and becomes
transient in the infinite data regime, demonstrating that very simple properties of the training distri-
bution can lead to these phenomena. In particular, following the common vs. rare classes distribution
     *
         Equal contribution.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of Chan et al. (2022a), our model requires two types of data: (i) data where similar observations fre-
quently appear in the training set—this type of data will induce IWL; and (ii) a large number of
diverse data points, where each sample is predictable from the context, but each appears rarely so
that reliable IWL cannot be achieved—this type of data will induce ICL.
Through a combination of a generalization error and regret bound analysis, we identify conditions
where ICL and IWL emerge. In particular, our theoretical model shows that the presence of type (i)
data (which we refer to as in-weight data) induces IWL and the presence of type (ii) data (referred
to as in-context data) leads to ICL. This is consistent with the empirical findings of Chan et al.
(2022a): When a sufficient number of in-context data samples are present, such as samples from
rare classes, ICL emerges, and the Zipf distribution provides a good balance between in-context and
in-weight data. When the model is trained over more samples, the samples from rare classes (or in-
context data) accumulate and the model learns in-weight after observing sufficiently many samples
from a given class. That is, the in-context data eventually becomes in-weight data, which improves
the performance of IWL. Consequently if IW prediction is better asymptotically, IWL is eventually
preferred over ICL and the latter diminishes. This partially explains the recent findings that ICL
can be transient (Reddy, 2024; Panwar et al., 2024), leaving open only the question about the case,
examined by Singh et al. (2023), where ICL and IWL can achieve the same performance in theory.
We demonstrate empirically that training transformers on synthetic and Omniglot (Lake et al., 2015)
data drawn from the stylized distribution in our theoretical model follows the predictions of the
developed theory. We further provide examples where ICL is persistent or where ICL and IWL are
present in parallel when ICL and IWL can achieve the same performance, which suggests that the
transience of ICL is more complicated in this case and it might depend on its finite-time performance
(which is much harder to analyze experimentally). Finally, to bridge the gap from theory to practice,
we show that fine-tuning an LLM (Gemini Nano v1 Gemini Team, Google, 2023) to memorize
certain data can result in a reduction of its ICL ability.
Additional related work. We do not investigate how transformers learn circuits that can perform
ICL. While such ability can evidently emerge from a vast amount of in-context training data and a
sufficiently expressive architecture (function class), several works have investigated mechanistically
how transformers can realize ICL (Garg et al., 2022; Olsson et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022; Akyürek
et al., 2023; Hendel et al., 2023; Abernethy et al., 2024; Singh et al., 2024). In particular, Garg et al.
(2022) have demonstrated transformers can in-context learn simple regression tasks and Akyürek
et al. (2023) mathematically constructed instances in which transformers can implement gradient
descent and closed-form regression. Xie et al. (2022) cast ICL as implicit Bayesian inference and
have shown that ICL is optimal when provided infinite examples with distinguishable prompts. Hen-
del et al. (2023) have empirically demonstrated that the transformer can compress context into a task
vector and direct the output of the query. These works generally induce ICL by constructing multi-
task context sequences. By contrast, we investigate how ICL can emerge with context sequences of
only a single task. While we consider the competition of ICL and IWL capabilities of the model, Lin
& Lee (2024) examines how the model chooses from different ICL predictors learnt during training
in a linear regression setting.
Several works studied ICL from a theoretical perspective. Bai et al. (2023) show that transformers
can implement many machine learning algorithms in-context and can perform in-context algorithm
selection. They also provide excess loss guarantees for pretraining to perform ICL. Li et al. (2023)
formalize ICL as an algorithm learning problem, where during pretraining the transformer learns a
prediction function from the training sequences. They further provide generalization bounds from
a multi-task learning perspective using algorithmic stability. Several works study the training dy-
namics with gradient descent or gradient flow and the emergence of ICL during training. Nichani
et al. (2024) study ICL by focusing on the ability of a simplified two-layer transformer architecture
to learn causal structures and the emergence of induction heads. Edelman et al. (2024); Chen et al.
(2024) also study how two-layer transformers learn induction heads for Markovian input sequences,
unveiling the multi-phase nature of the learning process. Focusing on single-layer architectures,
Sanford et al. (2024) show that the size of a single-layer transformer should be exponentially larger
to learn similar induction heads than that of a two-layer architecture, while Zhang et al. (2024) ana-
lyze the convergence properties of the training of a single linear attention layer for in-context linear
regression tasks. Wu et al. (2024) further study the generalization error under a similar setting, and
characterize how many tasks are needed to pretrain the model. They also show that the learned
solution is competitive with the Bayes optimal predictor under certain conditions. Our theoretical


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


work differs in that we focus on the selection of an in-weight and an in-context predictor based on
their corresponding test errors, as a model for this mechanism in transformer architectures.

2     T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS
In this section we present our theoretical model. In essence, we consider a bi-level model that learns
a “memorizing” in-weight predictor g as well as an in-context predictor h, and for every input x̃
it follows the prediction of the submodel that is expected to be better for that particular data point.
Naturally, g can be learned with high fidelity in parts of the input space where there is enough
training data, while h can be effective anywhere where the context is useful. The final behavior of
the model then will depend on the expected accuracy of g and h for a given input. In the rest of this
section we formalize this approach in the setting of tabular classification problems.
2.1    S ETTING

Let X ⊂ Rd be the finite space of inputs,1 C be the number of classes, and let the space of labels
be ∆C , the C-dimensional simplex. We have access to a training dataset S of N examples, where
in addition to the usual (input, label) pairs in a classification problem, each example has a context
consisting of L extra (input, label) pairs: S = {((x1i , yi1 , x2i , yi2 , . . . , xL    L              N
                                                                                    i , yi , xi ), yi )}i=1 . Let x̃i :=
(xi , yi , xi , yi , . . . , xi , yi , xi ) denote the i-th training example, and X̃ = (X × ∆C )L × X be the
   1 1      2 2               L L

space of examples with context. Suppose (x̃i , yi ) are drawn from a ground-truth distribution D; dur-
ing training the task is to predict yi given x̃i , while the final goal is to minimize the prediction error
for a new sample (x̃, y) sampled independently from D where x̃ = (x1 , y 1 , x2 , y 2 , . . . , xL , y L , x).
In the latter, the prediction error is measured by the loss function ℓ : ∆C × ∆C → [0, 1], where
ℓ(ŷ, y) is the loss of the prediction ŷ given the label y.
Data-generating process. We consider the setting of inputs with label noise: there exists a map-
ping y ∗ : X → ∆C , such that the true label for input x is y ∗ (x). When we sample x in the context
or as the query, we sample y = ei , the i-th standard basis vector, with probability y ∗ (x)i .
Predictors. Below, we formalize the two classes for learning: the in-weight learning (IWL) class
G, and the in-context learning (ICL) class H. The IWL class of functions G uses only the query, and
is a tabular function class: for each x ∈ X , g can learn a separate mapping from x to ∆C . We denote
                                                                    |X |
G = {g : X̃ → ∆C , g(x̃; w) = g(x; w) = w(x) ∈ ∆C , w ∈ ∆C }. The ICL class of functions H
uses only labels in the context to make a prediction, and let it be parameterized by u belonging to
some set W. Inspired by the induction head (Olsson et al., 2022), a circuit that learns to copy tokens
in the context to the output, we design H consisting of functions that output a convex combination
of the labels in the context. In addition, we mix in uniform distribution to ensure bounded loss. Let
h′ : X̃ × W → ∆L be a function that outputs weights for a convex combination (a distribution)
                                                                           PL
given an example, and let H = {h : X̃ → ∆C , h(x̃; u) = ϵ1 + (1 − Cϵ) l=1 h′ (x̃; u)l yl , u ∈ W}.
Simple model. We design a model that selects among the in-weight and in-context learners by
a function α, which can take a different value in [0, 1] for each x̃ ∈ X̃ . We analyze the follow-
ing simplified model f to study the emergence of in-context vs. in-weight learning: for each x̃,
f (x̃; α, w, u) = α(x̃)g(x̃; w) + (1 − α(x̃))h(x̃; u).
2.2    S ELECTION BY TEST ERROR

Previous empirical observations show that ICL emerges when the data distribution has a long tail
with many rare classes (Chan et al., 2022a). We investigate the hypothesis that ICL emerges because
in-weight learning has large error on classes that have few samples in the training dataset. We first
quantify the generalization error of the in-weight learner. Then, we consider a more explicit class of
in-context learners and give upper and lower bounds on the errors of the IC predictor. Because of its
importance in training
                P       classifiers, and LLMs in particular, we concentrate on the cross-entropy loss2
CE(ŷ, y) = − c∈C yc log ŷc ; more general losses are considered in Appendix A, and proofs are
also relegated to this appendix.
   1
     The finiteness of X is only assumed to simplify the exposition; the results can easily be extended to a
continuous input space X (see Appendix A.1).
   2
     Throughout the paper, log denotes the natural logarithm.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We start by quantifying how fast the loss of an IW predictor g can achieve that of the optimal pre-
dictor achieving minŷ∈∆C Ey [ℓ(ŷ, y)]. In case of the cross-entropy loss, the minimizer ŷ above
becomes the true distribution y ∗ and we have minŷ∈∆C Ey [ℓ(ŷ, y)] = Ey [ℓ(y ∗ (x), y)]. Further-
more, one can show
                 √    that the convergence rate for the cross-entropy loss can be much faster than
the usual O(1/ Nx ) rate—the optimal rate achievable by any predictor g is Ey [CE(g(x), y)] −
                        log(Nx )
Ey [CE(y ∗ , y)] ≥ C−1
                    2      Nx    − O(1/Nx ). Setting g to be the famous Krichevsky–Trofimov esti-
                               N   +1/2
mator, predicting g KT (x)i = Ni|x
                                 x +C/2
                                         where Ni|x is the number of samples when we observe label
i for input x, achieves this bound (see, e.g., Csiszár & Shields, 2004, Theorem 6.4):
                                                           C − 1 log(Nx )
               Ey [CE(g KT (x), y)] − Ey [CE(y ∗ , y)] ≤                  + O(1/Nx ).
                                                             2     Nx

Inspired by the induction head and attention mechanism in transformers (Olsson et al., 2022), in
the rest of this subsection we consider the following function class for in-context learning, which
is one of the simplest examples showcasing ICL capabilities and can be used to demonstrate basic
properties that may emerge during ICL:
                  (                        L
                                                                                      )
                                          X       exp(−∥xl − x∥A )
            H = h(x̃) = ϵ1 + (1 − Cϵ)         PL                         yl , ∥A∥ ≤ B ,
                                          l=1    j=1 exp(−∥xj − x∥A )


where ϵ ∈ (0,√1), A is a d × d positive semidefinite matrix, ∥A∥ denotes the spectral norm of A,
and ∥x∥A = x⊤ Ax for any x ∈ Rd . The idea is that a function h ∈ H implements a simplified
induction head, averaging the label predictions yl for all context vectors xl weighted by a softmax
depending on the similarity of xl and the query x. If the context contains irrelevant labels, that is,
labels yl ̸= y for some l ∈ [L], the prediction will be noisy, as shown in the next proposition.
Proposition 1. Given an example sequence x̃ with one-hot label y, let k denote the number of
irrelevant labels in the context. Suppose for all x ∈ X , ∥x∥ ≤ 1, then the prediction of any h ∈ H
satisfies
             2k(1 − ϵC)                                   2k(1 − ϵC)
                         √   + 2ϵ(C − 1) ≤ ∥h(x̃) − y∥1 ≤            + 2ϵ(C − 1).
        k + (L − k) exp(2 B)                                  L
                                                       P
Specializing ℓ(ŷ, y) to cross-entropy loss CE(ŷ, y) = c∈C −yc log ŷc , we obtain the following.
Corollary 1. Assume the labels y are one-hot (deterministic). Let x̃ be an example sequence. If x̃
does not contain a relevant label, then CE(h(x̃), y) = log 1ϵ . If x̃ contains k irrelevant labels, then

             k(1 − ϵC)                                                              L−k
                           √     + ϵ(C − 1) ≤ CE(h(x̃), y) ≤ − log (1 − ϵC)                +ϵ .
      k + (L − k) exp(2 B)                                                             L

The guarantees above show  √ that the test error of the IW predictor converges to that of the optimal
predictor at a rate of O(1/ Nx ), while the IC predictor has a minimum test error depending on the
number of irrelevant labels. In the case where the true labels y ∗ (x) have low variance, and the best
IW predictor achieves lower risk than the IC predictor, the IW predictor will eventually be more
accurate than the IC predictor given enough samples. For example, let B = 1, C = 2. Fix L, for
                                                                       1−2ϵ
any k ≥ 1, the minimum ICL error is bounded from below by 1+(L−1)e            2 + ϵ. Under the cross-

entropy loss, the minimum error for the IW predictor is the entropy of y ∗ (x). Since C = 2, y has a
binary distribution, whose entropy is a continuous function with minimum value 0. Therefore, if y ∗
                                                                                          1−2ϵ
concentrates sufficiently on one of the possible outputs, the entropy is smaller than 1+(L−1)e  2 + ϵ,
                  ∗
and under this y (x) the minimum error of IWL is smaller than that of the ICL predictor.
We plot the bounds in Figure 1. Indeed, with few samples, the loss of the IC predictor can be
smaller than that of the IW predictor. However, the IW predictor eventually converges to a solution
with smaller error after seeing many examples with the same query. We can consider an oracle
algorithm that selects between the learned IW predictor ĝ and IC predictor ĥ based on their test
error (i.e., how they would perform on new data), and predicts
                                                              n                                o
  f (x̃) = α(x̃)ĝ(x) + (1 − α(x̃))ĥ(x̃), where α(x̃) = I Ey [ℓ(ĝ(x), y)] ≤ Ey [ℓ(ĥ(x̃), y)]


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    IC Lower Bound/Upper Bound                      IW Lower Bound/Upper Bound
                              k=0                             k=1                            k=2                         k=3

               0.5

               0.0
                              k=4                             k=5                            k=6                         k=7
        Loss



               0.5

               0.0
                     5   10    15    20   25         5   10    15    20   25        5   10    15    20   25     5   10    15    20   25
                                                                    Nx (in log2 )

Figure 1: The theoretical error bounds of IC and IW predictors. We set L = 8, ϵ = 0.001, B =
1, C = 10, and y ∗ (x) = [0.999, 0.001/9, . . . , 0.001/9]. As the number of irrelevant contexts,
k, increases the lower and upper bounds of IC error also increase, whereas where the number of
samples, Nx , increases the lower and upper bounds of the IW error decrease. Consequently one can
expect ICL to be transient as we observe more samples.

is the indicator function whether the expected test error of ĝ does not exceed that of ĥ for a particular
input x̃. Under this algorithm, it is possible that initially IWL performs worse than ICL due to
insufficient in-weight data. For example, when the training data contains a large number of rare
classes, and each class is seen only a few times. Eventually, with enough in-weight data, the model
can memorize the solution to achieve as good or even better prediction accuracy by using IWL on
the query, rather than using the context for prediction and exhibiting ICL. This phenomenon is
consistent with the empirical observation that ICL emerges with rare classes in the training data,
and can be transient after more training steps with more data (Chan et al., 2022a; Singh et al., 2023;
Reddy, 2024; Panwar et al., 2024). We defer further discussion on transience of ICL to Appendix D.


2.3    L EARNING TO USE IN - CONTEXT VS . IN - WEIGHT LEARNING

In practice, the model does not observe the test error during training. Here we attempt to bridge
the gap between the oracle algorithm and the behavior of the simple model when f is trained us-
ing gradient-based methods. Consider the usual sequential training procedure: for each sample
x̃t , t = 1, . . . , N , the model predicts ft (x̃t ; αt ) = αt (x̃t )g(x̃t ; wt ) + (1 − αt (x̃t ))h(x̃t ; ut ), and the
parameters wt+1 , ut+1 , αt+1 are updated based on the observed loss ℓt (ft (x̃t )) = ℓ(ft (x̃t ), yt ).
The parameters wt , ut , αt are usually updated using some gradient-based method Af . Apart from
converging to a local optimum of the loss function under technical assumptions (e.g., convexity of
the loss function, see, e.g., Zinkevich, 2003; Hazan, 2023), such algorithms often guarantee that
their regret grows only sublinearly in N , where the regret of algorithm Af is defined as
                                               N
                                               X                                             N
                                                                                             X
                     RegretN (Af ) =                 ℓ(ft (x̃t ; αt ), yt ) − min                  ℓ(f (x̃t ; w, u, α), yt ),
                                                                                    w,u,α
                                               t=1                                           t=1

the excess loss of the online updated parameter sequence (wt , ut , αt )N      t=1 relative to that of the opti-
mal predictor selected in hindsight (where f (·, w, u, α) = α(·)g(·; w)+(1−α(·))h(·; u)). Sublinear
regret means that the average loss of the algorithm converges to the loss of the optimal predictor;
algorithms with this property are called no-regret algorithms (as the average regret converges to
zero). Note that when minimizing the regret, the parameters used to predict at time step t are com-
puted based on the observed data (x̃1 , y1 ), . . . , (x̃t−1 , yt−1 ), and are evaluated on a new data point
(x̃t , yt ); hence the choice of αt is evaluated on new data, similarly to our recommendation at the
end of the previous subsection, where the choice between the IW and IC predictors should be based
on their performance on new, unseen data, that is, the test error.
For simplicity, we consider a bi-level parameter update procedure shown in Algorithm 1. Since
g is tabular, it can implement the optimal fixed predictor for each input x, and hence in the regret
definition we can use g(·; w∗ ) (where w∗ is the optimal parameter for g). In the following proposition
we show that the regret of Algorithm 1 is bounded by the regret of learning α and g. If Aα and Ag
are no-regret algorithms, Algorithm 1 has sublinear regret. Moreover, observe that under the linear


                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


losses mt , the best-in-hindsight α chooses the predictor with the lower total loss for each x̃. Indeed,
denote α∗ to be the best α in hindsight given the losses mt , it has the following explicit form:
                           X
          α∗ (x̃) = 1 if        ℓt (g(x̃t ; wt )) − ℓt (h(x̃t ; ut )) < 0, α∗ (x̃) = 0 otherwise
                            t:x̃t =x̃

Algorithm 1 Bi-level update
   Input: horizon N , no-regret learner Aα , Ag for g, and Ah for h.
   for t = 1 to N do
     Receive example x̃t , predict with ft (x̃t ; αt ) = αt (x̃t )g(x̃t ; wt ) + (1 − αt (x̃t ))h(x̃t ; ut )
     Observe losses ℓt (ft (x̃t )), ℓt (g(x̃t ; wt )), ℓt (h(x̃t ; ut ))
     Update wt+1 = Ag (ℓ1 (g(x̃t ; w1 )), . . . , ℓt (g(x̃t ; wt )))
     Update ut+1 = Ah (ℓ1 (h(x̃t ; u1 )), . . . , ℓt (h(x̃t ; ut )))
     Define mt (αt ) = αt (x̃t )(ℓt (g(x̃t ; wt )) − ℓt (h(x̃t ; ut )))
     Update αt+1 = Aα (m1 , . . . , mt )
  end for
                                                                                     PN
Proposition 2. Let xt denote the query at time t, let RegretN (Ag ) =
PN                                                                                      t=1 ℓ(g(xt ; wt ), yt ) −
                   ∗
                                                                                   P N                       ∗
   t=1 ℓ(g(x t ; w   ), yt ) be the regret of learning   g, and    RegretN (Aα ) =   t=1 mt (αt ) − mt (α ) be
the regret of learning α. Algorithm 1 satisfies
            XN                            N
                                          X
                 ℓ(ft (x̃t ; αt ), yt ) −     ℓ(g(x̃t ; w∗ ), yt ) ≤ RegretN (Aα ) + RegretN (Ag ).
            t=1                             t=1
                                        ∗
Since the problem of learning α is linear, common gradient-based algorithms have sublinear re-
gret. For example, both√the exponentiated gradient and the AdaGrad method with a diagonal pre-
conditioner achieves O( KN ) regret, where K is the number of distinct examples seen during the
learning process (see, e.g., Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Hazan, 2023). Further, since g learns a
separate (independent) predictor for each x, and ℓ is convex, the problem of √   learning g(x) is con-
vex. Many regret-minimizing algorithms, including gradient descent, has O( K ′ N ) regret in this
setting, where K ′ is the number of distinct queries observed. In this case, we have overall sublinear
regret against the best in-weight learner g ∗ . This guarantee implies that on average, our loss con-
verges to that of the best in-weight predictor in hindsight. In Appendix A.2, we extend this result to
show that Algorithm 1 converges to the best-in-hindsight predictor generally.
Suppose the examples {(x̃t , yt )}N  t=1 are drawn i.i.d. from the population distribution. Then by
online-to-batch conversion (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2001), the expectation of the average loss of g(·; wt )
in Algorithm 1 exhibits similar behavior as the generalization-error guarantee. We give a standard
result below. If we consider the same class of ICL predictors, they also will have a positive minimum
loss for each ℓt as in the previous section.
Proposition 3. Fix x ∈ X . Suppose {(x̃t , yt )}Nt=1 are drawn i.i.d. from D, where y is drawn i.i.d.
given the query x. Let Nx be the number of examples with x as the query, then
                    "                     #
       1               X                                                1
         Eyt :xt =x         ℓt (g(x; wt )) ≤ min Ey [ℓ(g(x; w), y)] +     E RegretNx (Ag (x)) ,
      Nx             t:x =x
                                               w                       Nx
                        t

where RegretNx (Ag (x)) is the regret of Ag on the input x, learned over Nx time steps.
In other words, although the model in practice does not directly observe the test error during training,
the training samples observed at each training iteration can be viewed as a “test” sample, its loss
provides a quantity similar to that of the test error.
The above results show that as long as Ag and Aα are no-regret algorithms (which are satisfied in
this setting by simple gradient descent, see, e.g., Zinkevich, 2003), the performance of the final pre-
dictor approximates well the performance of the optimal predictor, and αN approximates well α∗ ,
implying that the learned model will select IC on IW prediction depending on their performance.
This shows that the unrealistic step of choosing between an IC or IW predictor based on their (un-
known) test error, as suggested at the end of Section 2.2, can be replaced by a decision rule learned
during training using an algorithm similar to gradient descent. Note that we have not included the
complexity of learning the IC predictor h. Nevertheless, we demonstrate experimentally in the next
section that the predictions drawn from our simple models are valid in many practical scenarios.

                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Chance        IW Predictor                  IC Predictor          Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL               Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1


                   IBD
       0-1 Error          0
                   OOBD   1



                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16         20      8    12     16     20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )

Figure 2: 0-1 validation errors of the IC predictor, IW predictor, and transformer as a function of
training set size N on the synthetic data, over five seeds. L = 1, phigh = 0.9, prelevant = 0.9
and σ = 0.2. The columns correspond to test data with relevant/irrelevant context, and classes from
the high-frequency (denoted CH ) or low-frequency classes (denoted CL ). The top row shows IBD
error on the specified conditional data distribution, while the bottom row shows OOBD error. ICL
diminishes as N increases and IWL and ICL can emerge simultaneously.

3    E XPERIMENTS
In this section we demonstrate through experiments that our simple theoretical model is predictive
and can help explain qualitatively the relationship between ICL and IWL in practical settings.
3.1 S YNTHETIC CLASSIFICATION
We consider a synthetic classification task and investigate how the errors of IC and IW predictors
can inform whether a transformer trained end-to-end will exhibit ICL capabilities. How different pa-
rameters and other model architectures impact the emergence and transience of ICL are respectively
explored in Appendices B.1 and B.2.
Data. We consider a classification problem with an imbalanced data distribution, where there are
high- and low-frequency (i.e., common and rare) classes. Let CH and CL denote their label sets,
respectively, and let C = CH ∪ CL . Each sample is generated by first selecting a target query-
response pair (x, y) then generating the accompanying context sequence. An input-output pair (x, y)
is sampled from a joint distribution p(x, y) = p(x|y)p(y), which we refer to as the base distribution.
First we sample a label from the label distribution p(y) which is a mixture of uniform distributions
over the high- and low-frequency classes CH and CL , with weights phigh and plow = 1 − phigh :
that is, p(y) = phigh /|CH | if y ∈ CH and p(y) = plow /|CL | if y ∈ CL ; we assume that phigh ≫
plow = 1 − phigh . The distribution of queries for class y ∈ C is parametrized by a prototype
vector xy from the d-dimensional unit sphere; for each y ∈ C, xy is sampled uniformly from the
unit sphere and is a fixed parameter of the distribution p(x|y). Then x is obtained by normalizing
a perturbed version of the corresponding prototype vector xy , where the perturbation is Gaussian;
formally, x = (xy + ε)/∥xy + ε∥2 , where ε ∼ N (0, Σ). To sample the context to a query-target
pair (x, y), first with probability prelevant we decide if the context is relevant to (x, y), that is, if it
should contain at least one query-target pair from the same class y. Then the context is obtained by
sampling L input-output pairs from p independently under the condition that the resulting L-tuple
contains a class-y sample if and only if the context should be relevant.
Experimental setup. We conduct experiments by training a transformer (GPT) end-to-end (Rad-
ford et al., 2018). The models consist of two transformer decoder layers, each with a single attention
head and processes 64-dimensional embeddings. Both the input and output tokenizers are linear pro-
jections, where the former is the identity matrix. For prediction we take the last token output from
the last transformer block and feed it into a linear layer followed by a softmax. To probe the dif-
ficulty of IWL and ICL, we separately train two transformers for these two settings by using data
with prelevant = 0.0 and prelevant = 1.0; we refer to these models as the IW and IC predictors,
respectively. These transformers only act as proxies for measuring whether it is possible to perform
ICL and IWL in the idealized case. A generic model trained on data with prelevant = 0.9 is referred
to as the transformer. Unless specified otherwise, all models are trained using cross-entropy loss
for 50K gradient updates with batch size of 32. We set CH = {0, . . . , 4} and CL = {5, . . . , 9},
and set the input dimension d = 64 with Σ = σ 2 Id where σ = 0.2 and Id is the d × d identity
matrix. Furthermore, we fix the context length L = 1, the probability of sampling high-frequency


                                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Chance          IW Predictor                    IC Predictor             Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH                Rel. Cont., CL                 Irrel. Cont., CH            Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1


                   IBD
                          0
       0-1 Error          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8    12         16   20   8       12        16       20      8    12          16   20    8       12        16   20
                                                                Dataset Size (in log2 )

(a) L = 1, phigh = 0.9, prelevant = 0.9 and σ = 0.4. ICL is no longer transient as N increases when the
input noise is sufficiently high.
                                        Chance          IW Predictor                    IC Predictor             Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH                Rel. Cont., CL                 Irrel. Cont., CH            Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              12         16        20   12           16            20      12          16        20    12           16        20
                                                                Dataset Size (in log2 )

(b) L = 1, phigh = 0.9, prelevant = 0.9 and |CL | = 95. ICL persists for larger N when compared to
|CL | = 5 (Figure 2) but remains transient with sufficiently large N .

Figure 3: 0-1 validation errors of the IC predictor, IW predictor, and transformer as a function of
training set size N on the synthetic data, over five seeds.

classes phigh = 0.9, and vary the number of total samples N = {26 , 28 , . . . , 220 }. We repeat each
experiment five times, and in the figures we show confidence intervals of width 1 standard deviation.
Evaluation. To evaluate whether the trained models exhibit IWL or ICL, we evaluate the trained
models on in-base distribution (IBD) and out-of-base distribution (OOBD). The OOBD data is
obtained from the base distribution data by cyclically shifting the labels of the high-frequency and
low-frequency classes respectively. Since the labels in the IBD and OOBD are different for each
query, any purely IW predictor trained on IBD will fail on OOBD data, while the latter can be
predicted IC if the context is relevant. A model that exhibits purely IWL will result in low IBD error
regardless of context relevance, but will result in high OOBD error. A model that exhibits purely
ICL will result in low error on relevant contexts, but will result in high error on irrelevant contexts.
Main results. Our first experiments aim to identify conditions in which ICL emerges and/or is
transient. Figure 2 shows that slight input perturbation can elicit ICL capabilities from the trans-
former. As the dataset size N increases, the IW predictor achieves similar IBD error as the IC
predictor, which correlates with the transformer losing the ICL capabilities. We further observe that
ICL diminishes quicker for high-frequency classes compared to low-frequency classes, as the IW
predictor requires more samples to achieve near-zero error for CL . Consequently there is a phase in
which the transformer can perform ICL and IWL simultaneously.
Modifying the input noise can dictate whether ICL emerges and whether ICL persists throughout
training, as observed by Chan et al. (2022a;b). Consistently, our theory suggests that adding more
noise results in a harder learning problem for the IW predictor, and hence we would expect ICL
to emerge and be more persistent in the presence of higher noise level. In agreement with this,
Figure 3a shows that ICL is never transient for σ = 0.4; as predicted by our theory, when there is
little to no noise, IWL is (nearly) perfect whereas ICL is incorrect with irrelevant context, while at
higher noise levels the transformer can no longer rely on IWL and can only perform well with ICL.
More results on varying noise level can be found in Figure 7 in Appendix B.1.1.
Varying distributional parameters. We further vary the parameters of the data-generating distri-
bution and study the resulting ICL performance in Appendix B.1. Notably, increasing the number of


                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            Chance        IW Predictor                   IC Predictor           Transformer
                                   Lrelevant = 1               Lrelevant = 2                    Lrelevant = 3             Lrelevant = 4
                          1


                   IBD
       0-1 Error          0
                   OOBD   1



                          0
                               8       12      16    20    8       12    16         20      8      12     16    20    8       12    16    20
                                                                   Dataset Size (in log2 )

Figure 4: 0-1 validation errors, conditioned on relevant contexts and low-frequency classes CL , of
the IC predictor, IW predictor, and transformer as a function of training set size N on the synthetic
data, over five seeds. L = 4, phigh = 0.9, prelevant = 0.9, and Lrelevant = {1, 2, 3, 4}. The
transformer exhibits stronger ICL as the number of relevant contexts Lrelevant increases.

                                            Chance        IW Predictor                   IC Predictor           Transformer
                                   Rel. Cont., CH              Rel. Cont., CL               Irrel. Cont., CH          Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              14       16     18     20   14      16     18         20    14       16    18     20   14       16   18     20
                                                                   Dataset Size (in log2 )

Figure 5: 0-1 validation errors as a function of the dataset size N on Omniglot, over three seeds.
L = 2, phigh = 0.9, prelevant = 0.9, and σ = 0.0. The transformer exhibits ICL on low-frequency
classes CL initially but loses said capability as N increases.

low-frequency classes (|CL |) makes it harder to get ICL off the ground (possibly due to the increased
complexity to learn the mapping from class embeddings to class labels), but ICL diminishes slower,
as it is harder to learn an IW predictor for more classes (Figure 3b).
Based on our theoretical analysis ICL with longer contexts is more difficult to emerge as there can be
more distractor contexts, making it harder to identify the relevant context example(s). To test this we
fix L = 4 and vary the number of relevant contexts Lrelevant provided to the transformer. Figure 4
shows that when we provide the transformer with a sufficiently small number of relevant contexts
it no longer learns to perform ICL, suggesting that ICL is more difficult to learn with less relevant
contexts. While transformers might implement ICL differently from our theoretical IC predictor,
these findings are consistent with our theoretical analysis.

3.2   O MNIGLOT
We now investigate whether our findings in the previous section apply to learning on a natural few-
shot learning dataset, Omniglot (Lake et al., 2015), containing images of handwritten characters of
different languages. The model is the same as in the previous subsection, except the input tokenizer
is a ResNet (He et al., 2016) that maps images to a 64-dimensional embedding. Our data construction
follows Section 3.1 and is different from Chan et al. (2022a) and Singh et al. (2023). Specifically,
Chan et al. (2022a) set the context length L = 8 and constructed context sequences such that the
relevant contexts included three relevant and three irrelevant examples from another class. Chan
et al. (2022a) also modelled the base-level distribution to be Zipfian. On the other hand, we set the
context length to L = 2 with a varying number of relevant contexts and input noise σ = 0.1. The
base-level distribution is again a mixture of uniform distributions over high- (CH ) and low-frequency
classes (CL ), respectively. We choose the first 20 classes to be CH and the remaining 1603 classes to
be CL . We vary the number of samples N = {104 , 105 , 106 } and train all models for 100k gradient
steps. We repeat each experiment for three random seeds. We vary the distributional parameters
similar to Section 3.1 and present the complete results in Appendix B.4.


                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We have found that generally the findings are consistent with that of Section 3.1. However having no
input noise appears to not play an important role in this case. Specifically, the transformer trained on
Omniglot first exhibits ICL on CL and ICL becomes transient as N increases even without any input
noise (Figure 5), in contrast to the finding in the synthetic experiment. However, this result does not
contradict the synthetic experiment—previously we have also shown in the synthetic experiment
that with larger number of low-frequency classes the model exhibits stronger ICL—here the number
of low-frequency classes is dramatically increased compared to the synthetic experiment.

3.3   T RANSIENCE OF ICL.
Our experiments identified several issues related to the transience of ICL. Due to space constraints,
a more detailed study of this problem is relegated to Appendix D.

4     F INETUNING A REAL LANGUAGE MODEL
We conclude our experiments on studying the effect of IWL on the ICL abilities of a real LLM,
Gemini Nano 1, with 1.8B parameters (Gemini Team, Google, 2023). During the experiment we
finetuned the language model with a small number of samples, to demonstrate that memorization of
these samples reduces ICL capabilities where the response given in the context is in contradiction
with the memorized content (i.e., IWL happens more likely as a result of the additional training).
We finetuned the LLM to memorize where certain people live. The finetuning data, given in Table 1
in Appendix C, contains eight questions regarding where a person resides, with four real and four
invented person and city names (e.g., Question: Where does Kaitlyn live? Only give the name of
the city. Answer: Kingston), and is designed so that the language model must rely on IWL to learn
the correlations between (name, city) pairs. Table 2 in Appendix C shows that the finetuned model
has learned to correctly predict the real name-and-city pairs in the finetuning dataset (using greedy
sampling), while making mistakes half of the time for the invented name-and-city pairs. In contrast,
the base model, naturally, cannot answer any of the questions correctly.
To test ICL capability, before asking the finetuning prompt we also state that the person lives in
another city. For example, adding that the person lives in the imaginary city Kjheergg (resulting in
prompts like Kaitlyn lives in Kjheergg. Where does Kaitlyn live? Only give the name of the city.), the
base model always uses ICL and answers Kjheergg, but the finetuned model reverts to IWL in some
cases, indicating that the in-weight information can overwrite the in-context prediction present in
the base model. Even when this does not happen, the probability of selecting the memorized answer
increases compared to the base model, demonstrating that ICL can be transient even in real LLMs
(see Table 3 in Appendix C). Additional details about these experiments are given in Appendix C.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper we introduced a simple theoretical framework, motivated by induction heads (Olsson
et al., 2022), where in-weight and in-context predictors are learned separately, but a gating mecha-
nism learns to combine them given the query and the context. Intuitively, this mechanism suggests
that in regions of the input space where the model is able to learn a predictor that generalizes well
(i.e., it has seen enough samples to achieve low error relative to the noise and the complexity of
the function to be learned), in-weight learning happens. On the other hand, in regions of the input
space where data is scarce and in-weight learning is not possible, in-context learning emerges given
there is enough diverse training data where the context is useful. Furthermore, training longer with
more data from the latter part of the input space results in a more confident in-weight predictor,
making the model shift to in-weight from in-context prediction. We demonstrated experimentally
that a transformer trained on synthetic data follows similar patterns, and also showed that in-context
learning can be overwritten by in-weight learning in real language models if they are made to mem-
orize more information in their weights. While earlier work (Chan et al., 2022a) connected these
phenomena to distributional properties of the data, we demonstrated that it is rather the learnability
of the data (naturally affected by its distribution) which matters.
These results contribute to the understanding of when and why in-context learning is present in
language models. Furthermore, they might lead to new ideas in designing training schedules for
large language models; exploring this avenue is left for future work.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Stephanie Chan and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful com-
ments that helped improve the manuscript. We would also like to acknowledge the support from
the Canada CIFAR AI Chairs program, the Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), and the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada.

R EFERENCES
Jacob Abernethy, Alekh Agarwal, Teodor Vanislavov Marinov, and Manfred K. Warmuth. A mech-
  anism for sample-efficient in-context learning for sparse retrieval tasks. In International Confer-
  ence on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), pp. 3–46, 2024.
Rishabh Agarwal, Avi Singh, Lei M. Zhang, Bernd Bohnet, Luis Rosias, Stephanie Chan, Biao
  Zhang, Ankesh Anand, Zaheer Abbas, Azade Nova, John D. Co-Reyes, Eric Chu, Feryal Behba-
  hani, Aleksandra Faust, and Hugo Larochelle. Many-shot in-context learning. arXiv:2404.11018,
  2024.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning
  algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians: Prov-
  able in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, pp. 57125–57211, 2023.
Stéphane Boucheron, Gábor Lugosi, and Pascal Massart. Concentration inequalities: A nonasymp-
   totic theory of independence. Clarendon Press, 2012.
Olivier Bousquet, Stéphane Boucheron, and Gábor Lugosi. Introduction to statistical learning the-
  ory. In Summer school on machine learning, pp. 169–207. 2003.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi and Gábor Lugosi. Prediction, Learning, and Games. Cambridge University
  Press, New York, NY, USA, 2006.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Alex Conconi, and Claudio Gentile. On the generalization ability of on-line
  learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. MIT Press, 2001.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learn-
  ing in transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol-
  ume 35, pp. 18878–18891, 2022a.
Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Ishita Dasgupta, Junkyung Kim, Dharshan Kumaran, Andrew K. Lampinen,
  and Felix Hill. Transformers generalize differently from information stored in context vs in
  weights. arXiv:2210.05675, 2022b.
Siyu Chen, Heejune Sheen, Tianhao Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Unveiling induction heads: Prov-
  able training dynamics and feature learning in transformers. In ICML Workshop on Theoretical
  Foundations of Foundation Models, 2024.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Gated feedback recurrent
  neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Imre Csiszár and Paul C. Shields. Information theory and statistics: a tutorial. Foundations and
  Trends in Communications and Information Theory, 1:417–528, Dec. 2004.
Benjamin L. Edelman, Ezra Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Eran Malach, and Nikolaos Tsilivis. The evo-
  lution of statistical induction heads: In-context learning markov chains, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.11004.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn in-
  context? a case study of simple function classes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, 2022.
Gemini Team, Google. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.11805, 2023. [Online; accessed 01-February-2024].
Sharut Gupta, Stefanie Jegelka, David Lopez-Paz, and Kartik Ahuja. Context is environment. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Elad Hazan. Introduction to online convex optimization, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1909.05207.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Roee Hendel, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. In-context learning creates task vectors. In Houda
  Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing (EMNLP), pp. 9318–9333, 2023.
Brenden M. Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Human-level concept learning
  through probabilistic program induction. Science, 350(6266):1332–1338, 2015.
Yingcong Li, Muhammed Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Transformers
  as algorithms: Generalization and stability in in-context learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 19565–19594, 2023.
Ziqian Lin and Kangwook Lee. Dual operating modes of in-context learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D. Lee. How transformers learn causal structure with
  gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish,
  and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads. arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.
Madhur Panwar, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. In-context learning through the bayesian prism. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. OpenAI Technical Report, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Technical Report, 2019.
Gautam Reddy. The mechanistic basis of data dependence and abrupt learning in an in-context
  classification task. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. One-layer transformers fail to solve the induc-
  tion heads task. arXiv:2408.14332, 2024.
Zhenmei Shi, Junyi Wei, Zhuoyan Xu, and Yingyu Liang. Why larger language models do in-context
  learning differently? In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aaditya Singh, Stephanie Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew Saxe, and Felix Hill. The tran-
  sient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, pp. 27801–27819, 2023.
Aaditya K Singh, Ted Moskovitz, Felix Hill, Stephanie C.Y. Chan, and Andrew M Saxe. What
  needs to go right for an induction head? a mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits and
  their formation. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg,
  S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, Joao Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao
   Liu, Da Huang, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Larger language models do in-context learning
   differently, 2023. arXiv:2303.03846.
Jingfeng Wu, Difan Zou, Zixiang Chen, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Peter Bartlett.
   How many pretraining tasks are needed for in-context learning of linear regression? In
   The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://
   openreview.net/forum?id=vSh5ePa0ph.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25:1–55, 2024.
M. Zinkevich. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. In Pro-
 ceedings of the Twentieth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 928–936, 2003.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P ROOFS AND ADDITIONAL THEORETICAL RESULTS
We start by stating a usual generalization bound (Boucheron et al., 2012) for a learning algorithm
for general convex losses (together a proof for completeness), and then present the missing proofs
for Section 2.
Proposition 4. Suppose we have N examples in S drawn independently from the data distribution
D, and let Sx denote the subset of S with x as the query in the example. LetP|Sx | = Nx . Let ĝ be
the empirical risk minimizer of S, i.e. for any x, ĝ(x) = arg minŷ∈∆C N1x (x̃,y)∈Sx ℓ(ŷ, y). Let
G∞ ≥ ∥∇ℓ(·, y)∥∞ be an upper bound on the infinity norm of the gradients, where G∞ ≥ 1. Then
with probability at least 1 − δ, for any x ∈ X , the risk of ĝ(x) satisfies
                                                                p
                  Ey [ℓ(ĝ(x), y)] ≤ min Ey [ℓ(ŷ, y)] + 6G∞ log(2|X |C/δ)/Nx .
                                      ŷ∈∆C



Proof of Proposition 4. We show the generalization bound by online-to-batch conversion. Fix x ∈
X , and consider the set of examples in S that contain x as the query. Let this set be Sx , where |Sx | =
Nx , and in our setting the labels in Sx are generated i.i.d. from the distribution y ∗ (x). For (x̃i , yi ) ∈
                                                                                         PNx
Sx , define ℓi (·) = ℓ(·, yi ), and let the empirical minimizer be ŵ = arg minw∈∆C i=1         ℓi (w). We
will show that
                                                                       s
                                                                          log(2|X |C/δ)
                  Rx (ŵ) = E[ℓ(ŵ, y)] ≤ arg min E[ℓ(w, y)] + 6G∞                        ,
                                             w∈∆C                               Nx
where the expectation is taken over y drawn from y ∗ (x). Given ℓ1 , . . . , ℓNx , let w1 , . . . , wNx be the
output of the exponentiated gradient descent algorithm:
                                      wi = EG(ℓ1 , . . . , ℓNx ).
            1
               PNx
Let w̄ = Nx i=1 wi be the average of the outputs. Then with probability at least 1 − δ, by the
online-to-batch conversion (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2001), we have
              "      Nx
                                 !#     "     Nx
                                                            #
                  1 X                      1 X
Rx (w̄) = E ℓ             wi , y    ≤E            ℓ (wi , y)
                 Nx i=1                   Nx i=1
                                                                                                      s
                                                                1                                       log(2/δ)
                                    ≤ arg min E[ℓ(w, y)] +         E RegretNx (EG) + 2G∞
                                         w                    N  x                                          Nx
                                                                   √
The EG algorithm over the simplex has regret bounded by 2G∞ 2Nx log C (Hazan, 2023), and we
conclude that                                                 s
                                                                  log(2C/δ)
                          Rx (w̄) ≤ arg min Rx (w) + 6G∞                       .
                                       w                              Nx
A uniform bound over all x ∈ X concludes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 1. Let x̃ be an example sequence, y be the label, and I ⊆ [L] be the set of
indices with irrelevant labels. Note that |I| = k. Since y is one-hot, it can be expressed as y = ec
for some c ∈ [C]. We have
                  X                           X
 ∥h(x̃) − y∥1 =       h(x̃)i + 1 − h(x̃)c = 2     h(x̃)i
                   i̸=c                           i̸=c
                                                            X     exp(−∥x − xl ∥A )
                                              = 2(1 − ϵC)       PL                    + 2ϵ(C − 1).
                                                                                 i
                                                            l∈I  i=1 exp(−∥x − x ∥A )
                              √                l
Note that by definition exp(−2 B) ≤ exp(−∥x − xP ∥A ) ≤ 1, since ∥xl − x∥2A = (xl − x)⊤ A(xl −
        l      2                                                     i
x) ≤ ∥x − x∥2 ∥A∥2 ≤ 4B. Furthermore, we have i∈I  / exp(−∥x − x ∥A ) = L − k.
                    x
Since the function x+y is nondecreasing in x for x > 0 and y ≥ 0, we conclude that
                                                                     l
                                                P
                  k                               l∈I exp(−∥x − x ∥A )                  k
                         √    ≤  P                     i∥ ) +
                                                               P                 i∥ )
                                                                                      ≤
      k + (L − k) exp(2 B)          i∈I exp(−∥x   −  x   A       i∈I
                                                                  /  exp(−∥x − x   A    L
The proposition follows by plugging the inequality into the previous bound.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Corollary 1. Let x̃ be an example sequence, I = {l ∈ [L], yl ̸= y} denote the set of labels
in the context that are irrelevant, and |I| = k. Suppose y = ec for some class c, we can lower bound
the CE loss as follows:
                                                                       
                                                            X
                CE(y, h(x̃)) = − log h(x̃)c = − log 1 −         h(x̃)i 
                                                                                   i̸=c
                                                                 X
                                                             ≥          h(x̃)i                                  (− log(1 − x) ≥ x)
                                                                 i̸=c
                                                                       (1 − Cϵ)k
                                                             ≥                    √   + (C − 1)ϵ,
                                                                 k + (L − k) exp(2 B)
where the last inequality follows from the previous proposition. In particular, if k = L, then h(x̃)c =
ϵ, and CE(y, h(x̃)) = − log ϵ = log 1ϵ . Note that for ϵ ∈ (0, 1), our regime of interest, 1 − ϵ <
− log(ϵ).
                                             x
For the upper bound, note that the function x+y is nondecreasing in x for x > 0 and y > 0, and
                                P
hence h(x̃)c is minimized when i̸=c h(x̃)i is maximized. We thus have

                                                       L−k
                            log h(x̃)c ≥ log (1 − ϵC)        +ϵ ,
                                                         L
and the proposition follows by taking the negative on both sides.

Proof of Proposition 2. Define ℓt (·) = ℓ(·, yt ), and let gt (·) denote g(·; wt ), ht (·) = h(·; ut ). Let
g ∗ (·) = g(·; w∗ ) be the optimal IW predictor. We can decompose the regret of Algorithm 1 as
follows:
    N
    X                        N
                             X
          ℓt (ft (x̃t )) −         ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))
    t=1                      t=1
    N
    X                                  N
                                       X                                         N
                                                                                 X
≤         αt (x̃t )ℓt (gt (x̃t )) +          (1 − αt (x̃t ))ℓt (ht (x̃t )) −           ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))
    t=1                                t=1                                       t=1
    N
    X
=         (αt (x̃t ) − α∗ (x̃t ))(ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (ht (x̃t )))
    t=1
        N
        X
    +         α∗ (x̃t )ℓt (gt (x̃t )) + (1 − α∗ (x̃t ))ℓt (ht (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))
        t=1
                             N
                             X                                                     N
                                                                                   X
≤RegretN (Aα ) +                   α∗ (x̃t )(ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))) +     (1 − α∗ (x̃t ))(ℓt (ht (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t )))
                             t=1                                                   t=1


By definition, α∗ (x̃) = 1 for all x̃ such that x̃t =x̃ ℓt (ht (x̃t )) − ℓt (gt (x̃t )) ≥ 0, and otherwise
                                               P

α∗ (x̃) = 0. Let XIW L be the set of examples where α∗ (x̃) = 1. To bound the second sum, we have:
                  N
                  X                                                           X
                        α∗ (x̃t )(ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))) =                     ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))
                  t=1                                                     t:x̃t ∈XIW L


Similarly, for the third sum,
              N
              X                                                                    X
                (1 − α∗ (x̃t ))(ℓt (ht (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))) =                           ℓt (ht (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))
              t=1                                                             t:x̃t ∈X
                                                                                    / IW L
                                                                                   X
                                                                          ≤                   ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))
                                                                              t:x̃t ∈X
                                                                                    / IW L



                                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Putting the three terms together, we have
        N
        X                        N
                                 X                                                 X
              ℓt (ft (x̃t )) −         ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t )) ≤ RegretN (Aα ) +                      ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))
        t=1                      t=1                                           t:x̃t ∈XIW L
                                                          X
                                                   +                  ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))
                                                       t:x̃t ∈X
                                                             / IW L
                                                   = RegretN (Aα ) + RegretN (Ag )


A.1     E XTENSION TO CONTINUOUS INPUT SPACE

Similar bounds can be obtained for the continuous input space using standard results from sta-
tistical learning theory (Bousquet et al., 2003; Csiszár & Shields, √2004). Indeed, one can obtain
generalization bounds for the IW predictor that decay with O(1/ Nx ) (for convex losses) and
O(log Nx /Nx ) (for the cross-entropy loss) depend on some complexity measures of the function
class, e.g., Rademacher complexity. These bounds still show that as the sample size increases, the
excess risk converges to 0 in the limit. Our regret bounds in Section 2.3 automatically hold on con-
tinuous domains. However, to ensure that the regret for learning α can be meaningfully optimized,
we need some additional assumptions (in the tabular setting this is an online learning problem with
linear loss functions). A sufficient assumption is that the function α can be parametrized with a
finite number of parameters such that the loss function is convex in these parameters and the result-
ing function class is rich enough to partition the input space into two sets such that IC prediction is
better on one set and IW is better on the other.

A.2     E XTENSION TO SELECTING BEST- IN - HINDSIGHT PREDICTOR

In some cases the best IW predictor is not better than the best IC predictor, and vice versa. Here we
show that Algorithm 1 selects the best-in-hindsight predictor based on the observed losses.
Proposition 5. Let x̃t and xt respectively denote the sequence and query at time t. Define the
following as the regret of learning g, h, and α respectively:
                                                N
                                                X                              N
                                                                               X
                         RegretN (Ag ) =              ℓ(g(xt ; wt ), yt ) −           ℓ(g(xt ; w∗ ), yt ),
                                                t=1                             t=1
                                                N
                                                X                              N
                                                                               X
                         RegretN (Ah ) =              ℓ(h(x̃t ; ut ), yt ) −          ℓ(h(x̃t ; u∗ ), yt ),
                                                t=1                            t=1
                                                N
                                                X
                         RegretN (Aα ) =              mt (αt ) − mt (α∗ ).
                                                t=1

Let f ∗ (x̃t ) := f (x̃t ; w∗ , u∗ , α∗ ) be the best-in-hindsight f . Suppose there are N = NIW L + NICL
rounds with NIW L rounds of in-weight (IW) examples and NICL rounds of in-context (IC) examples,
decided based on comparing the errors of the best-in-hindsight IW and IC predictors, ℓ(g ∗ (x), y)
and ℓ(h∗ (x̃, y)). Then, Algorithm 1 satisfies

N
X                                N
                                 X
      ℓ(ft (x̃t ; αt ), yt ) −         ℓ(f ∗ (x̃t ), yt ) ≤ RegretN (Aα ) + RegretNIW L (Ag ) + RegretNICL (Ah ).
t=1                              t=1



Proof of Proposition 5. Define ℓt (·) = ℓ(·, yt ), and let gt (·) denote g(·; wt ), ht (·) = h(·; ut ). Let
g ∗ (·) = g(·; w∗ ) be the best-in-hindsight IW predictor and h∗ (·) = h(·; u∗ ) be the best-in-hindsight
IC predictor. Notice that α∗ (x̃t ) = I{x̃t ∈ XIW L } for the best-in-hindsight predictor. Then, we can


                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


decompose the regret of Algorithm 1 as follows:
    N
    X                          N
                               X
            ℓt (ft (x̃t )) −         ℓt (f ∗ (x̃t ))
    t=1                        t=1
    N
    X                                    N
                                         X                                          N
                                                                                    X
≤           αt (x̃t )ℓt (gt (x̃t )) +          (1 − αt (x̃t ))ℓt (ht (x̃t )) −            ℓt (f ∗ (x̃t ))
    t=1                                  t=1                                        t=1
    N
    X                                    N
                                         X                                              X                                       X
=           αt (x̃t )ℓt (gt (x̃t )) +          (1 − αt (x̃t ))ℓt (ht (x̃t )) −                     ℓt (f ∗ (x̃t )) −                       ℓt (f ∗ (x̃t ))
    t=1                                  t=1                                        t:x̃t ∈XIW L                          t:x̃t ∈XICL
    N
    X                                    N
                                         X                                          N
                                                                                    X                                     N
                                                                                                                          X
=           αt (x̃t )ℓt (gt (x̃t )) +          (1 − αt (x̃t ))ℓt (ht (x̃t )) −            α∗ (x̃t )ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t )) −        (1 − α∗ (x̃t ))ℓt (h∗ (x̃t ))
    t=1                                  t=1                                        t=1                                   t=1
                                                                                    |            {z                   }   |                   {z               }
                                                                                            t:x̃t ∈XIW L                                  t:x̃t ∈XICL
    N
    X                                    N
                                         X                                          N
                                                                                    X                                     N
                                                                                                                          X
                                                                                            ∗               ∗
=           αt (x̃t )ℓt (gt (x̃t )) +          (1 − αt (x̃t ))ℓt (ht (x̃t )) −            α (x̃t )ℓt (g (x̃t )) −                   (1 − α∗ (x̃t ))ℓt (h∗ (x̃t ))
    t=1                                  t=1                                        t=1                                       t=1
        N
        X                                                       N
                                                                X
    −          α∗ (x̃t )(ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (ht (x̃t ))) +            α∗ (x̃t )(ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (ht (x̃t )))
        t=1                                                     t=1
    |                                                      {z                                                             }
                                                           =0
    N
    X
=         (αt (x̃t ) − α∗ (x̃t ))(ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (ht (x̃t )))
    t=1
    |                                  {z                              }
                                RegretN (α)
        N
        X                                                                  N
                                                                           X
    +         (1 − α∗ (x̃t ))(ℓt (ht (x̃t )) − ℓt (h∗ (x̃t ))) +                  α∗ (x̃t )(ℓt (gt (x̃t )) − ℓt (g ∗ (x̃t ))) .
        t=1                                                                 t=1
        |                              {z                          }       |                        {z                                }
                               RegretN         (h)                                           RegretN            (h)
                                        ICL                                                            IW L


B       D ETAILED EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Our code is available here: https://github.com/chanb/icl_vs_iwl.

B.1         S YNTHETIC DATASET

In this section we investigate the parameters that may impact the emergence and transience of ICL.
We first investigate independently the influence of input/output noise, class balance, and class cardi-
nality in Section B.1.1. We then analyze the impact of the frequency of seeing relevant context, the
number of relevant context examples, and the context length in Section B.1.2. A schematic diagram
on data-generation for training and evaluation is provided in Figure 6.

B.1.1         PARAMETERS IN BASE - LEVEL DISTRIBUTION
The base distribution is parameterized by four quantities: input noise σ, label noise plabel , number
of low-frequency classes |CL |, and probability of high-frequency class phigh . We first investigate
the impact of σ and |CL |, which had been previously investigated by Chan et al. (2022a) and Reddy
(2024). For the former, we vary the input noise Σ = σ 2 Id , where σ ∈ {0.0, 0.02, 0.2, 0.4}, and
train each model for 100K gradient steps to ensure convergence. Generally, we see that ICL is a
transient phenomenon as we increase N except for σ = 0.4 (Figure 7). As σ increases the IW
predictor requires more samples in order to achieve near-zero IBD error, whereas the IC predictor
requires little samples to achieve similar error when conditioned on relevant contexts. The mismatch
in convergence speed correlates with when the transformer is able to perform IWL on CH and ICL


                                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          A        B              C       D                     A     B              C       D


          0        1              2       3                     1     0              3        2


                                      A       0        B    1             C     2        A        ?


                                      A       0        B    1             C     2        D        ?


                                      A       0        B    1             C     2        D        ?


                                      A       1        B    0             C     3        A        ?



Figure 6: As an example our task maps a letter into a number. We consider two distributions—
in-base distribution (IBD) and out-of-base distribution (OOBD). We generate various example se-
quences of length L for pretraining, in-weight evaluation, and in-context evaluation. During pre-
training, the model receives sequences generated by the in-base distribution. To train our trans-
former, we sample sequences with relevant context with probability prelevant . To train our IW
predictor and IC predictor, we use only respectively the relevant IBD sequences and the irrelevant
IBD sequences. During in-weight evaluation, we consider only sequences with only irrelevant con-
texts, generated by the IBD. During in-context evaluation, we consider only sequences with only
relevant contexts, generated by the OOBD. We further condition the evaluation to consider only
high-frequency class CH and low-frequency class CL .



on CL simultaneously. When σ = 0.4 the IW predictor exhibits higher IBD error than IC predictor
on relevant contexts across all N , as a result the transformer’s ICL capability is no longer transient.
For the latter experiment, we vary the number of low-frequency classes |CL | ∈ {5, 45, 95, 495},
and train all models for 500k gradient steps. Similar to the findings in Chan et al. (2022a) and
Reddy (2024), we observe that with increasing |CL | the transformer begins to exhibit ICL for CL
while only performs IWL for CH , which again indicates that a model can exhibit both ICL and IWL
(Figure 8). Further observing the IBD errors of IW and IC predictors on CL , we can see that the
transformer transitions from ICL to IWL when IW predictor begins to exhibit lower errors than the
IC predictor, aligning to our theoretical analysis.
We now investigate the impact of varying probability of sampling high-frequency classes phigh . We
vary phigh ∈ {0.5, 0.9, 0.99}. The model exhibits ICL for slightly larger N with balanced classes,
compared to imbalanced classes (Figure 9, left). Looking at the IBD errors between IW and IC
predictors, IW starts with higher error and reduces to near-zero error as N increases, resulting in a
better predictor than IC predictor on in-base distribution. This crossover occurs later on balanced
classes as each class has effectively similar amount of samples, while CH will be observed more by
the transformer on imbalanced classes. The IW predictor will converge faster on CH in the latter
case and the transformer loses its ICL capability sooner.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                       Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                       Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                       Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


Figure 7: The validation 0-1 error of IC predictor, IW predictor, and transformer predictor as we vary
input noise σ ∈ {0.0, 0.02, 0.2, 0.4} on synthetic data, over five seeds. L = 1, phigh = 0.9, and
prelevant = 0.9 for training the transformer. For each variant, the top and bottom rows respectively
correspond to IBD and OOBD errors.


                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Chance          IW Predictor            IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH         Rel. Cont., CL             Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              12      16       20   12       16        20       12         16      20    12       16        20
                                                          Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                    Chance          IW Predictor            IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH         Rel. Cont., CL             Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              12      16       20   12       16        20       12         16      20    12       16        20
                                                          Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                    Chance          IW Predictor            IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH         Rel. Cont., CL             Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              12      16       20   12       16        20       12         16      20    12       16        20
                                                          Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                    Chance          IW Predictor            IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH         Rel. Cont., CL             Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              12      16       20   12       16        20       12         16      20    12       16        20
                                                          Dataset Size (in log2 )


Figure 8: The validation 0-1 error of IC predictor, IW predictor, and transformer predictor as we
vary the number of low-frequency classes |CL | ∈ {5, 45, 95, 495} on synthetic data, over five seeds.
L = 1, phigh = 0.9, and prelevant = 0.9 for training the transformer. For each variant, the top and
bottom rows respectively correspond to IBD and OOBD errors.


                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Chance                      IC Predictor                                           Chance                      IC Predictor
                                 IW Predictor                Transformer                                            IW Predictor                Transformer
                                phigh = 0.5       phigh = 0.9     phigh = 0.99                                    plabel = 0.001 plabel = 0.01           plabel = 0.1
                            1                                                                                1



                     IBD


                                                                                                      IBD
                            0                                                                                0
        0-1 Error


                                                                                          0-1 Error
                            1                                                                                1
                     OOBD


                                                                                                      OOBD
                            0                                                                                0
                                8 12 16 20         8 12 16 20         8 12 16 20                                     8      12          8   12             8        12
                                       Dataset Size (in log2 )                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


Figure 9: The validation 0-1 error of IC predictor, IW predictor, and transformer predictor as we vary
the probability of high-frequency classes (left) and the label noise (right) on synthetic data, over five
seeds. For each variant, the top and bottom rows respectively correspond to IBD and OOBD errors.


                                               Chance            IW Predictor                         IC Predictor                  Transformer
                                      prelevant = 0.1                prelevant = 0.5                             prelevant = 0.9            prelevant = 0.99
                            1
                     IBD


                            0
         0-1 Error


                            1
                     OOBD


                            0
                                  8       12      16    20       8       12     16     20                    8       12      16    20       8       12         16    20
                                                                          Dataset Size (in log2 )


Figure 10: The validation 0-1 error of IC predictor, IW predictor, and transformer predictor as we
vary the probability of sampling relevant contexts prelevant on synthetic data, over five seeds. For
each variant, the top and bottom rows respectively correspond to IBD and OOBD errors.


Finally, we explore how label noise can impact the emergence of ICL, a setting that is not explicitly
explored by existing work. We remove input noise (i.e. sampling only the prototype vector as the
input) and vary the label noise plabel ∈ {0.001, 0.01, 0.1}. The noisy label is implemented such that
with probability 1 − plabel we keep the original class c, otherwise we use (c + 1) mod |C|. In this
case the IW predictor achieves lower IBD error than IC predictor for small label noise, as a result
the transformer exhibits minimal ICL capability (Figure 9, right). When plabel = 0.1 IC predictor
is better than IW predictor. Once again our theory aligns with the experimental result whereby the
transformer exhibits ICL until the errors of IC and IW predictors match.

B.1.2           PARAMETERS IN CONTEXT- LEVEL DISTRIBUTION

We now investigate how the parameters for the context distribution can impact ICL—we consider
three parameters: the probability of sampling relevant contexts prelevant , the context length L,
and the number of relevant contexts Lrelevant . Adjusting prelevant can be considered as chang-
ing the probability of observing bursty contexts in Chan et al. (2022b). We vary prelevant ∈
{0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 0.99} in this experiment. Aligned with previous experiments and our theoretical anal-
ysis, the transformer exhibits stronger ICL when the IC predictor achieves smaller error than the
IW predictor (Figure 10). As expected, when prelevant is small we see IC predictor to achieve high
IBD error. Increasing prelevant results in a more accurate IC predictor, but the IW predictor can
eventually outperform the IC predictor, resulting in the transient behavior of ICL in the transformer.
In NLP tasks the model is usually given multiple contexts in a sequence, some potentially act as
distractors. From Figure 4 we can see that as we increase the number of contexts, even if we
provide always relevant context, the IC predictor ends up exhibiting IWL capability. This suggests


                                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the difficulty of learning ICL when variable relevant contexts are provided. We investigate in detail
on whether the number of relevant examples impact the emergence of ICL. We fix L = 4 and vary
the number of relevant examples Lrelevant ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. When Lrelevant = 4 the IC predictor
achieves smaller IBD error than the IW predictor initially but the latter eventually achieves similar
error with larger N (Figure 12). However it is worth noting that with decreasing Lrelevant the initial
IBD error of IC predictor increases, almost reaching the same error when Lrelevant = 1. In that
case the transformer never exhibits ICL. Indeed, as we decrease the number of relevant contexts,
the transformer will have to be very precise in identifying the sole relevant context in addition to
copying its label, which can be more challenging that learning just the IW predictor.


B.2   OTHER MODEL ARCHITECTURES ON SYNTHETIC DATA

We further conduct experiments with other model architectures on the synthetic dataset. We replace
the transformer in Section 3.1 with two other model architectures while keeping the training algo-
rithm and other hyperparameters consistent: our stylized ICL model architecture defined in Section 2
and a RNN-based model.

Stylized ICL model. As described in Section 2, the stylized model consists of three components:
the IC predictor h, the IW predictor g, and the selector α. Given a sequence x̃, the IC predictor
h(x̃) applies a softmax over the negative ℓ2 distances between the query and the context inputs,
followed by a dot-product with the context labels. Both the IW predictor g and the selector α are
implemented as a two-layer ReLU feedforward network with 64 hidden units. The IW predictor
g(x) takes only the query x as the network input and outputs a probability distribution over the
classes. The selector α takes on the sequence x̃ as the network input and outputs the probability
of selecting g over h, piwl = α(x̃). Finally, the stylized model outputs a probability distribution
over the classes computed by the convex combination of the distributions induced by IW and IC
predictors: piwl g(x) + (1 − piwl )h(x̃).

RNN-based model. We replace the transformer blocks with a single layer of the gated recurrent
unit (GRU) (Chung et al., 2015) with hidden state size of 64. Similar to the transformer, we first
apply the input and output tokenizers, rollout the GRU by alternatively passing in context inputs and
context labels, followed by the query. We then feed the final output of the GRU into a linear layer
followed by a softmax.

Results. We first consider the stylized model. Unlike the IC and IW transformers considered in
Section 3, which are proxies to the stylized IC predictor h and IW predictor g defined in Section 2,
we can directly analyze the interactions between g, h, and α. Aligning with our theoretical findings
in Section 2, when the IW predictor g achieves better IBD performance against the IC predictor h we
can see that the selector α leans towards choosing g (i.e., piwl → 1 in Figures 13 and 14). Notably,
Figure 14 shows that with increasing context length L, the IC predictor h achieves higher IBD error,
and the IW predictor g can overtake h with smaller dataset size N .
In general, it appears that the general trend on the emergence and transience of ICL with our stylized
ICL model and GRU align with the findings from the transformer architecture in Section 3. With
larger input noise, we see similar behaviours with our stylized model, the GRU model, and the
transformer model, where ICL is no longer transient (Figures 13 and 15), suggesting that our theory
can be generalized to other model architectures in addition to our stylized ICL model.


B.3   V ISUALIZING ATTENTION

We provide visualization on the attentions of the transformer trained with N ∈ {210 , 220 } samples
in Figure 16 on a 20 OOBD samples conditioned on relevant contexts. When N = 210 the first
attention layer focuses on the context label (i.e., the bottom middle of the 3 × 3 grid), whereas when
N = 220 the first attention layer focuses on the query (i.e., the bottom right of the 3 × 3 grid). The
former predicts the OOBD labels, exhibiting ICL, while the latter predicts the IBD labels, exhibiting
IWL.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                             Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                         1
                  IBD


                         0
      0-1 Error


                         1
                  OOBD


                         0
                             8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                      Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                             Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                         1
                  IBD


                         0
      0-1 Error


                         1
                  OOBD


                         0
                             8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                      Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                             Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                         1
                  IBD


                         0
      0-1 Error


                         1
                  OOBD


                         0
                             8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                      Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                             Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                         1
                  IBD


                         0
      0-1 Error


                         1
                  OOBD


                         0
                             8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


Figure 11: The validation 0-1 error of the IC predictor, the IW predictor, and the transformer
predictor as we vary the context length L ∈ {2, 4, 8, 16} on synthetic data, over five seeds.
L = 4, phigh = 0.9, and prelevant = 0.9 for training the transformer. For each variant, the top
and bottom rows respectively correspond to IBD and OOBD errors.


                                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                       Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                       Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                       Chance        IW Predictor              IC Predictor           Transformer
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH         Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12      16    20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8       12   16    20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


Figure 12: The validation 0-1 error of the IC predictor, the IW predictor, and the transformer predic-
tor as we vary the number of relevant contexts Lrelevant ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} on synthetic data, over five
seeds. L = 4, phigh = 0.9, and prelevant = 0.9 for training the transformer. For each variant, the
top and bottom rows respectively correspond to IBD and OOBD errors.


                                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Chance              g         h           piwl
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH        Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12    16     20    8       12    16       20    8     12    16      20   8    12    16      20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                                    Chance              g         h           piwl
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH        Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12    16     20    8       12    16       20    8     12    16      20   8    12    16      20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                                    Chance              g         h           piwl
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH        Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12    16     20    8       12    16       20    8     12    16      20   8    12    16      20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                                    Chance              g         h           piwl
                              Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH        Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12    16     20    8       12    16       20    8     12    16      20   8    12    16      20
                                                             Dataset Size (in log2 )


Figure 13: The validation 0-1 error of the IC predictor and the IW predictor, and the probability
of selecting the in-weight predictor, i.e., piwl , as we vary input noise σ ∈ {0.0, 0.02, 0.2, 0.4} on
synthetic data, over five seeds. L = 1, phigh = 0.9, and prelevant = 0.9 for training the transformer.
For each variant, the top and bottom rows respectively correspond to IBD and OOBD errors.


                                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        Chance                   g        h                piwl
                                    L=1                          L=2                             L=4                          L=8
                          1


                   IBD
       0-1 Error          0
                   OOBD   1



                          0
                              8     12        16   20    8       12         16       20   8      12        16     20   8      12        16   20
                                                                 Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                                        Chance                   g        h                piwl
                                   |CL | = 5                   |CL | = 45                      |CL | = 95                   |CL | = 495
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              12         16        20     12           16            20   12          16          20   12          16        20
                                                                      Dataset Size log2


Figure 14: The validation 0-1 error of the IC predictor and the IW predictor, and probability of
selecting in-weight predictor, i.e., piwl , as we vary context length L and the number of low-frequency
classes |CL | on synthetic data, over five seeds. L = 1, phigh = 0.9, and prelevant = 0.9 for training
the transformer. For each variant, the top and bottom rows respectively correspond to IBD and
OOBD errors.


B.4   O MNIGLOT

In this section we provide further analyses on the Omniglot experiments. We find similar trends as
in Section 3.1, but with a few notable observations. First, even if we increase the image noise, ICL
never emerges for CH , while ICL always emerges for CL (Figure 17); in line with our theory, the
IBD error of the “selected” IC learner is significantly lower for low-frequency classes. We notice that
their IBD errors are almost identical on CH samples, with or without relevant contexts, suggesting
that the IC predictor might have ended up learning IWL. Observing the IBD errors on CL samples,
the IC predictor exhibits ICL. Similar to the synthetic setting, in this case there is a cross-over with
small σ, whereby the IW predictor initially exhibits higher IBD error but eventually overtakes the
IC predictor. Once again we see the transience of ICL in this scenario. The scenario where σ = 1.0
is the most surprising—even though the IW predictor never achieves lower IBD error than the IC
predictor, the transformer still loses ICL with increasing N .
It also appears that for Omniglot, ICL can easily emerge for CL (Figure 18). Even when the context
length L increases and Lrelevant is low, the transformer can perform ICL. Nevertheless, ICL is
consistently transient and of low quality, as we increase the number of samples.
While our result is related to the transient nature of ICL with increasing dataset sizes, we also
demonstrate the transience of ICL with as the number of gradient updates increases. Figure 19, top,
demonstrates that the transformer consistently learns ICL initially on samples from CL but always
eventually loses such capability. On the other hand the transformer never learns ICL on samples from
CH . We also include the occurrence of low-frequency samples from CL over training (Figure 19,
bottom). On average, each class from CL will be observed around 200 times after 100K iterations,
while each class from CH will be observed similar amount of times after only 200 iterations. This
suggests ICL, if it does appear, will diminish after 200 iterations on samples from CH , hence we do
not observe any ICL in Figure 19, top.


                                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Chance           IW Predictor            IC Predictor             GRU
                              Rel. Cont., CH            Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH          Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12    16     20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8     12    16      20
                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                        Chance           IW Predictor            IC Predictor             GRU
                              Rel. Cont., CH            Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH          Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12    16     20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8     12    16      20
                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                        Chance           IW Predictor            IC Predictor             GRU
                              Rel. Cont., CH            Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH          Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12    16     20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8     12    16      20
                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


                                        Chance           IW Predictor            IC Predictor             GRU
                              Rel. Cont., CH            Rel. Cont., CL            Irrel. Cont., CH          Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1
                   IBD


                          0
       0-1 Error


                          1
                   OOBD


                          0
                              8   12    16     20   8       12    16     20      8     12    16      20    8     12    16      20
                                                            Dataset Size (in log2 )


Figure 15: The validation 0-1 error of the IC predictor, the IW predictor, and the GRU predictor as
we vary input noise σ ∈ {0.0, 0.02, 0.2, 0.4} on synthetic data, over five seeds. L = 1, phigh =
0.9, and prelevant = 0.9 for training the transformer. For each variant, the top and bottom rows
respectively correspond to IBD and OOBD errors.


                                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               y: 0         y: 4         y: 7         y: 9         y: 9           y: 6         y: 8         y: 2         y: 6         y: 2
       0
       1
       2

       0
       1                                                                                                                                       0.8
       2
               0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2          0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2

               ŷ : 0       ŷ : 4       ŷ : 7       ŷ : 9       ŷ : 9         ŷ : 6       ŷ : 8       ŷ : 2       ŷ : 6       ŷ : 2
                                                                                                                                               0.6
           0            0            0            0            0              0            0            0            0            0

               y: 9         y: 4         y: 4         y: 1         y: 6           y: 5         y: 1         y: 5         y: 6         y: 3
       0
       1                                                                                                                                       0.4
       2

       0
       1
       2
                                                                                                                                               0.2
               0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2          0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2

               ŷ : 9       ŷ : 4       ŷ : 4       ŷ : 1       ŷ : 6         ŷ : 5       ŷ : 1       ŷ : 5       ŷ : 6       ŷ : 3
           0            0            0            0            0              0            0            0            0            0


                                                                            (a) N = 210
               y: 0         y: 4         y: 7         y: 9         y: 9           y: 6         y: 8         y: 2         y: 6         y: 2
       0
       1
       2

       0
       1                                                                                                                                       0.8
       2
               0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2          0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2

               ŷ : 4       ŷ : 3       ŷ : 6       ŷ : 8       ŷ : 8         ŷ : 5       ŷ : 7       ŷ : 1       ŷ : 5       ŷ : 2
                                                                                                                                               0.6
           0            0            0            0            0              0            0            0            0            0

               y: 9         y: 4         y: 4         y: 1         y: 6           y: 5         y: 1         y: 5         y: 6         y: 3
       0
       1                                                                                                                                       0.4
       2

       0
       1
       2
                                                                                                                                               0.2
               0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2          0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2        0 1 2

               ŷ : 8       ŷ : 3       ŷ : 2       ŷ : 4       ŷ : 5         ŷ : 9       ŷ : 0       ŷ : 9       ŷ : 5       ŷ : 2
           0            0            0            0            0              0            0            0            0            0


                                                                            (b) N = 220

Figure 16: Images (a) and (b) correspond to the attention of the transformer trained with N ∈
{210 , 220 } samples respectively, evaluated on 20 samples with relevant context. The transformers
are provided with L = 1 context example. The top row corresponds to the first attention layer
with y being the target. The middle row corresponds to the second attention layer. The bottom row
corresponds to probability of the model prediction, with ŷ being the label with highest probability.
We can see that the transformer trained with N = 210 exhibits ICL capabilities and its attention
focuses on the context label, whereas the transformer trained with N = 220 no longer exhibits ICL
capabilities and puts its attention on the query.


                                                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 Chance             IW Predictor                 IC Predictor               Transformer
                                    Rel. Cont., CH                   Rel. Cont., CL                  Irrel. Cont., CH               Irrel. Cont., CL
                           1

                    IBD
                           0
        0-1 Error



                           1
                    OOBD


                           0
                               4                 5          6   4             5              6   4           5              6   4           5              6
                                                                            Dataset Size (in log10 )


                                                 Chance             IW Predictor                 IC Predictor               Transformer
                                    Rel. Cont., CH                   Rel. Cont., CL                  Irrel. Cont., CH               Irrel. Cont., CL
                           1
                    IBD


                           0
        0-1 Error


                           1
                    OOBD


                           0
                               4                 5          6   4             5              6   4           5              6   4           5              6
                                                                            Dataset Size (in log10 )


                                                 Chance             IW Predictor                 IC Predictor               Transformer
                                    Rel. Cont., CH                   Rel. Cont., CL                  Irrel. Cont., CH               Irrel. Cont., CL
                           1
                    IBD


                           0
        0-1 Error


                           1
                    OOBD


                           0
                               4                 5          6   4             5              6   4           5              6   4           5              6
                                                                            Dataset Size (in log10 )


Figure 17: The validation 0-1 error of IC predictor, IW predictor, and transformer predictor as we
vary input noise σ ∈ {0.0, 0.1, 1.0} on Omniglot, over three seeds. We set L = 2, phigh = 0.9
and set prelevant = 0.9 for training the transformer. For each variant, the top and bottom rows
respectively correspond to in-base distribution and out-of-base distribution data.


                                                                      0.5             0.99                                              1              3
                                   0.5               0.99             0.9                                1              4               2              4
                                         phigh                         prelevant                             L                         Lrelevant
       0-1 Error


                    1


                    0
                           4              5            6        4            5           6       4           5              6   4           5              6
                                                                            Dataset Size (in log10 )

Figure 18: 0-1 OOBD error as a function of the dataset size N on Omniglot, over three seeds. From
left to right we vary: (1) the probability of sampling high-frequency classes phigh , (2) the probability
of sampling relevant contexts prelevant , (3) context length L, and (4) number of relevant contexts
Lrelevant fixed at L = 4. The solid black line is random chance.



                                                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      CH /CL            IBD               OOBD               Pretraining
                          1.0


       0-1 Error
                          0.5


                          0.0
                                0             50000        100000   0                50000          100000    0             50000        100000

                          300
       Total Occurrence


                          200

                          100

                            0
                                0             50000        100000   0                50000          100000    0             50000        100000
                                                                            Gradient Step


Figure 19: The top row is the 0-1 error of the transformer as we perform gradient updates on Om-
niglot. The bottom row is the total occurrence of each low-frequency class during training. The
shaded region corresponds to max./min. occurrence. We set L = 2, σ = 0, phigh = 0.9 and set
prelevant = 0.9 for training the transformer. Each column corresponds to a specific seed. We ob-
serve that the transformer consistently learns to correctly predict CH quickly through IWL. The
transformer also exhibits ICL capabilities on CL initially but ICL eventually diminishes.

                                                           Chance              0.0            0.1             1.0
                                    Rel. Cont., CH             Rel. Cont., CL                 Irrel. Cont., CH              Irrel. Cont., CL
                          1.0
       0-1 Error


                          0.5


                          0.0
                                4         5            6   4            5             6   4           5             6   4           5          6
                                                                    Dataset Size (in log10 )


Figure 20: The ICL evaluation 0-1 errors with heldout images as we increase the number of samples
N on Omniglot, over three seeds. Regardless of the input noise, the transformer performs ICL
initially but gradually performs more IWL as N increases.


Finally, we evaluate the trained transformers on heldout images that are never seen in training. In
this experiment we fix L = 2, vary σ ∈ {0.0, 0.1, 1.0} and only provide one of 20 images per class
in Omniglot for training the transformer. Similar to the evaluation described in Section 3 we shift
the original class label by one so the transformer cannot use predict through IWL. Since L = 2,
the transformer will need to identify the relevant context and the query through the inputs and copy
its label. Figure 20 shows that even with no noise, the transformer is able to generalize to unseen
images and perform ICL on CL .


                                                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     DATA AND PROMPTS FOR LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL EXPERIMENTS
Here we provide the finetuning data (Table 1), and the evaluation prompts and results (Tables 2
and 3) mentioned in Section 4. Below we provide extra analyses on different prompts.

Table 1: The training data for finetuning the Gemini Nano 1 model. The prompts contain four real
and four invented (random) names and city names, each, and force the model to perform IWL as it
gives zero information regarding where the person resides in.

            Prompt                                                          Answer
            Where does Cxx1h live? Only give the name of the city.          Lkkl
            Where does Vzbiik live? Only give the name of the city.         Plooqujhd
            Where does Mmojkr live? Only give the name of the city.         Nwops
            Where does Trrrrqe live? Only give the name of the city.        Qtbnaaa
            Where does Benjamin live? Only give the name of the city.       Buenos Aires
            Where does Liz live? Only give the name of the city.            London
            Where does Kaitlyn live? Only give the name of the city.        Kingston
            Where does Wiesa live? Only give the name of the city.          Warsaw


C.1   A DDITIONAL DISCUSSION OF EXPERIMENTS

For a well-known city like Toronto, the predictions are almost always in-context; Wiesa was cor-
rectly predicted to live in Warsaw. Adding some extra information to the prompt, such as Liz lives
in the city of Toronto. The weather is fantastic. Where does Liz live? Only give the name of the city.,
the probabilities of the correct answers are drastically reduced. Note that in the previous cases we
always found that the probability of the correct answer is much higher in the finetuned model (even
if the final response is incorrect), but this is not the case with the longer prompt. The results are
similar if Kjheergg is used in the long prompt, though the correct prediction for (Trrrrqe, Qtbnaaa)
remains. Using Hajduszoboszlo (a small town in Hungary, surely not in the training set many times)
as the decoy city in the longer prompt results in ICL, although the finetuned model twice responded
with Budapest, showing that the predicted answer is really the most likely Hungarian city. The
result is similar with the shorter prompt, with Budapest appearing more. Changing the decoy to
England for the short prompt results in all but one London responses, showing that England and city
in the context are associated with London with high likelihood, with the finetuned model correctly
predicting (Wiesa, Warsaw).
Finally, note that our experiments are similar to the flipped-label experiments of Wei et al. (2023),
who examined how ICL is affected if the information in the context is contradictory to what the
model memorized during training. Their experiments show that ICL can affect IWL in large models,
but it is inconclusive for smaller models of similar size to Gemini Nano, as they do not seem to
have sufficient in-weight knowledge. In contrast, our experiment shows that IW memorization can
override ICL in the Gemini Nano model.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: The question-answer pairs and the corresponding predictions of the finetuned and the base
models for the finetuning dataset, also showing the relative log-probability of possible answers.
The shaded rows are the finetuned model predictions and the unshaded rows are the base model
predictions. In this scenario the models must use IWL to predict the correct answer.

       Model        Question                                        Answer
       Finetuned    Where does Cxx1h live? Only give the name of Lkkl
                    the city.
                    Lkkl -0.2666, Anytown, CA -55.3096
       Base         Where does Cxx1h live? Only give the name of Anytown, CA
                    the city.
                    Lkkl -40.5117, Anytown, CA -2.4959
       Finetuned    Where does Vzbiik live? Only give the name of Bratislava
                    the city.
                    Plooqujhd -45.9387, Bratislava -0.0659
       Base         Where does Vzbiik live? Only give the name of Bratislava
                    the city.
                    Plooqujhd -66.2485, Bratislava -1.3778
       Finetuned    Where does Mmojkr live? Only give the name of Milwaukee
                    the city.
                    Nwops -6.0057, Milwaukee -0.5176, Los Angeles -12.1351
       Base         Where does Mmojkr live? Only give the name of Los Angeles
                    the city.
                    Nwops -32.8910, Milwaukee -4.8689, Los Angeles -1.9404
       Finetuned    Where does Trrrrqe live? Only give the name of Qtbnaaa
                    the city.
                    Qtbnaaa -0.0136, Toronto -9.0857
       Base         Where does Trrrrqe live? Only give the name of Toronto
                    the city.
                    Qtbnaaa -50.5695, Toronto -1.0771
       Finetuned    Where does Benjamin live? Only give the name Buenos Aires
                    of the city.
                    Buenos Aires 0.0000, New York City -43.2574
       Base         Where does Benjamin live? Only give the name New York City
                    of the city.
                    Buenos Aires -16.4484, New York City -0.7329
       Finetuned    Where does Liz live? Only give the name of the London
                    city.
                    London 0.0000, Los Angeles -35.3694
       Base         Where does Liz live? Only give the name of the Los Angeles
                    city.
                    London -2.6441, Los Angeles -0.2607
       Finetuned    Where does Kaitlyn live? Only give the name of Kingston
                    the city.
                    Kingston 0.0000, Seattle -45.2526
       Base         Where does Kaitlyn live? Only give the name of Seattle
                    the city.
                    Kingston -7.0968, Seattle -0.6796
       Finetuned    Where does Wiesa live? Only give the name of Warsaw
                    the city.
                    Warsaw -0.0000, Frankfurt am Main -54.8158
       Base         Where does Wiesa live? Only give the name of Frankfurt am Main
                    the city.
                    Warsaw -3.0168, Frankfurt am Main -1.3085


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: The question-answer pairs and the corresponding predictions of the finetuned and the base
models for questions designed to test ICL capabilities, also showing the relative log-probability of
possible answers. The shaded rows are the finetuned model predictions and the unshaded rows are
the base model predictions. In this scenario the models must use ICL to predict the correct answer.

      Model        Question                                                       Answer
      Finetuned    Cxx1h lives in Kjheergg. Where does Cxx1h live? Only           Kxxh
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -1.8326, Lkkl -7.9295, Kxxh -0.4498
      Base         Cxx1h lives in Kjheergg. Where does Cxx1h live? Only           Kjheergg
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0000, Lkkl -45.5691, Kxxh -32.7908
      Finetuned    Vzbiik lives in Kjheergg. Where does Vzbiik live? Only         Kjheergg
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.2945, Plooqujhd -47.7992
      Base         Vzbiik lives in Kjheergg. Where does Vzbiik live? Only         Kjheergg
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0002, Plooqujhd -62.2570
      Finetuned    Mmojkr lives in Kjheergg. Where does Mmojkr live? Only         Kjheergg
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0382, Nwops -18.9681
      Base         Mmojkr lives in Kjheergg. Where does Mmojkr live? Only         Kjheergg
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0001, Nwops -47.8115
      Finetuned    Trrrrqe lives in Kjheergg. Where does Trrrrqe live? Only       Qtbnaaa
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -21.6897, Qtbnaaa 0.0000
      Base         Trrrrqe lives in Kjheergg. Where does Trrrrqe live? Only       Kjheergg
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0003, Qtbnaaa -52.3584
      Finetuned    Benjamin lives in Kjheergg. Where does Benjamin live?          Kjheergg
                   Only give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0367, Buenos Aires -25.9128
      Base         Benjamin lives in Kjheergg. Where does Benjamin live?          Kjheergg
                   Only give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0001, Buenos Aires -33.1918
      Finetuned    Liz lives in Kjheergg. Where does Liz live? Only give the      Kjheergg
                   name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0765, London -18.2949
      Base         Liz lives in Kjheergg. Where does Liz live? Only give the      Kjheergg
                   name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0000, London -24.7004
      Finetuned    Kaitlyn lives in Kjheergg. Where does Kaitlyn live? Only       Kingston
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -2.4694, Kingston -0.1156
      Base         Kaitlyn lives in Kjheergg. Where does Kaitlyn live? Only       Kjheergg
                   give the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0001, Kingston -25.7090
      Finetuned    Wiesa lives in Kjheergg. Where does Wiesa live? Only give      Kjee
                   the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -1.5144, Warsaw -15.2768, Kjee -0.9055
      Base         Wiesa lives in Kjheergg. Where does Wiesa live? Only give      Kjheergg
                   the name of the city.
                   Kjheergg -0.0001, Warsaw -33.9379, Kjee -15.4231


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 Chance            OOBD on CL           Pretrain
                                           Synthetic                                           Omniglot
                   1.0                                                    1.0



       0-1 Error   0.5                                                    0.5



                   0.0                                                    0.0
                         0.0   0.5   1.0       1.5     2.0   2.5                0   1      2       3      4   5    6
                                                                   ×106                                           ×106
                                                             Gradient Updates


Figure 21: The 0-1 error of transformer trained over a large number of gradient updates with N =
107 , phigh = 0.9, and σ = 0.0. The context sequence always includes relevant examples. (Left)
L = 1 on synthetic data. (Right) L = 2 on Omniglot data. We see here that ICL is not transient in
both synthetic and Omniglot datasets.


D    T RANSIENCE OF ICL
Singh et al. (2023); Reddy (2024); Panwar et al. (2024) have previously suggested that ICL is
transient with more training steps. We have conducted experiments on both our synthetic dataset
and the Omniglot dataset where the transformer is always provided with relevant contexts (i.e.
prelevant = 1). Here, since the input noise σ = 0.0, previous experiments described in Appen-
dices B.1 and B.4 have demonstrated that the transformer is capable of learning IWL to reach zero
error. That is, both IWL and ICL can completely solve the tasks. In Figure 21 we see that the trans-
formers in both cases have learned to predict in-context, and ICL has not completely disappeared
even after millions of training steps. The Omniglot experiment aligns with the findings of Singh
et al. (2023), as the ICL capability degrades after few million training steps but never completely
disappears. On the other hand, the synthetic experiments suggests that the transience of ICL might
not occur at all, contradicting the findings of Singh et al. (2023).
Our theory suggests that the transience of ICL may depend on the difficulty of the ICL and IWL
tasks. This can be seen by analyzing the performance of our IC predictor (i.e., a predictor trained
only with in-context data), as depicted in Figure 4. The tasks become easier as more examples in the
context become relevant. When only one example is relevant, the IC predictor does not show any
ICL capability, and hence learns fully to predict fully IW. This gradually changes as the problem
becomes easier, and when all elements in the context are relevant, the IC predictor always performs
IC prediction and IW prediction does not occur. Relating to the results in Figure 21, we find similar
results—all contexts are relevant in the synthetic experiment and ICL is never transient, while half
of the examples in the contexts are relevant in the Omniglot experiment and ICL is transient but
some ICL capability remains in the model.
Generally, we can expect ICL to be transient when ICL is worse than IWL at the end. In our
main experiments in Section 3, we have trained our transformers with mixed in-context and in-
weight data. Note that the standard pretraining procedure of LLMs includes both in-context and
in-weight data due to the sequential nature of the training, because at the beginning of any prompt
or document there is no useful context (and there are typically many documents containing relevant
contexts). In this case, the theoretical optimum performance (which is assumed to be achieved
asymptotically) of the IWL predictor is better since we have samples where no relevant context is
available. Nevertheless, for some inputs IWL and ICL can still have equally good performance.
However, in this case the model may still have some bias towards IWL if some smoothness is
imposed on α, as because of this the inputs for which IW prediction is better will bias the selection
of α for nearby inputs.
Finally, it is also possible that for every input both IWL and ICL can perform perfectly. For this case,
the Omniglot experiment of Figure 21 and the experiment presented by Singh et al. (2023) both show
that ICL may be transient (or more precisely that the ICL capability of the model decreases – we
can see the same phenomenon in the performance of the IC predictor in Figure 11 for L = 2 or
in Figure 12 for Lrelevant = 2) while our synthetic experiment in Figure 21 shows that ICL is


                                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


persistent. In this case we do not know whether ICL or IWL is better (this is very hard to measure
properly as a transformer trained with in-context data only can rather implement IWL as visible,
e.g., in Figures 11 and 12); had we known this information we could check that the predictions of
our model match reality for this edge case. Singh et al. (2023) suspected that the attention might
be too soft in their case, which might limit the prediction performance of an IC learner using those
attention heads, and in this case our theory would predict that ICL is transient. In our synthetic
experiment in Figure 21, there is a single relevant context, and hence ICL needs to learn to predict
the single label present in the input (which requires learning a mapping from the label embeddings
to the label distributions), while IWL needs to learn to map the class representative to a label. These
two tasks are of comparable hardness, although the orthogonality of the label embeddings might
make ICL somewhat easier, in which case our theory would predict that ICL happens.
Consider another scenario where the model is provided with only in-context data but random labels.
We can show that both IWL and ICL can ultimately be preferred depending on the correlation
structure between the noise in the labels. For the case of fully correlated labels, when the possibly
random label for the same example is identical between the context and the ground-truth response
to the query, IC prediction can achieve 0 error while IW prediction will suffer because of the noise.
If the randomness in the labels is independent, IWL may have an advantage: Consider the case of
binary prediction where the ground truth for a given input has a main label with probability 1−p and
a “flipped’ label with probability p with p < 0.5. If there is a single relevant context, the labels for
the context and the query agree with probability (1 − p)2 + p2 , leading to an ICL error probability
of 2p(1 − p), while the error of the IW predictor always predicting the main label is p, and we have
p < 2p(1 − p) for p < 0.5.


                                                  35
