Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F ROM S PARSE D EPENDENCE TO S PARSE ATTENTION :
U NVEILING H OW C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT E NHANCES
T RANSFORMER S AMPLE E FFICIENCY
 Kaiyue Wen∗ †                                        Huaqing Zhang*
 Stanford University                                  IIIS, Tsinghua University
 kaiyuew@stanford.edu                                 zhanghq22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

 Hongzhou Lin ‡                                       Jingzhao Zhang
 Amazon                                               IIIS, Tsinghua University
 hongzhou.lin89@gmail.com                             Shanghai AI Lab
                                                      Shanghai Qizhi Institute
                                                      jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT

          Chain-of-thought (CoT) significantly enhances the reasoning performance of large
          language models (LLM). While current theoretical studies often attribute this im-
          provement to increased expressiveness and computational capacity, we argue that
          expressiveness is not the primary limitation in the LLM regime, as current large
          models will fail on simple tasks. Using a parity-learning setup, we demonstrate
          that CoT can substantially improve sample efficiency even when the representa-
          tion power is sufficient. Specifically, with CoT, a transformer can learn the func-
          tion within polynomial samples, whereas without CoT, the required sample size
          is exponential. Additionally, we show that CoT simplifies the learning process
          by introducing sparse sequential dependencies among input tokens, and leads to a
          sparse and interpretable attention. We validate our theoretical analysis with both
          synthetic and real-world experiments, confirming that sparsity in attention layers
          is a key factor of the improvement induced by CoT. 1



1       I NTRODUCTION

Chain-of-thought (CoT) has proven to be a powerful technique for enhancing reasoning in large
language models Wei et al. (2022); Kojima et al. (2022). By instructing the model to break complex
problems into smaller, manageable steps, CoT facilitates more efficient reasoning and better gener-
alization, particularly in algorithmic and logical tasks Nye et al. (2022); Lewkowycz et al. (2022);
Wang et al. (2023b). Building on this, performance can be further improved through multi-step
prompting and multi-path sampling techniques Chowdhery et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2022b); Zhou
et al. (2023a); Zhang et al. (2023); Fu et al. (2023).
This focus on CoT within in-context learning has since expanded to more structured learning ap-
proaches Yao et al. (2024); Besta et al. (2024). By adding reasoning examples of CoT style to the
instruction-tuning dataset, models enhance their problem-solving abilities more effectively than re-
lying solely on CoT during prompting Zelikman et al. (2022); Chung et al. (2024). As a result, CoT
is now shaping a new paradigm in language model development, marking a shift from simply scal-
ing data Kaplan et al. (2020); Hoffmann et al. (2022) to focusing on advanced reasoning strategies
Lightman et al. (2024), which leads to more effective learning outcomes.

    ∗
      These authors contributed equally.
    †
      A large part of this work was done while Kaiyue was at Tsinghua University.
    ‡
      This work is independent of and outside of the work at Amazon.
    1
      Our code is available at https://github.com/zhqwqwq/Learning-Parity-with-CoT.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     (a) Sample complexity of 4-          (b) Normalized attention entropy and evaluation accuracy
     layer 4-head transformer on          curves of 4-layer 4-head transformer on 𝑛 = 30, 𝑘 = 3 parity
     parity with 𝑛 = 30.                  problem.

Figure 1: (a) We show that, without Chain-of-Thought (CoT), the sample complexity for training
transformers to learn the parity function grows exponentially with the hardness parameter k. In
contrast, utilizing CoT significantly improves sample efficiency. (b) We also show that the sparsity
of attention layers, measured by normalized entropy (1), is crucial in the parity learning experiment.
In both CoT and non-CoT scenarios, as the attention layers become sparser—indicated by a rapid
decrease in normalized entropy—a corresponding jump in evaluation accuracy occurs.
While CoT’s success is well-established, understanding why it works is still a hotly debated topic
Saparov & He (2023); Prystawski et al. (2024). Recent theoretical studies suggest that CoT en-
hances a model’s expressiveness, increasing its representational capacity when the sequence is long
enough Feng et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024c). However, expressivity alone does not guarantee success.
Large language models often struggle with simple tasks—like counting the number of ’r’s in ”straw-
berry”—when not using CoT. Given the increasing model sizes, it seems unlikely that such tasks are
inherently inexpressible. This discrepancy calls for a deeper study of generalization, hinting the true
power of CoT may lie beyond the expressiveness.
In this paper, we study the benefit of CoT from the sample efficiency perspective. We provide con-
crete examples where expressiveness is not the limiting factor; that is, the function can be expressed
both with and without CoT by the transformers. We demonstrate, both in theory and in practice, that
without CoT, the learning requires exponentially more samples comparing to with CoT. Further, we
show that CoT sequences introduce sparse sequential dependence, thereby enhancing the sparsity in
the attention layers. We then show that transformers can efficiently optimize and generalize on such
sequences. We summarize our contributions as follows.

1. Theoretically, we show that while the parity problem can be expressed by a 1-layer transformer,
   learning requires exponentially many samples without CoT when the number of parameters is
   limited (Theorem 1 and 2). Meanwhile, for CoT data with sparse sequential dependence, a 1-
   layer transformer can learn the parity function and faithfully represent the sparse dependence in
   its attention pattern with almost linear samples with respect to sequence length(Theorem 3).
2. Empirically, we verify our analysis that training on parity function with CoT data requires only
   polynomial samples and will induce sparse and interpretable attention (Figure 3). We further
   show that evaluating and training on CoT data will also induce sparser attention on real-world
   dataset GSM-8k on pretrained language models.

2    M OTIVATING E XAMPLES : L EARNING PARITY F UNCTIONS
We start with empirically exploring the sample efficiency of training transformers to learn the class
of parity functions (Blum et al., 2003) with and without CoT. The parity functions exhibits simple
structure but yet hard to learn by traditional networks Abbe & Sandon (2018); Malach & Shalev-
Shwartz (2022). Specifically, given a set of n binary variables b1 , b2 , . . . , bn , a parity function takes
k secret variables bi1 , . . . bik and outputs 1 if the sum of these k variables is odd, and 0 if it is even:
                                   f (b1 , ..., bn ) = bi1 ⊕ bi2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ bik ,
where bi ∈ {0, 1} and ⊕ is the XOR operator. For example, f (b1 , b2 , b3 , b4 , b5 ) = b1 ⊕ b2 ⊕ b4 is
a 5-variable parity function with k = 3. The function f returns 1 if the sum of b1 , b2 and b4 is odd,
and 0 otherwise, independently of the value of b3 and b5 . Intuitively, the parameter k controls the
hardness of the problem. When k increases, the number of possible subsets grows exponentially,
making the identification of the correct secret set more challenging.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given a n-variable parity function f , we generate sequences of length n + 2 as auto-regressive
manner: b1 , · · · bn , bn+1 := 0 and bn+2 = f (b[1:n] ). To incorporate CoT, we break the sum of XOR
down into k steps and add all the intermediate steps into the sequence, i.e. including bi1 , bi1 ⊕ bi2 ,
· · · , bi1 ⊕ bi2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ bik . As a result, the CoT data has length n + k + 1. With the example function
f (b1 , b2 , b3 , b4 , b5 ) = b1 ⊕ b2 ⊕ b4 , one sampled sequence would be
          No CoT       0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0 , 0 ∈ {0, 1}7 , as b1 ⊕ b2 ⊕ b4 = 0 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 1 = 0.
                       | {z } |{z} |{z}
                          input    [EOS] answer

        With CoT       0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0 0, 1 , 0 ∈ {0, 1}9 , as b1 = 0, b1 ⊕ b2 = 1.
                       | {z } |{z} |{z} |{z}
                          input    [EOS] CoT answer

Next, we train transformer networks with and without CoT respectively, with a common held-out
test set, and compare their sample complexities. The sample complexity is defined as the amount of
data a model sees at the first time it achieves perfect validation accuracy. More precisely, we halt
the training process when the model reaches 100% validation accuracy and record the total number
of training examples used up to this point as the empirical sample complexity.
In Figure 1, we compare the empirical results of learning parity function with and without CoT. The
results show that the sample complexity without CoT (orange curve) grows exponentially, while
with CoT (blue curve), it increases linearly. In other words, incorporating CoT allows us to learn the
task with exponentially fewer samples. Additionally, it suggests that sparsity in the attention layers
plays a crucial role in the learning process. To explore why CoT enables transformers to learn more
efficiently, we formally define our problem setup below.

3     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide a formal analysis of the training dynamics of Transformers on the parity
problem, both with and without Chain of Thought (CoT). We select the parity problem as our testbed
because identifying a set of key variables amidst various confounding ones is a fundamental aspect
of many reasoning tasks, and parity serves as an abstraction of this process.
3.1   N OTATIONS AND D EFINITIONS

Parity Problem. Each token in our setting is either 0 or 1. We represent a sequence of length T
as b[1], . . . , b[T ]. A parity function is a function of form parityS (b) = ⊕j∈S b[j], where S is the
set of secret indices that is fixed during training and testing, and ⊕ is the XOR operator on binary
variables. The cardinal of the secret set k = |S| controls the hardness of the problem.
Definition 1 (Parity Problem (n, k) without CoT). Given a secret set S of cardinal k, we define the
parity problem without CoT as the following distribution of sequences pNoCoT :
                    b[i] ∼ U ({0, 1}), ∀i ∈ [1, n], b[n + 1] = 0, b[n + 2] = parityS (b).
where b[1], ..., b[n] are uniformly sampled from 0 and 1.
Definition 2 (Parity Problem (n, k) with CoT). Given a secret set S of cardinal k, we define the
parity problem with CoT as the following distribution of augmented sequences pCoT :
  b[i] ∼ U ({0, 1}), ∀i ∈ [1, n], b[n + 1] = 0, b[i + 1] = b[i] ⊕ b[S[i]], ∀i ∈ {n + 1, . . . , n + k}.
where S is any permutation of S, i.e. {S[i] | i = n + 1, . . . , n + k} = S.
When CoT is provided, the data includes a step-by-step computation of the desired parity function,
adding one variable at a time. Note that CoT is not unique for a given secret set since we can
arbitrarily permute S, given the commutative property of the XOR operator.
Transformer Architecture. To conduct the theoretical analysis, we simplify the Transformer archi-
tecture similar to prior works (see e.g. Wang et al. (2024b); Nichani et al. (2024); Li et al. (2023b)).
More precisely, we drop all the layer norms or batch normalization; simplify the positional embed-
ding; use a square matrix to represent the attention layer and concatenate the residual branch in a
Densenet fashion Huang et al. (2017). After simplification, the network still has strong expressive
power like the standard Transformers.
In a standard Transformer, an embedding layer matches each vocabulary token into a dense vector
of size d and then adds a positional embedding. In our case, we only have boolean tokens and the
sequence has constant length T . Hence, we simply freeze 2T unit vectors as the embedding vectors:


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 3 (Embedding Module). For any position  i ∈ [T ], we sample
                                                                    two embedding vectors ei,0
and ei,1 uniformly at random from unit hypercube U { √1d , − √1d }d . These embedding vectors are
frozen during training. Then for any binary sequence b ∈ {0, 1}T , the embedding is defined as

                                   E (b) = [e(i,b[i]) ]i∈[T ] ∈ Rd×T .
Due to the properties of the hypercube, with high probability, the embedding vectors are near-
orthogonal with each other.

Next, we define the attention layer. In standard architecture, the attention layer is derived from the
product of query and key matrices, i.e. QK T = XT W Q (W K )T X. In our case, we directly use a
full matrix XT AX to parameterize it, which has the same representation power.
Definition 4 (Attention Module). Given an input matrix X ∈ Rd×T and attention weight A, we
define the attention module as
                                 A(X) = X softmax(C + XT AX),

where C ∈ RT ×T is the autoregressive mask with value −∞ on the lower triangular matrix.

The attention module is then followed by a fully connected layer with ReLU activation:
Definition 5. We define the FFN function with width 2m over a matrix X ∈ R2d×T as
                                    FFN(X) = hT ReLU(W X).

Here W ∈ R2m×2d , h ∈ R2m×o with o being the output dimension and ReLU is element-wise.
Finally, we concatenate the modules into a simplified Transformer block.
Definition 6 (Simplified Transformer Block). We define a simplified Transformer block as,

                                                   E (b)
                                 T (b) = FFN                   ,
                                                 A (E (b))

where E is the embedding module, A is the attention module and FFN the fully connected layer.
An L-layer Transformer consists of a composition of L such blocks, with the embedding module E
appearing only in the initial layer. The intermediate dimension is set to d, while the output dimension
of the final layer is 1.

Compared with the standard residual structure, we use a Densenet structure to concatenate the resid-
ual branch with identity branch. Again, this transformation does not affect the representation power
of the network, which is the standard practice in previous theoretical analysis (see e.g. Wang et al.
(2024b); Nichani et al. (2024)).
Loss function. To simplify our analysis, we use hinge loss ℓ(ŷ, y) = max{(−1)y ŷ + 1, 0} as
the loss function. We define the next token prediction loss of a boolean sequence b as L(w) =
                                          Pn+k
ℓ(T (L) (b)[n + 1], b[n + 2]) and L(w) = i=n+1 ℓ(T (L) (b)[i], b[i + 1]) for with and without CoT
setup respectively, where w denotes all the trainable parameters.

3.2   E XPONENTIAL S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY WITHOUT C OT

We now present analysis in the no CoT setup. First, we show that the parity problem is easy to
represent with the simplified Transformer architecture:
Theorem 1 (Easy to Represent). Consider the Transformer model defined in Definition 6, for any
δ < 0.1 and large enough n, when the number of secret indices k is in [n/ log5 (n/δ), n/ log4 (n/δ)],
with probability at least 1 − δ over the randomness of embedding e, there exists a weight configu-
ration of the Transformer with dimension d = Θ(k log(n/δ)) and width 2m = O(k) with Θ(log n)
precision of the weights and activations, such that d2 + dm = o(nk/ log n), and it achieves perfect
accuracy on the parity problem (n, k) without CoT, i.e.

                         ∀b ∼ pNoCoT , sgn (T (b)[n + 1]) = (−1)b[n+2]+1 .


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In other words, the model possesses sufficient expressive power to represent any parity function,
even in the absence of the chain of thought. Therefore, we are in the representational-sufficient
regime where expressiveness is not the bottleneck. The proof of this statement is based on random
matrix theory and concentration inequalities, which we defer to Appendix B.2.
While the function is expressible, this does not guarantee that the solution can be easily found.
In fact, we show that achieving a perfectly accurate solution using a gradient-based optimization
method requires an exponential number of samples in k assuming the memory, i.e. space complexity,
to perform optimization is bounded throughout the training.
Theorem 2 (Hard to Learn). For any randomly initialized simplified Transformer model with con-
stant layers, when the embedding dimension d and width 2m satisfies d2 + dm = o(nk/ log(n)), for
any constant number of passes q, when the model is trained with q−pass stochastic gradient descent
with O((d2 + dm) log n) memory, the sample complexity required to learn the parity problem (n, k)
without CoT to any nontrivial accuracy a > 50% with nontrivial probability p > 50% is 2Ω(k) .

The proof is deferred to Appendix B.3. We use results from the classical online learning communi-
ties (Lyu et al., 2023) to show that in the regime where the memory required to perform the training
is less than nk, the model can’t effectively store information about enough samples inside the pa-
rameters during training, and hence can’t infer the secret indices effectively. Here the parameters k
denotes the size of the secret set S and the sample complexity grows exponentially when k grows.

3.3   P OLYNOMIAL S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY WITH C OT

The result in Theorem 2 presents a seemingly negative outcome for learning algorithmic reasoning,
as the model requires exponentially many samples relative to k. However, in our main result, Theo-
rem 3, we will demonstrate that the sample complexity can be significantly reduced if a step-by-step
derivation is provided. In other words, CoT is much more sample efficient, where model can effec-
tively learn complex relationships as long as each token depends on only a few previous tokens.
We will use the following initialization of the 1-layer Transformer model. The attention is initialized
to be uniform (A = 0) and the contribution of attention output is initialized to be zero (Wr,d+1:2d =
0). The parameter h in the FFN and the word embedding E is fixed during training.
Assumption 1 (Initialization). At initialization,
                                                 n+k   1
                                                 X     X                           1                1
∀r ∈ [2m], A = 0, Wr,d+1:2d = 0, Wr,1:d =                  νr,i,b ei,b , h1:m =      , hm+1:2m = −    .
                                               i=n+1 b=0
                                                                                  2m               2m

Here νr,i,b is independent random variable sampled uniformly from {−ϵ, ϵ}.

We can then train the model with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and get the following theorem.
Theorem 3 (Easy to Learn with CoT). For any constant δ ∈ (0, 1), when the number of secret
indices k is in [n/ log5 (n/δ), n/ log4 (n/δ)], with probability 1−δ, a randomly initialized simplified
Transformer (see Assumption 1) with o(nk) parameters trained for constant steps using mini-batch
SGD with Õ(n) samples using appropriate hyperparameters (see Assumption 2) can reach perfect
accuracy on a parity problem (n, k) with CoT,
                   ∀b ∼ pCoT , i ∈ {n + 1, . . . , n + k}, sgn (T (b)[i]) = b[i + 1].
Furthermore, after training, the attention pattern is interpretable and one-hot in the sense that, for
any b ∼ pCoT , i ∈ {n + 1, · · · , n + k}, j ≤ i,
                      softmax(C + E(b)AE(b))[j, i] − 1(j = S[i]) < 1/n8 .
Moreover, the result still holds even if all the weights and activations are in Θ(log n) precision.

This theorem indicates that the attention module can successfully extract the sparse sequential de-
pendencies in the CoT data and faithfully represent it in the attention pattern, which is validated
in our experiments (see Figure 3). It is also amongst the first optimization dynamics analysis of
Transformers using finite-sample gradients rather than population gradients. We delay the full proof
of the theorem to Appendix B.5.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof Sketch. In our analysis, the dynamics of the model includes three key phases. In the first
phase, the weight of the FFN layers become correlated with the embeddings associated to the secret
indices. In the second phase, this correlation caused the attention module to receive a strong signal
to amplify the attention weight on the corresponding secret indices at each position. The attention
pattern will become one-hot after this step. Finally, in the third phase, the FFN layers learn the
correct mapping to the output, utilizing both the embedding at the current token and the retrieved
embedding from the secret indices as indicated by the attention.
Phase 1. Configuring the FFN At initialization, as the FFN weight corresponds to the attention
output (Wr,d+1:2d ) is initialized to be zero. The set of neurons activated at each position i ∈ [n +
1, n + k] is solely determined by the word embedding e(i,b[i]) at the position. Because ei,b are nearly
orthogonal, it holds that ⟨ei,b[i] , Wr,1:d ⟩ ≈ νr,i,b for all i and r with high probability. As a result,
for a fixed i and b[i], the set of activated neurons at position i is {r | νr,i,b[i] > 0}. Therefore, at
initialization, the MLP can be viewed as an ensemble of multiple linear functions specialized to each
position and boolean value. We can show that when the learning rate is small, the set of activated
neurons at each position remains the same through the training process. Hence, we can conceptually
view the FFN function as a set of different linear functions applied independently at each position
and value. We will denote this set of linear weight as κt,i,b (formally defined in Lemma 18).
As the attention weight matrix A is initialized as zero, the attention pattern will be uniform at
initialization. Notice that in the parity data with CoT, the only position whose value correlates with
b[i + 1] when conditioned on b[i] is S[i]. This suggests that the linear weight κ1,i,b[i] will have a
stronger correlation with the embedding e(S[i],b[j]) than other embeddings.
This step crucially relies on the sparse dependency in the CoT data. The strong linear correlation
will not be present in the data without CoT when k > 1, as every token b[i] for i ∈ [n + 1] will be
uncorrelated with the desired output b[n + 2] in such case.
Phase 2. Learning the Sparse Attention At the second step, as the FFN weight corresponds to the
attention output is no longer zero, the attention weight matrix A will receive a non-zero gradient. By
the chain rule, the gradient corresponding to how the attention from i−th token attends to the j−th
token softmax(C +XT AX)[j, i] will be larger when the approximate contribution of the embedding
of the j−th token to the output at the i−th token ⟨κ1,i,b[i] , e(j,b[j]) ⟩ is larger. This suggests that the
attention will be amplified on the index that has a strong correlation with the output at the current
token, which is the secret index S[i]. This step will make the attention pattern approximately one-hot
as in the theorem statement.
Phase 3. Learning the Output Mapping At the final step, as the attention pattern is one-hot,
the FFN layer only needs to learn a mapping from the embedding at the current token and the
embedding at the secret index to the output. As the mapping is linear conditioned on the embedding
at the current token, the FFN layer can learn the correct mapping within a single step. This step will
make the model reach perfect accuracy on the parity problem with CoT.

4    E MPIRICAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate and extend our theoretical findings through comprehensive experiments
in the following three aspects: First, we empirically confirm that CoT reduces the sample complexity
of transformers in learning the parity problem. Second, we conduct multi-pass training of transform-
ers without CoT, as a complement to the established lower bound (Theorem 2) which only applies
to constant-pass training. The results indicate that multi-pass training indeed improves the models’
ability to learn parity problems. Third, we conduct experiments on the GSM8K dataset (Cobbe et al.,
2021) to show that CoT introduces sparse sequential dependence on real-world training data. Al-
though necessary simplifications on transformer are made in Section 3 to develop theoretical results,
we use the standard transformer architecture in the subsequent experiments following the GPT-2
architecture (Radford et al., 2019) with trainable position embeddings unless otherwise specified.
4.1 PARITY L EARNING WITH M ULTI - LAYER T RANSFORMERS
In this section, we conduct an ablation study on the sample complexity of transformers with standard
GPT-2 architectures and one-pass training, with and without CoT.
Ablation study on sample complexity (Figure 2). We train transformers on parity problem with
n = 30 and k = 1, 2, 3, 4, with and without CoT, varying layers and heads from 1 to 4. We choose


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) Sample complexity of transformers with varying numbers of layers and heads on parity problem with n=30


      (b) Sample complexity of 1-layer 1-head               (c) Sample complexity of 4-layer 4-head
      transformer on parity problem with 𝑛 = 30             transformer on parity problem with 𝑛 = 30

Figure 2: The sample complexity for learning parity without CoT increases exponentially with k.
CoT significantly reduces the sample complexity, demonstrating exponential 0.0improvement
                                                                                0.2 0.4 0.6
                                                                                            across
                                                                                            0.8 1.0
varying numbers of heads and layers.


(a) Sample complexity of 1-layer           (b) The attention pattern of 1-layer 1-head transformer
1-head transformer on parity               trained on (𝑛 = 40, 𝑘 = 20) parity problem, detailed in
problem with 𝑛 = 100 using CoT.            Section 4.1.

Figure 3: (a) When n is fixed, the sample complexity of learning parity with CoT grows approx-
imately linearly with k. (b) The attention pattern learned by the transformer with CoT is inter-
pretable, as the i-th output token of CoT predominantly attends to secret index S[i].
the best performer across learning rates from 6×10−5 , 8×10−5 , and 1×10−4 . At each step, a fresh
batch of training data is sampled, with a maximum budget of 107 samples. We record the number of
samples seen by the model before reaching an evaluation accuracy of 1 as the sample complexity.
Results. Figure 2 shows that training with CoT [first row in Figure 2 (a)] consistently achieves better
sample efficiency than training without CoT [second row in Figure 2 (a)]. Moreover, for a fixed
configuration of heads and layers, the sample complexity without CoT grows exponentially with
the parameter k. In contrast, CoT greatly reduces the sample complexity, showing an exponential
improvement across different numbers of heads and layers. These findings are consistent with our
theoretical analysis.
Training with CoT induce sparse and interpretable attentions (Figure 3). We evaluate the
sample complexity of a 1-layer, 1-head transformer on larger parity problems (n = 100 and
20 ≤ k ≤ 100). Without CoT, training exceeds the sample budget when k ≥ 4. However, with
CoT, we can successfully train for any k. Figure 3b shows the attention pattern of a 1-layer, 1-head
transformer trained on a parity problem with (n = 40, k = 20) using CoT on a random query. In


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                            1.0


      Evaluation Accuracy
                                                                                                         4


                                                                                          Layer number
                            0.8                                                                          3
                                                                                                         2
                            0.6                                                                          1
                                                                                                             1 2 3 4
                                                                                                             Head number
                                  5   200         400        600          800         1000
                                                   epoch number
Figure 4: Evaluation accuracy of transformers on the (n = 20, k = 6) parity problem without
CoT. The model is trained on a dataset of 10, 000 samples for 1, 000 epochs. Almost all layer-head
configuration achieve perfect evaluation accuracy. Adding more heads is more effective than adding
layers. The blue dashed line marks the with CoT setup, which achieves perfect accuracy in 5 epochs.
this case, CoT processes the secret variables in ascending order. The i-th row illustrates the atten-
tion weight of the i-th token attending to the previous ones, with indices corresponding to secret
variables highlighted in red.
Results. In Figure 3a, we show that training with CoT succeed with large n and k. Moreover,
the empirical result suggests that the sample complexity of learning parity with CoT grows approx-
imately linearly with k. This shows a clear contrast to without CoT setting where the required
samples explodes exponentially. To validate our theorem on learning the sparse dependence, we
show in Figure 3b that the attention pattern learned by the transformer with CoT is interpretable.
Specifically, the i-th output token of CoT primarily focuses on the i-th secret variable, with minimal
attention given to other tokens.
4.2          M ULTI - PASS T RAINING I MPROVES PARITY L EARNING WITHOUT C OT

In our theory, we only establish lower bounds for the sample complexity of learning parity problems
with constant pass SGD training. To complement the established lower bounds for transformers
learning parity (Theorem 2), we conduct empirical experiments by training transformers without
CoT using multi-pass training. We make two observations below. First, the results demonstrate
that training with repeated data can help Transformers learn the parity function, although this process
still consumes significantly more computation (epochs) than trained on CoT data (Figure 4). Second,
a key difference between one-pass and multi-pass training is the development of sparse attention
(see Figure 5 Right), similar to the role of CoT shown in the previous section. This shows that the
development of sparse attention is crucial even in when training without CoT on the parity data.
Experiment protocols. On (n = 20, k = 6) parity problem, we conduct multi-pass training without
CoT. In Figure 4, the models are trained with 104 samples for 1000 epochs, with the number of layers
and heads ranging from 1 to 4. In Figure 5, we compare the training of 4-layer 4-head transformer
on 5 · 104 and 106 samples respectively. The learning rate is initialized 10−4 .
Normalized attention entropy. To measure attention sparsity, we introduce the concept of normal-
ized attention entropy for each attention head (illustrated in Figure 5 Right). Let P ℓ,h (x)[i] denote
the attention score distribution produced by the h-th head in the ℓ-th layer at the i-th token of input
x. The normalized attention entropy for the input x is then defined as:
                                                              H(P ℓ,h (x)[i])
                                            Ent(x; ℓ, h) = min                ∈ [0, 1],                                    (1)
                                                          i≥2    log i
                    R
where H(P) = − log(P)dP is the entropy of distribution P. The normalization term log i rep-
resents the entropy of a uniform distribution over i tokens, account for the varying context length.
The minimum is taken over different tokens in x since attention heads may specialize in extracting
information for specific tokens. As a result, a lower normalized attention entropy indicates a sparser
attention pattern. To compute the normalized attention entropy for each head, we would average the
normalized entropy across all question-answer pairs in the validation set.
Results. As shown in Figure 4, when trained on 104 samples, which only accounts for a small por-
tion (∼ 1%) of all possible inputs (220 ≈ 106 ), most of the transformer architectures we examined
achieve perfect evaluation accuracy given sufficient epochs. While the k = 6 problem is intractable
with one-pass training without CoT, these results demonstrate that multi-pass training can indeed en-
hance learning in the no-CoT setup. However, CoT is by far the most effective accelerator, achieving
perfect accuracy in just 5 epochs, significantly outperforming the multi-pass no-CoT training.


                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: 4-layer 4-head transformer trained on the (n = 20, k = 6) parity problem without CoT
using multi-pass training, detailed in Section 4.2. When trained on a small dataset of 50000 samples,
the model achieves perfect evaluation accuracy (Top), accompanied by a significant decrease in en-
tropy. Surprisingly, when trained on an even larger training set with 1000000 samples, the model
fails to learn (Bottom), and both the training loss and the normalized attention entropy remain ele-
vated. This shows that the development of attention sparsity may improve optimization.
Although learning without CoT is less efficient, it offers a ”slow-mode” trajectory. In Figure 5 (Top),
the no-CoT loss function initially plateaus before eventually dropping to zero. During this plateau,
the entropy in the attention layers continues to decrease, indicating that feature learning is occurring
gradually. When all the attention heads become sparse, a transition phase occurs in the loss and
accuracy: the loss drops to zero, and evaluation accuracy jumps to 1. In contrast, in the failure case
shown in Figure 5 (Bottom), the entropy of the attention layers remains high throughout.
This experiment on no-CoT confirms that sparse attention is crucial for parity learning. As previ-
ously demonstrated in Figure 1, CoT accelerates learning by quickly inducing sparsity. This suggests
that CoT not only improves the sample efficiency but also improve the optimization landscape by
facilitating sparsity, due to the introduction of sparse dependencies added in the intermediate steps.
4.3 C OT I NDUCES S PARSITY ON R EAL -W ORLD DATA
Now we move from the synthetic parity problem to real world experiment on GSM8K dataset of
grade-school math word problems (Cobbe et al., 2021). We observe that:
1. Real-world CoT data also exhibits sparse sequential dependence, leading to a sparser attention
   pattern in pre-trained models.
2. Fine-tuning on CoT data further enhances the models’ attention sparsity on the input data.
Experiment protocols. In Figure 6, we examine two data types: With CoT, where inputs from
GSM8K dataset are concatenated with ground truth answers that include multiple reasoning steps,
and No CoT, where inputs are directly concatenated with the final answer. We evaluate two lan-
guage models: the pre-trained model Qwen2-7B (Yang et al., 2024) and the specialized mathemat-
ics model Qwen2-7B-Math (Qwen, 2024) which is fine-tuned from Qwen2-7B on a mathematics-
specific corpus with CoT data. We plot the normalized attention entropy (Equation (1)) across
different heads. More details can be found in the Appendix Appendix C.1.
Results. Unlike the synthetic parity problem, the sequential dependency of real-world data is hard to
measure directly. However, it can be inferred from the attention sparsity of pre-trained models when
they process such data as input. As shown in Figure 6, comparing the normalized attention entropy
of the same pre-trained model Qwen2-7B on different types of data, we can see that the entropy is
lower for With CoT data compared to No CoT data, indicating that real-world CoT data indeed
exhibits a sparser structure. Furthermore, on the same With CoT data, Qwen2-Math-7B model
demonstrates lower attention entropy compared to Qwen2-7B model, suggesting that fine-tuning on
CoT data promotes the development of sparser attention patterns in the model.

5   A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Parity Learning. The most relevant work to ours is Wies et al. (2023), which shows that subtask
decomposition enables learning the parity problem with polynomial sample complexity in recurrent
neural networks (RNNs). Their learnability results rely on techniques from Wang et al. (2022a),
which operate within the NTK linearization regime of RNNs. In contrast, the Transformers an-


                                                   9
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                                   Layer 1              Layer 11               Layer 21              Layer 28


Normalized Attention Entropy
                                                0.4                   0.3
                           0.4                  0.3                                          0.1                     Qwen2-7B+
                                                                      0.2                                            No CoT
                                                0.2                                                                  Qwen2-7B+
                           0.2                                                                                       With CoT
                                                0.1                   0.1                                            Qwen2-Math-7B+
                                                                                                                     With CoT
                           0.0 1             28 0.0 1              28 0.0 1               28 0.0 1              28
                                    head                 head                      head               head

     Figure 6: We compare the normalized attention entropy of the pre-trained Qwen2-7B and math-
     specialized Qwen2-Math-7B models on the GSM8K dataset with and without CoT prompting (Sec-
     tion 4.3). Each bar represents the entropy of an attention head. The Qwen2-7B model exhibits
     sparser attention when processing CoT data, indicating that real-world CoT data has a sparser struc-
     ture. The entropy difference between the Qwen2-7B and Qwen2-Math-7B model suggests that
     fine-tuning on CoT data promotes the development of sparser attention patterns of the model.
     alyzed in our work exhibit feature learning and identify the sparse secret set within the attention
     module. On the positive side, a line of works that studies optimization dynamics of neural networks
     on parity (Kou et al., 2024; Barak et al., 2023; Edelman et al., 2023; Daniely & Malach, 2020; Abbe
     et al., 2023; 2024b) show that nΩ(k) samples is sufficient to learn parity, which is close to the sta-
     tistical query lower bound (Kearns, 1998). On the negative side, it is well-established that learning
     parity using gradient descent (GD) requires Ω(nk ) iterations due to the SQ lower bound (Kearns,
     1998). For SGD learning, Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017); Abbe & Sandon (2020) showed that an
     exponential number of samples is necessary when SGD is hindered by additional noise or when
     the number of weights updated in each step is constrained. However, it remains unclear whether
     standard mini-batch SGD will still need exponential sample complexity. In our paper, we take the
     alternative approach to consider the training as an online algorithm with bounded memory (parame-
     ters) and utilize results from online learning literature to provide a rigorous exponential lower bound
     (Lyu et al., 2023; Kol et al., 2017). Hahn & Rofin (2024) shows that while parity is easy to represent
     using Transformers, the sensitivity structure of the function will require the representation to have
     large weight norms. A recent work (Abbe et al., 2024a) conjectured that a distribution is weakly
     learnable by a Transformer if and only if it has constant globality, which is supported by empirical
     experiments. The work also highlights the parity problem as a notable special case.
     Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT). CoT is the technique to let the model generate a reasoning process be-
     fore final answers. CoT prompting has proven effective in enhancing language models’ reasoning
     capabilities (Wei et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Zhou et al., 2023b; Wang &
     Zhou, 2024; Creswell et al., 2023). Training with CoT data has further improved the model’s capa-
     bility in performing complex reasoning (see Qwen (2024); Yue et al. (2023); Yu et al. (2024); Kim
     et al. (2023) and reference therein). Different lines of work have explored the effect of CoT. From the
     representation theory perspective, works including Feng et al. (2024); Merrill & Sabharwal (2024);
     Li et al. (2024d); Nowak et al. (2024); Wen et al. (2024) show that CoT can provably expand the
     representation power of neural architectures including Transformers and RNNs. From the statistical
     approximation level, prompting with CoT reduces the statistical error (Hu et al., 2024; Prystawski
     et al., 2023). Li et al. (2023a) studies how MLP learns with CoT data. Li et al. (2024a) studies how
     Transformers learn to perform CoT through prompting using gradient descent. We differ from this
     work as (1) we focus on how Transformer captures the sparse sequential dependency in CoT, which
     is not reflected in their data modeling; (2) we study zero-shot CoT data directly. Dutta et al. (2024);
     Wang et al. (2024a) studies pre-trained Transformers’ activation on CoT data. They highlight the
     attention head’s role in moving the essential information from the context to the reasoning process,
     which is consistent with our theoretical insight. Concurrently with our work, Kim & Suzuki (2024a)
     theoretically demonstrated that CoT reduces the number of gradient steps required to solve the parity
     problem. While their analysis focuses on GD with a noisy oracle, our work investigates mini-batch
     SGD and provides theoretical guarantees on the exponential reduction in sample complexity.
     We defer other related works to Appendix A.
     6 C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS .
     Our work demonstrates that Transformers trained on Chain-of-Thought (CoT) data with sparse se-
     quential dependencies can efficiently learn sparse attention mechanisms, accurately capturing these
     dependencies while requiring exponentially fewer samples than models trained without CoT. Our
     current analysis of CoT training assumes that each subsequent token depends on exactly one token
     in the context and focuses solely on the parity function. A promising future direction is to explore
     more general scenarios where each token depends on multiple previous tokens and extends to func-
     tion classes beyond parity.


                                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Jingzhao Zhang is supported by National Key R&D Program of China 2024YFA1015800 and
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute Innovation Program.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe and Colin Sandon.          Provable limitations of deep learning.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.06369, 2018.
Emmanuel Abbe and Colin Sandon. Poly-time universality and limitations of deep learning, 2020.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.02992.
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. Sgd learning on neural networks:
  leap complexity and saddle-to-saddle dynamics, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2302.11055.
Emmanuel Abbe, Samy Bengio, Aryo Lotfi, Colin Sandon, and Omid Saremi. How far can trans-
  formers reason? the locality barrier and inductive scratchpad. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06467,
  2024a.
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
  necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
  networks, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.08658.
Boaz Barak, Benjamin L. Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, Eran Malach, and Cyril Zhang.
  Hidden progress in deep learning: Sgd learns parities near the computational limit, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.08799.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gian-
 inazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al. Graph of
 thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, 2024.
Avrim Blum, Adam Kalai, and Hal Wasserman. Noise-tolerant learning, the parity problem, and the
  statistical query model. J. ACM, 50(4):506–519, jul 2003. doi: 10.1145/792538.792543.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learn-
  ing in transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Siyu Chen, Heejune Sheen, Tianhao Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Training dynamics of multi-head
  softmax attention for in-context learning: Emergence, convergence, and optimality, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19442.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240), 2023.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pel-
  lat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao,
  Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin,
  Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(70), 2024.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Frank Cole, Yulong Lu, Riley O’Neill, and Tianhao Zhang. Provable in-context learning of linear
  systems and linear elliptic pdes with transformers, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2409.12293.
Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. Selection-inference: Exploiting large lan-
  guage models for interpretable logical reasoning. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Amit Daniely and Eran Malach. Learning parities with neural networks, 2020. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2002.07400.
Subhabrata Dutta, Joykirat Singh, Soumen Chakrabarti, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. How to think
  step-by-step: A mechanistic understanding of chain-of-thought reasoning, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.18312.
Benjamin L. Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, Eran Malach, and Cyril Zhang. Pareto frontiers
  in neural feature learning: Data, compute, width, and luck, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2309.03800.
Guhao Feng, Bohang Zhang, Yuntian Gu, Haotian Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards revealing
  the mystery behind chain of thought: A theoretical perspective. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Guhao Feng, Bohang Zhang, Yuntian Gu, Haotian Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards revealing
  the mystery behind chain of thought: a theoretical perspective. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2024.
Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter Clark, and Tushar Khot. Complexity-based prompting
  for multi-step reasoning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Michael Hahn and Mark Rofin. Why are sensitive functions hard for transformers?, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09963.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Henni-
  gan, Eric Noland, Katherine Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Oriol Vinyals, Jack William Rae, and Laurent
  Sifre. An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Xinyang Hu, Fengzhuo Zhang, Siyu Chen, and Zhuoran Yang. Unveiling the statistical foundations
  of chain-of-thought prompting methods, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.
  14511.
Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected
  convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, 2017.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael Kearns. Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. Journal of the ACM
 (JACM), 45(6):983–1006, 1998.

Juno Kim and Taiji Suzuki. Transformers provably solve parity efficiently with chain of thought.
  2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08633.

Juno Kim and Taiji Suzuki. Transformers learn nonlinear features in context: Nonconvex mean-
  field dynamics on the attention landscape, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
  01258.

Seungone Kim, Se June Joo, Doyoung Kim, Joel Jang, Seonghyeon Ye, Jamin Shin, and Minjoon
  Seo. The cot collection: Improving zero-shot and few-shot learning of language models via
  chain-of-thought fine-tuning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14045.

Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
  2014.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and
  Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Gillat Kol, Ran Raz, and Avishay Tal. Time-space hardness of learning sparse parities. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 1067–1080,
  2017.

Yiwen Kou, Zixiang Chen, Quanquan Gu, and Sham M. Kakade. Matching the statistical query
  lower bound for k-sparse parity problems with stochastic gradient descent, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2404.12376.

Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Johan Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski,
  Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo,
  Yuhuai Wu, Behnam Neyshabur, Guy Gur-Ari, and Vedant Misra. Solving quantitative reasoning
  problems with language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Songtao Lu, Xiaodong Cui, and Pin-Yu Chen. How do nonlinear trans-
  formers acquire generalization-guaranteed cot ability? In High-dimensional Learning Dynamics
  2024: The Emergence of Structure and Reasoning, 2024a. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=8pM8IrT6Xo.

Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Shuai Zhang, Sijia Liu, and Pin-Yu Chen. Learning on transformers
  is provable low-rank and sparse: A one-layer analysis. In 2024 IEEE 13rd Sensor Array and
  Multichannel Signal Processing Workshop (SAM), pp. 1–5, 2024b. doi: 10.1109/SAM60225.
  2024.10636559.

Yingcong Li, Kartik Sreenivasan, Angeliki Giannou, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak.
  Dissecting chain-of-thought: Compositionality through in-context filtering and learning, 2023a.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18869.

Yuchen Li, Yuanzhi Li, and Andrej Risteski. How do transformers learn topic structure: Towards
  a mechanistic understanding. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
  Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 19689–19729. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v202/li23p.html.

Zhiyuan Li, Hong Liu, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Chain of thought empowers transformers to
  solve inherently serial problems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024c.

Zhiyuan Li, Hong Liu, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Chain of thought empowers transformers to
  solve inherently serial problems, 2024d. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12875.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Xin Lyu, Avishay Tal, Hongxun Wu, and Junzhao Yang. Tight time-space lower bounds for constant-
  pass learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08070.

Eran Malach and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. When hardness of approximation meets hardness of learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23, 2022.

William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expressive power of transformers with chain of thought,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07923.

Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D. Lee. How transformers learn causal structure with
  gradient descent, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14735.

Franz Nowak, Anej Svete, Alexandra Butoi, and Ryan Cotterell. On the representational capacity of
  neural language models with chain-of-thought reasoning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2406.14197.

Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show your work:
 Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. In Deep Learning for Code
 Workshop, 2022.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.

Ben Prystawski, Michael Y. Li, and Noah D. Goodman. Why think step by step? reasoning emerges
  from the locality of experience, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03843.

Ben Prystawski, Michael Li, and Noah Goodman. Why think step by step? reasoning emerges from
  the locality of experience. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Team Qwen.     Introducing qwen2-math.               https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/
  qwen2-math/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-09-28.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Abulhair Saparov and He He. Language models are greedy reasoners: A systematic formal analysis
  of chain-of-thought. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, and Shaked Shammah. Failures of gradient-based deep learning,
  2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.07950.

Heejune Sheen, Siyu Chen, Tianhao Wang, and Harrison H. Zhou. Implicit regularization of gradient
  flow on one-layer softmax attention, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08699.

Yuandong Tian, Yiping Wang, Beidi Chen, and Simon S Du. Scan and snap: Understand-
  ing training dynamics and token composition in 1-layer transformer. In A. Oh, T. Nau-
  mann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 71911–71947. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/e359ebe56ba306b674e8952349c6049e-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Roman Vershynin. High-Dimensional Probability: An Introduction with Applications in Data
  Science, volume 47 of Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics. Cam-
  bridge University Press, 2018. ISBN 978-1-108-41590-3. doi: 10.1017/9781108231596. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231596.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
  Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language
  models, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.04091.
Lifu Wang, Bo Shen, Bo Hu, and Xing Cao. On the provable generalization of recurrent neural
  networks, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.14142.
Xuezhi Wang and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought reasoning without prompting, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10200.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. Rationale-
  augmented ensembles in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00747, 2022b.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Zhiwei Wang, Yunji Wang, Zhongwang Zhang, Zhangchen Zhou, Hui Jin, Tianyang Hu, Jiacheng
  Sun, Zhenguo Li, Yaoyu Zhang, and Zhi-Qin John Xu. Towards understanding how transformer
  perform multi-step reasoning with matching operation, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2405.15302.
Zixuan Wang, Stanley Wei, Daniel Hsu, and Jason D. Lee. Transformers provably learn sparse
  token selection while fully-connected nets cannot, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2406.06893.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Kaiyue Wen, Xingyu Dang, and Kaifeng Lyu. Rnns are not transformers (yet): The key bottleneck
  on in-context retrieval, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18510.
Kevin Christian Wibisono and Yixin Wang. In-context learning from training on unstructured data:
  The role of co-occurrence, positional information, and training data structure. In ICML 2024
  Workshop on Theoretical Foundations of Foundation Models.
Kevin Christian Wibisono and Yixin Wang. How in-context learning emerges from training on
  unstructured data: The role of co-occurrence, positional information, and noise structures. In
  ICML 2024 Workshop on Theoretical Foundations of Foundation Models, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=55DHL6rJwK.
Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. Sub-task decomposition enables learning in se-
  quence to sequence tasks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen2 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.10671, 2024.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, James T. Kwok, Zhen-
  guo Li, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions
  for large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.12284.
Xiang Yue, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yao Fu, Wenhao Huang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen.
  Mammoth: Building math generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05653.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. STar: Bootstrapping reasoning with
  reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in
  large language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03493.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in
  large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H. Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables
  complex reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2023a.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables com-
  plex reasoning in large language models, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
  10625.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Transformer Optimization Dynamics. Our works fall in the line of works that studies the opti-
mization dynamics of Transformers on synthetic datasets (Li et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2024; Kim
& Suzuki, 2024b; Wibisono & Wang; Chan et al., 2022; Wibisono & Wang, 2024; Cole et al., 2024;
Sheen et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2023; Nichani et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b).
Similar to our works, Wang et al. (2024b) highlights that Transformers can learn to select sparse
critical tokens from the context on linear data. We differ from their work in studying the mini-batch
optimization dynamics on nonlinear data and hence establishing sample complexity bounds.

B     O MITTED P ROOF
B.1     N OTATION AND A SSUMPTIONS .

We will denote a sequence of binary variables as b[1], . . . , b[T ] with b[i] ∈ {0, 1}. We will use [j]
to denote variables corresponding to the j−th token dimension without otherwise specified.

B.1.1      T RAINING S PECIFICATION
Training Update We will consider the following 1-pass SGD with batch size B:

                                   B n+k
                                   X X
                          L(t) =                ℓ(T [w(t) ](b(t,s) )[i], b(t,s) [i + 1]).
                                   s=1 i=n+1
                                               1
                       w(t+1) = w(t) − ηt        ∇w L(t) .
                                               B
Here w includes A and W . We will leave h unchanged for the simplicity of analysis.

B.2     R EPRESENTATION T HEORY

Proof of Theorem 1. We will set d = Θ(k log(n/δ)) and m = k + 1. We will use p(x, y) as
shorthand for 2(x − 1) + y + 1.
Define embedding matrix M as follows
                                              Mp(i,b) = eTS[i],b .
for {S[1], . . . , S[p]} = S. Then M ∈ R2k×d .
Lemma 1. For large enough n, with probability 1 − δ, it holds that
                             ∥M T ∥op = O(1).           λmin (M M T ) > 1/12.
                                                                                  p
Proof. The first result follows from Lemma 28, noted that K = Θ(                      1/d). The second result
follows from Lemma 29.
Lemma 2. With probability 1 − δ/4 over the randomness of embedding ej,b for j ∈ S, b ∈ {0, 1},
there exists uj,b , satisfying that ∀j ∈ S, b ∈ {0, 1},
                      ∀j ′ ∈ S, b′ ∈ {0, 1}, ⟨uj,b , ej ′ ,b′ ⟩ = 1((j, b) = (j ′ , b′ )).
Further,
                                            X                      √
                                     ∥                 uj,b ∥2 = O( k).
                                         j∈S,b∈{0,1}


Proof. We can simply choose
                                  uS[i],b = M T (M M T )−1 o2(i−1)+b .
with o2(i−1)+b being the one-hot vector in R2k .


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 3. When the event in Lemma 2 happens, there exists vj ,
                                                  ⟨vj , ej,0 ⟩ = ⟨vj , ej,1 ⟩ = 1.
                                              ′
                                        ∀j ̸= j, j ∈ S, ⟨vj ′ , ej,b ⟩ = 0.
Further,
                                                      X               √
                                                  ∥         vj ∥2 ≤ O( k).
                                                      j∈S


Proof. We can choose vj = uj,0 + uj,1 .
Lemma 4. When vi defined in Lemma 2 exists, for all j ̸∈ S, b ∈ {0, 1}, with probability 1 − δ, it
holds that
                                   X
                                |⟨     vj ′ , ej,b ⟩| ≤ 1/2.
                                                   j ′ ∈S

                                                                     P                      √
Proof. Noted that ej,b is independent from vj ′ , assuming V = j ′ ∈S vj ′ , then ∥V ∥2 = O( k),
using Azuma-Hoeffding Bound, with probability 1 − δ/2
                                       P                               r
            X                         ∥ j ′ ∈S vj ′ ∥2 p                 k log(2k/δ)   1
         |⟨       vj ′ , ej,b ⟩| = O(      √            log(2k/δ)) = O(              )≤ .
                                             d                                d        2
           j ′ ∈S

The proof is then completed.
                                                                                P                                P
Assuming the event in Lemmas 2 and 4 happens, defined V =                              j ′ ∈S vj
                                                                                                   ′   and U =   j ′ ∈S uj ,1
                                                                                                                          ′



                  A = 40 log(n)V eTn+1,0                Wr,1:d = ar en+1,0         Wr,d+1:2d = br U.
for some scalar ar , br to be determined.
For an arbitrary b, it holds that,

      1. If j ∈ S, eTj,b[j] Aen+1,0 = 40 log n.

      2. If j ̸∈ S, eTj,b[j] Aen+1,0 ≤ 20 log n.

If we define
                                                   zj = eTj,b[j] Aen+1,0 .

The softmax value is given by:
                                                                         ezj
                                        softmax(z)j,n+1 = P                   zj ′ .
                                                                         j′ e


1. For j ∈ S:
                                                      ezj = e40 log n = n40 .

2. For j ̸∈ S:
                                                      ezj ≤ e20 log n = n20 .

With |S| = k, the denominator of the softmax becomes:
                    X         X                X
                       ezj′ =      e40 log n +   ezj′ ∈ [kn40 , kn40 + n21 ].
                       j′            j ′ ∈S                   j ′ ∈S
                                                                  /


For j ∈ S:
                                           n40     1      1      1
             softmax(z)j,n+1 =          40     20
                                                  = ·       −19
                                                                = + O(n−19 ).
                                      kn + O(n )   k 1 + O(n )   k

                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For j ∈
      / S:
                                                 ezj          n20
                    softmax(z)j,n+1 =                      ≤      = O(n−20 ).
                                            kn40 + O(n20 )   kn40

We then have
                                                                   1(j ∈ S)      1
                     softmax(E(b)AE(b))[j, n + 1] =                         + O( 7 ).
                                                                       k        n

As

                                      ⟨U, ej,b ⟩ = 1(j ∈ S, b = 1).

We have that
                                                           1X           1
                            ⟨U, A(E(b))[n + 1]⟩ =             b[j] + O( 6 ).
                                                           k           n
                                                             j∈S

                                                      P
Now we only need to map from the summation                j∈S b[j] to the parity of the summation.We set

                           br = 2k,
                                
                                 −4⌈ 2r ⌉ + 4     if 1 ≤ r ≤ m,
                           ar =     1              if r = m + 1,
                                 −4⌊ r−m ⌋ + 2 if m + 2 ≤ r ≤ 2m.
                                         2

                                   1    if 1 ≤ r ≤ m,
                           hr =
                                   −1 if m + 1 ≤ r ≤ 2m,

Then
                           k
                           X
       T (E(b))[n + 1] =         hr ReLU (ar − br ⟨U, A(E(b))[n + 1]⟩)
                           r=1
                           m                                    2m
                           X                    X               X                   X                  1
                      =          ReLU(ar + 2          b[j]) −         ReLU(ar + 2         b[j]) + O(      )
                           r=1                                  r=m
                                                                                                       n4
                                                j∈S                                 j∈S
                                  P
                                   j∈S b[j]+1
                                             1
                      = (−1)           + O( 4 )
                                            n
                                          1
                      = (−1)b[n+2]+1 + O( 4 ).
                                         n
Thus sgn(T (E(b))[n + 1]) = (−1)b[n+2] for large enough n.
Note that the range of parameters is polynomial with n, thus could be represented with Θ(log n)
precision. With Θ(log n) precision, the error of each activation can be bounded by a small inverse
polynomial of n and hence we can show the same result.



B.3    DYNAMICS WITHOUT C OT

Proof. We will utilize the Theorem 6 in Lyu et al. (2023), which shows that any branching programs
with o(nk) memory will require exponential samples to learn sparse parities with constant passes.
Here the frozen embedding matrix e, which will utilize naively O(nd) memory, can’t be saved in
the memory. However, we can take the alternative approach to regenerate e using a random number
generator with a fixed seed on each step. This allow us to simulate standard SGD optimization with
o(nk) memory, which is a special case of branching programs.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4     DYNAMICS WITH C OT

Assumption 2. Consider the following conditions for sufficiently large n:
                                          h                         i
1. The secret Hamming weight satisfies k ∈ log5 n(n/δ) , log4 n(n/δ) .

2. Set d = k log1.1          n

                         and m = 2k. This implies md log n = o(nk).
                             δ
                                                                                            7
3. Define the batch size as B = C2 n log20 nδ for a sufficiently large constant C2 = 1.28×10

                                                                                         ϵ2   .
4. Set the learning rates to be
                                                                     √
                                                                 mϵ B                                     4kϵ
                                                     η0 = η1 =             ,                    η2 =          .
                                                               100 log nδ                                  3
Lemma 5. Under Assumption 2, the following conditions hold as n → ∞:

1. limn→∞ nd = 0 and limn→∞ nkB
                                = 0.
          q
2. limn→∞ 2k        Bmn

             d log     δ   = 0.

3. Each of the following expressions tends to zero:
            q
                k log( 300mnB
                          δ   )
      (a)            √
                       B
                                .
            q
                2k log( 400mn
                           δ  )
      (b)            √
                       d
                                .
            q
                2nk log( 300mnB
                            δ   )
      (c)            √
                       Bd
                                  .
                           (                                             )
                                          √
4. η0 = η1 ≤ min                 q3mϵ B       , mnϵ                        .
                               80 log( 300nB
                                         δ   ) 120
                                       n√nk
5. limn→∞ log2            300mnB
                             δ
                                           √
                                          d Bd
                                               = 0.
    η0 η1
6. 256mn  2 > 40 log n.


7. limn→∞ ηη20 = 0.

8. limn→∞ (η0 + η1 ) < 5nη2 .

Proof. The conditions in Lemma 5 are satisfied based on the definitions provided in Assumption 2.
Below, we outline the verification for each condition:

1. Limit of nd and nk
                   B
                      :
                                          1.1            n

                         d   k log                       δ                    1            1
                           =                                     ∈                   ,               → 0 as n → ∞.
                         n         n                                     log3.9 (n/δ) log2.9 (n/δ)
   Similarly,
                                     20          n
                                                           C2 log20            n
                                                                                           C2 log20   n
                                                                                                                     log25 (n/δ)

                 B    C2 n log                   δ                             δ                      δ
                    =                                    =                             ≤          n           = C2               → 0.
                 nk         nk                                   k                           log5 (n/δ)
                                                                                                                          n
                  q
                      2k         Bmn

2. Limit of            d log      δ          :
                       s                                             s
                           2k             Bmn                                  2k
                                                                                                           20 n

                              log                                =                         log   C 2 n log       · mn/δ   .
                                                                          k log1.1     n

                            d              δ                                           δ
                                                                                                              δ


                                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Simplifying,
            s                                 s                                               √
                  2k           Bmn                    2                                          log n
                     log                  =                    · O(log n) = O                                    → 0.
                   d            δ                 log1.1   n
                                                           δ                                log0.55 (n/δ)

3. Limits of Sub-Inequalities (a), (b), and (c):
    (a)
                                                                                             √
                      q
                          k log 300mnB
                                                      p                                          √         !
                                   δ                       k · O(log n)                      k · log n
                               √                  =q                          =O         √                   .
                                 B                  C2 n log20          n                  n · log10 (n/δ)
                                                                        δ
          Given k ≤ log2 n(n/δ) ,
                               √   √
                                               q
                                                      n
                                                            √
                               k · log n         log2 (n/δ)
                                                              log n    log0.5 (n)
                           √                 ≤ √                    =             → 0.
                             n · log10 (n/δ)      n · log10 (n/δ)     log11 (n/δ)
   (b)                 q
                           2k log 400mn
                                            p                     √
                                     δ        2k · O(log n)           log n
                                √         = q               = O                  → 0.
                                  d           k log1.1 n
                                                                 log0.55 (n/δ)
                                                                    δ

    (c)
            q
             2nk log 300mnB
                                     p                                                                      √
                        δ               2nk · O(log n)                                                         nk log n
                  √           =q                                                          =O         √
                    Bd           C2 n log20 n · k log1.1
                                                                                    n                    nk · log10.55 (n/δ)
                                                                δ                   δ
                                                                √
                                                                 log n
                                                  =O           10.55                → 0.
                                                           log       (n/δ)
4. Bound on η0 and η1 :
                                √
                                           q
                                        2kϵ C2 n log20                      n

                            mϵ B                                            δ             √
                                                                                    = O kϵ n log9 (n/δ) .

                η0 = η1 =             =
                          100 log nδ       100 log nδ


   Comparing to the minimum of the two terms:
                                   √
                              3mϵ B               √
                                            = O kϵ n log10 (n/δ) ,

                            q
                          80 log 300nB

                                      δ

   and
                                             mnϵ
                                                 = O(knϵ).
                                             120
                                                   √
   Since η0 scales similarly to the first term and n log10 (n/δ) ≪ n for large n, the inequality
   η0 ≤ min{·} holds.
                            n√nk
5. Limit of log2 300mnB
                     δ
                             √
                            d Bd
                                  :

                                     2   300mnB
                                 log                = O(log2 (n/δ)),
                                             δ
   and
                √                                      √
               n nk                                   n nk
                √   =                       q
               d Bd   k log1.1            n
                                             · C2 n log20 nδ · k log1.1 nδ

                                          δ
                                                  √                 !
                                                 n nk                                n
                       =O                        √                    =O                         .
                                   k log1.1 (n/δ) nk log10.55 (n/δ)           k log11.65 (n/δ)


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Given k ≥ log5 n(n/δ) ,

                                  n                        n                      1
                                            ≤                            =                .
                           k log11.65 (n/δ)        n
                                              log5 (n/δ)
                                                         log 11.65
                                                                   (n/δ)   log 5.65
                                                                                    (n/δ)

   Therefore,
                      √
                                log2 (n/δ)

              300mnB n nk
          2
                                             = O log−4.65 (n/δ) → 0 as n → ∞.

      log             √   =O      5.65
                 δ   d Bd      log (n/δ)

             η0 η1
6. Limit of 256mn  2 : As
                                                            √     !2
                                                        mϵ B            m 2 ϵ2 B
                                    η0 η1 =                          = 4          .
                                                              n
                                                                      10 log2 nδ

                                                      100 log δ
   Substituting into the left term:
                   η0 η1               m2 ϵ2 B                     mϵ2 B
                            =               2            =                       .
                         2                     n
                                                           256 × 104 log2 nδ n2

                 256 m n       256 × 104 log δ m n2

   Substitute m = 2k and B = C2 n log10 nδ :


                                     2kϵ2 C2 n log10 nδ      2kC2 log8 nδ

                         η0 η1
                                 =                         =                 .
                       256 m n2     256 × 104 log2 nδ n2       256 × 104 n


                              7
   Setting C2 = 1.28×10
                    ϵ2  :
                                                                          8   n
                                                                                                    k log8   n

                             η0 η1     2k × 1.28 × 107 log                    δ                              δ
                                   2
                                     ≥                                                = 10 ×                         .
                           256 m n          256 × 104 × n                                                n

   Using k ≥ log5n n from the assumption:
                 (δ)
                                                            n
                                                                      log8    n

                                η0 η1                    log5   ( )
                                                                 n            δ                        n
                                       ≥ 10 ×                    δ
                                                                                      = 10 log3              .
                              256 m n2                                n                                δ

   Since log3    n

                 δ       > 4 log n for sufficiently large n, we have:
                                                       n
                                              10 log3       > 40 log n.
                                                        δ

   Thus,
                                                        η0 η1
                                                               > 40 log n.
                                                      256 m n2
7. We aim to show that:
                                                  η2
                                                     →0              as n → ∞.
                                                  η0
   Here
                                                           √ √                                        √ √
                     q
                  2kϵ C2 n log10              n

                                                        2kϵ C2 n log5                     n
                                                                                                    kϵ C2 n log4              n

                                              δ                                           δ                                   δ
             η0 =                                     =                                           =                                   .
                     100 log nδ                             100 log nδ

                                                                                                          50

   Thus, the ratio ηη20 is:
                         4kϵ
                η2                        4kϵ × 50                                               200
                   = √ √3 4 n =          √ √                                               = √ √                              .
                η0  kϵ C2 n log ( δ ) 3kϵ C2 n log4                                   n
                                                                                      δ     3 C2 n log4                  n
                                                                                                                         δ
                                   50


                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                      7
   Substituting C2 = 1.28×10
                         ϵ2  :
                         η2           200                                                200ϵ
                            = q                                                =         √                 .
                         η0           7√                                         3 × 3580 n log4      n
                             3 1.28×10 n log4                              n

                                                                                                      δ
                                             ϵ2                            δ

                 √
                     n log4   n

   As n → ∞,                  δ       → ∞, hence:
                                                                    η2
                                                                       → 0.
                                                                    η0

8. Limit of (η0 + η1 ) < 5nη2 :
                                                      √                                     √ !
                                                  mϵ B                                   mϵ B
                                  η0 + η1 = 2 ·              =O                                   .
                                                100 log nδ                               log nδ

                                                4kϵ
                                    5nη2 = 5n ·       = O(nkϵ).
                                                  3
         √         √
   Given B = O n log10 (n/δ) ,


                       √           √
                                    kϵ n log10 (n/δ)              √

                    mϵ B
                                                        = O kϵ n log9 (n/δ) .

                         n =O

                   log δ               log(n/δ)
                                 √
   Since nkϵ grows faster than kϵ n log9 (n/δ) for large n, the inequality (η0 + η1 ) < 5nη2 holds.

This concludes the proof.

Proof. We will set our hyperparameters according to Assumption 2. We will first warmup our
analysis on linear loss ℓ(ŷ, y) = (−1)y ŷ. We can rewrite the training dynamics in this case as
                                                   B       n+k
                                           1 X X
               w(t+1) = w(t) − ηt                      ∇w ℓ(T [w(t) ](b(t,s) )[i], b(t,s) [i + 1])
                                           B s=1 i=n+1
                                                   B       n+k
                                           1 X X           (t,s)
                         = w(t) − ηt                  (−1)b [i+1] ∇w T [w(t) ](b(t,s) )[i].                    (2)
                                           B s=1 i=n+1

We will train the model end to end in three steps and analyze the evolution of all the weight changes.
The final results can be shown combining Lemmas 21 and 26. Lemma 27 generalizes the analysis
to hinge loss. It is also easy to verify that all the results hold if the parameters has only O(log n)
precision.

B.4.1    AUXILIARY S TATISTICS
To simplify our calculations, we define several auxiliary statistics on the data. Table 1 provides the
definitions and rough orders of these statistics, including logarithmic terms.
Lemma 6. Fixing j, b1 , b2 , let F(i,t,s) be the filtration generated by the random variables {b(t,s) [i] |
max{n + 1, j} ≤ i, S[i] ̸= j, t′ ≤ t, s ≤ B} ordered in lexicographic order, the process
                                          (t,s)
                                  (−1)b           [i+1]
                                                          1(b(t,s) [j] = b1 , b(t,s) [i] = b2 )
is a martingale with respect to {Ft }t .

Proof. b[i + 1] = b[i] ⊕ b[S[i]], and since S[i] ̸= j, b[S[i]] is independent from b[j], . . . , b[i]. Thus,
                                                           (t,s)
                                                                   [i+1]
                                          E[(−1)b                          | F(i,t,s) ] = 0,

provided 1(b(t+1,s) [j] = b1 ) is constant. Hence, this process is a martingale.


                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Statistic       Definition                                                            Rough Order
                     B                                                                       q
                    X        (t,s)
    δt,i,b             (−1)b [i+1] 1 b(t,s) [i] = b                                       O    B log nB
                                                                                                      δ
                    s=1
                    B
                    X             (t,s)
    αt,i,j,b1 ,b2         (−1)b           [i+1]
                                                  1 b(t,s) [j] = b1 , b(t,s) [i] = b2     ᾱi,j,bq   +
                                                                                               1 ,b2
                    s=1                                                                                               nB
                                                                                          O        B log               δ

                         (−1)b1 +b2 1(j=S[i])B
                    (
                                    4          ,                i≥n+2
    ᾱi,j,b1 ,b2         (−1)b1 1(j=S[i], b2 =0)B
                                                                                          O (B) when j = S[i],
                                      2           ,             i=n+1                     0 otherwise
                                                                                            r           
                           n+k            1                                                                           nB

                           X              X 1                                                         Bk log           δ
    βt,j,b1                                            αt,i,j,b1 ,b2                      O                  n
                                                                                                                            
                                                   i
                    i=max{n+1,j} b2 =0
                       S[i]̸=j
                                                                                              r                             
                           n+k            1                                                                           mnB

                           X              X 1                                                         Bk log           δ
    ψt,r,j,b1                                          1 (νr,i,b2 > 0) αt,i,j,b1 ,b2      O                  n
                                                                                                                                
                                                   i
                    i=max{n+1,j} b2 =0
                       S[i]̸=j
                        2m
                                                                            !
                    1   X
                                 1 (νr,i,b > 0) 1 (νr,i′ ,b2 > 0)
                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                  q
                    i′                                                                                m log( δ )
    γi,b,i′ ,b2            r=1                                                            O               n
                      1 1 + 1 (i = i′ , b = b2 )
                    − ′                          m
                     i            2
                                                                                                     r                          
                    2m                                                                                                    mnB

                    X                                                                             m     kB log             δ
    ζt,i,b,j,b1           1 (νr,i,b > 0) ψt,r,j,b1                                        O                      n
                                                                                                                                
                    r=1


Table 1: Definitions and rough orders of auxiliary statistics, including logarithmic terms. Here,
t ∈ {0, 1, 2}, i′ ∈ [n + 1, n + k + 1],i, j ∈ [n + k], b, b1 , b2 ∈ {0, 1}, s ∈ [B], and r ∈ [2m].


This version maintains the essential details while focusing on the core aspects of the martingale
property and independence conditions.
Lemma 7. For each batch, the data inside the batch is approximately balanced. With probability
at least 1 − δ/10, the following bounds hold for all t ∈ [3], i, j ∈ [n + k], b, b1 , b2 ∈ {0, 1}, and
r ∈ [m] for statistics defined in Table 1:
                                                        q
                                           |δt,i,b | ≤ B log 300nB

                                                                   δ
                                                        q
                      |αt,i,j,b1 ,b2 − ᾱi,j,b1 ,b2 | ≤ 2B log 300nB

                                                                     δ      1 (j = S[i])
                                                        q
                                                          2Bk log 300nB

                                                                       δ
                                         |βt,j,b1 | ≤
                                                         q      n
                                                        2 Bk log 300mnB

                                                                        δ
                                       |ψt,r,j,b1 | ≤
                                                        q        n
                                                          2m log 200n

                                                                     δ
                                       |γi,b,i′ ,b2 | ≤
                                                           q n
                                                        4m kB log 300mnB

                                                                           δ
                                      |ζt,i,b,j,b1 | ≤
                                                                  n
                                                                              (t,s)

Proof. Fix any t, i, and b. For each s ∈ [B], define Xs = (−1)b [i+1] 1 b(t,s) [i] = b . The
sequence {Xs }B
              s=1 consists of independent random variables with |Xs | ≤ 1 and zero mean. By the


                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Azuma-Hoeffding inequality,
                                                                             R2

                                                Pr (|δt,i,b | > R) ≤ 2 exp −             .
                                                                             2B
              q
                                 300nB

Setting R =        2B log          δ            , we get

                                                                             δ
                                                    Pr (|δt,i,b | > R) ≤         .
                                                                           150nB
Applying a union bound over all t, i, and b, we ensure that with probability at least 1 − δ/50, the
bound on δt,i,b holds for all choices.
Similarly, for αt,i,j,b1 ,b2 , we fix t, i, j, b1 , and b2 , and define
                                          (t,s)

                           Ys = (−1)b [i+1] 1 b(t,s) [j] = b1 , b(t,s) [i] = b2 .

Again, {Ys }B
            s=1 are independent with |Ys | ≤ 1 and mean ᾱi,j,b1 ,b2 /B. Applying the Azuma-
Hoeffding inequality as before, we obtain the stated bound for αt,i,j,b1 ,b2 .
For βt,j,b1 and ψt,r,j,b1 , the bound can be derived similarly combining Lemma 6 and Azuma-
Hoeffding bound.
                                    P2m
For γi,b,i′ ,b2 , consider the sum     r=1 1 (νr,i,b > 0) 1 (νr,i ,b2 > 0). Each term is an indepen-
                                                                 ′
                                                    1            ′
dent Bernoulli random variable with mean 2 (1 + 1 (i = i , b = b2 )). The variance of the sum
is bounded by m. Applying the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, we get
                                                                   R 2 n2

                               Pr (|γi,b,i′ ,b2 | > R) ≤ 2 exp −            .
                                                                    2m
               r
                                200n

                   2m log         δ
Setting R =             n                  , we obtain the desired bound.
For ζt,i,b,j,b1 , we note that it is a sum over 2m terms, each involving ψt,r,j,b1r
                                                                                  , which are bounded as
                                                                                                                   300mnB

                                                                                                     2   Bk log       δ
in Lemma 7. The total number of terms is 2m, and each term is bounded by                                          n             .

B.4.2      F IRST S TEP : C ONFIGURING THE MLP S
Lemma 8. For the dynamics following Equation (2), attention weight stays constant in the first step,
i.e., A(1) = A(0) = 0.

Proof. Because W:,d+1:2d = 0, ∇A T [w(0) ](b)[i] = 0.

Lemma 9. For the dynamics following Equation (2), attention output stays constant in the first step,
and
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                             1X
                      ∀t ∈ {0, 1}, i ∈ [n + k + 1], A[A(t) ](E(b))[i] =                            ei,b[i] .
                                                                                             i j=1


Proof. This follows from the definition of the attention module and Lemma 8.
                                                     δ
Lemma 10. For an input b, With probability 1− 50Bm       , at initialization, whether a neuron r outputs
nonzero value at position i is determined by νr,i,b[i] .
                                   0

                           1 Wr,1:d   , E(b)[i] > 0 = 1 νr,i,b[i] > 0 .
Further,
                                                 0
                                                Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] − νr,i,b[i] < ϵ/100.


                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Under Assumption 1,
                                                         n+k
                                                         X       1
                                                                 X
                                            0
                                           Wr,1:d =                  νr,i,b ei,b
                                                       i=n+1 b=0


Because,
                                               n+k
                                               X      1
                                                      X
                                                            2
                                                           νr,i,b = 2kϵ2 .
                                              i=n+1 b=0


                                    δ
By Lemma 30, with probability 1 − 50Bm ,

                                                                      s
                               0                                          4 log( 100Bm
                                                                                    δ  )k
                              Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] − νr,i,b[i] ≤                              ϵ
                                                                                  d

                   q
                       4k
By Lemma 5.2,           d log(100Bm/δ) < 0.01, we can conclude that

                        n+k    d
                                                                                              !
                        X      X                                                                        δ
              Pr                     νr,i′ ,b′ 1(i′ ̸= i)ei′ ,b[i′ ] [l]ei,b[i] [l] ≥ ϵ/100       ≤        .
                                                                                                      50Bm
                       i′ =n+1 l=1

The proof is then complete.

Lemma 11. With probability 1− 50    δ
                                      , the following E1 happens: for any input b(0,s) in the first batch,
at initialization, for any r, whether a neuron r outputs nonzero value at position i is determined by
νr,i,b[i] .
                                      0

                               1     Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] > 0 = 1 νr,i,b[i] > 0 .

Further,
                                        0
                                       Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] − νr,i,b[i] < ϵ/100.


Proof. Apply union bound to Lemma 10 over neuron dimension and data in the first batch.

Lemma 12. When E1 defined in Lemma 11 happens, for all i′ ∈ [n + 1, n + k + 1], b′ ∈ {0, 1}, the
gradient on Wr,1:d satisfies that,
                                           n+k  1
                               dL(0)    hr X X
                                      =           1(νr,i,b > 0)δ0,i,b ei,b .
                              dWr,1:d   B i=n+1
                                                          b=0



Proof.
                              B n+k
                    dL(0)   1 X X          (0,s)
                          =           (−1)b [i+1] ∇Wr,1:d T [w(t) ](b(0,s) )[i]
                   dWr,1:d B s=1 i=n+1
                                      B    n+k
                                hr X X          (0,s)
                              =            (−1)b [i+1] ei,b(t,s) [i] 1(νr,i,b(0,s) [i] > 0).
                                B s=1 i=n+1


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We can then expand this formula to have
                       B n+k
                       X X                   (0,s)
                                                     [i+1]
                                    (−1)b                    ei,b(0,s) [i] 1(νr,i,b(0,s) [i] > 0)
                       s=1 i=n+1
                       B n+k 1
                       X X X                         (0,s)
                  =                      (−1)b               [i+1]
                                                                     1(b(0,s) [i] = b)ei,b 1(νr,i,b > 0)
                       s=1 i=n+1 b=0
                       n+k      1                               B
                       X        X                               X             (0,s)
                  =                  ei,b 1(νr,i,b > 0)                (−1)b          [i+1]
                                                                                              1(b(0,s) [i] = b)
                       i=n+1 b=0                                s=1
                       n+k
                       X        1
                                X
                  =                  ei,b 1(νr,i,b > 0)δ0,i,b .
                       i=n+1 b=0

The proof is then complete.
Lemma 13. With probability 1 − 0.13δ, for all i′ ∈ [n + 1, n + k + 1], b′ ∈ {0, 1}, the gradient on
Wr,1:d satisfies that,
                                                  p
                              dL(0)

                                                     log(300nB/δ)
                                     , ei,b ≤             √        .
                             dWr,1:d                    m B

Proof. Combining Lemmas 12 and 30, we have that for any r, with probability 1 − δ/100m,
    *                                            +                     s               
          n+k   1
       hr X X                                        1                     2k log 200m
                                                                                    δ
                  1(νr,i,b > 0)δ0,i,b ei,b , ei,b ≤     sup δ0,i,b 1 +                 
       B i=n+1                                      2mB                          d
                 b=0


By Lemmas 5 and 7, with probability 1 − 11δ/100, for all r, it holds that for all r, i′ , b′
      *     n+k   1
                                                    +                     p
        hr X X                                          1                    log(300nB/δ)
                     1(νr,i,b > 0)δ0,i,b ei,b , ei,b <      sup δ0,i,b <           √         .
        B i=n+1                                        mB                        m B
                     b=0

Combining with Lemma 12 and applying union bound concludes the proof.
Lemma 14. For ᾱ and ψ defined in Appendix B.4.1, When E1 defined in Lemma 11 happens, for all
i′ ∈ [n + 1, n + k + 1], b′ ∈ {0, 1}, the gradient on Wr,d+1:2d satisfies that,
                n+k 1 1                                               n+k 1
   dL(0)     hr X X X 1                                            hr X X
           =              1(νr,i,b2 > 0)ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b2 eS[i],b1 +          ψ0,r,j,b1 ej,b1 .
 dWr,d+1:2d B i=n+1     i                                          B j=1
                               b1 =0 b2 =0                                                                    b1 =0


Proof. With probability 1 − δ/50, E1 defined in Lemma 11 happens, and
                   B n+k
       dL(0)     1 X X          (0,s)
               =           (−1)b [i+1] ∇Wr,1:d T [w(t) ](b(0,s) )[i]
     dWr,d+1:2d B s=1 i=n+1
                           B     n+k
                     hr X X          (0,s)
                 =              (−1)b [i+1] A[A(t) ](E(b(0,s) ))[i]1(νr,i,b(0,s) [i] > 0)
                     B s=1 i=n+1
                        B n+k                                         i  1
                     hr X X          (0,s)                         1XX
                 =              (−1)b [i+1] 1(νr,i,b(0,s) [i] > 0)         1 (b[j] = b) ej,b1
                     B s=1 i=n+1                                   i j=1
                                                                                                     b1 =0


Rearranging the summation, and use α defined in Lemma 7,,
                          n+k 1                                  n+k          1
             dL(0)     hr X X                                    X            X 1
                     =          ej,b1                                                      1(νr,i,b2 > 0)α0,i,j,b1 ,b2 .
           dWr,d+1:2d B j=1                                                            i
                                        b1 =0           i=max{n+1,j} b2 =0



                                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Breaking the summation,
                     n+k 1 1
      dL(0)      hr X X X 1
               =               1(νr,i,b2 > 0)α0,i,S[i],b1 ,b2 eS[i],b1
    dWr,d+1:2d B i=n+1       i
                                  b1 =0 b2 =0
                              n+k 1                                           1
                          hr  XX                              X               X 1
                      +                    ej,b1                                          1(νr,i,b2 > 0)α0,i,j,b1 ,b2
                          B j=1                                                       i
                                   b1 =0           i∈[max{n+1,j}.n+k],S[i]̸=j b2 =0

This simplifies to
               n+k 1 1                                                                           n+k     1
  dL(0)     hr X X X 1                                                                        hr X X
          =              1(νr,i,b2 > 0)ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b2 eS[i],b1                           +          ψ0,r,j,b1 ej,b1 .
dWr,d+1:2d B i=n+1     i                                                                      B j=1
                              b1 =0 b2 =0                                                               b1 =0
The proof is then complete.

This leads to the following bound on the gradient,
Lemma 15. With probability 1−0.16δ, for all i ∈ [n+k +1], b ∈ {0, 1}, the gradient on Wr,d+1:2d
satisfies that,
                                       dL(0)

                                                          3
                                                , ei,b ≤     .
                                    dWr,d+1:2d           2mn

Proof. Denote
                n+k  1 1                                               n+k 1
             hr X X X 1                                             hr X X
      Gr =                 1(νr,i,b2 > 0)ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b2 eS[i],b1 +          ψ0,r,j,b1 ej,b1 .
             B i=n+1     i                                          B j=1
                          b1 =0 b2 =0                                                           b1 =0

By Lemma 30, for all r ∈ [2m], i ∈ [n + k + 1], b ∈ {0, 1}, with probability 1 − δ/25,

                         n+k    1
                   1     X X        1
   |⟨Gr , ei,b ⟩| ≤                   1(νr,i,b2 > 0)ᾱi,S[i],b,b2 1(S[i′ ] = i) + ψ0,r,i,b
                  2mB ′             i
                       i =n+1 b2 =0
     q                v                                                      v                      
       2 log( 400mn
                       u n+k 1          1                                     un+k 1
                 δ  )  u   X     X    X     1                                 u  X    X
   +          √       t                                        2
                                               1(νr,i,b2 > 0)ᾱi,S[i],b      +t             2
                                                                                           ψ0,r,j,b  
                                           i 2                         1 ,b2                       1
        2mB d             i=n+1            b1 =0 b2 =0                           j=1                    b1 =0

By Lemma 7, we have with probability 1 − δ/10,
                               q
                              2 Bk log 300mnB

                                            δ
               sup ψ0,r,i,b ≤                    ,                     sup ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b2 ≤ B/2.
                                       n
Combining with Lemma 5,
          n+k       1
   1      X X          1                                                      1
                          1(νr,i,b2 > 0)ᾱi,S[i],b,b2 1(S[i′ ] = i) ≤
 2mB ′                  i                                                    2mn
        i =n+1 b2 =0
                        q
                           k log 300mnB

   1                  2               δ                 1
       |ψ0,r,i,b | ≤              √             ≤
 2mB                          mn B                  200mn
 q                   v                                                          q
   2 log( 400mn                                                                   2k log( 400mn
                     u n+k 1          1
             δ     ) u   X     X     X      1                                                δ  )     1
          √          t                         1(ν        > 0)ᾱ 2            ≤          √        ≤       ,
                                             2     r,i,b2       i,S[i],b  ,b
     2mB d             i=n+1 b1 =0 b2 =0
                                           i                            1   2
                                                                                    2mn d           200mn
                                                   √
 q                   v
   2 log( 400mn
                     un+k 1
             δ     ) uX X                        2    2nklog( 300mnB     )       1
          √          t              2
                                  ψ0,r,j,b    ≤             √ δ              ≤        .
     2mB d             j=1
                                           1
                                                         mn   Bd               200mn
                              b1 =0
                                                     (0)
Further by Lemma 14, we have that dWdL
                                    r,d+1:2d
                                             = Gr with probability 1 − δ/50. This concludes the
proof.


                                                            28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4.3      S ECOND S TEP : C ONFIGURING THE ATTENTION
Lemma 16. With probability 1−0.29δ , the following E2 happens: the change in the neuron outcome
is small after the first step for any input b,
                       sup Wr1 − Wr0 , [E(b)[i], A[A1 ](E(b))[i]]                 < 3ϵ/80.
                           r

This leads to the case that for any input b(1,s) in the second batch, for any r, whether a neuron r
outputs nonzero value at position i is determined by νr,i,b[i] .
                                  1

                           1 Wr,1:d    , E(b)[i] > 0 = 1 νr,i,b[i] > 0 .

Proof. By Lemma 13, with probability 1 − 0.13δ,
                                                                      p
                                                dL(0)

             1        0                                                 log(300nB/δ)
      sup | Wr,1:d − Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] | = η0           , E(b)[i] ≤ η0        √       .
       r                                       dWr,1:d                     m B
By Lemma 15,with probability 1 − 0.16δ,
                                                                        dL(0)

       1           0                                                                                             3
sup | Wr,d+1:2d − Wr,d+1:2d , A[A1 ](E(b))[i] | = η0                             , A[A1 ](E(b))[i]       ≤ η0       .
 r                                                                    dWr,d+1:2d                                2mn
                                    √
Hence, as η0 ≤ min{ √ 3mϵ B                    , mnϵ
                                                 120 } (Lemma 5.3), we conclude that
                       80       log(300nB/δ)

                       sup Wr1 − Wr0 , [E(b)[i], A[A1 ](E(b))[i]                  < 3ϵ/80.
                           r
The proof is then complete.

This shows that the gradient of MLP on the second and first steps is the same in distribution.
Lemma 17. With probability 1 − 0.58δ, inequalities in Lemma 7 hold and for t ∈ {0, 1}, ∀i ∈
[n + k], ∀b ∈ {0, 1},
                           n+k 1
                dL(t)   hr X X
                      =          1(νr,i,b > 0)δt,i,b ei,b .
               dWr,1:d B i=n+1
                                         b=0
                                1 Xn+k1                                                 n+k 1
            dL(t)       hr    X    X      1                                          hr X X
                      =                     1(νr,i,b2 > 0)ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b2 eS[i],b1 +             ψt,r,j,b1 ej,b1 .
         dWr,d+1:2d B i=n+1               i                                          B j=1
                              b1 =0 b2 =0                                                  b1 =0

     dL(t)

                          3
              , ei,b ≤      .
  dWr,d+1:2d            2mn
Moreover for any input b,
                       sup Wrt − Wr0 , [E(b)[i], A[A1 ](E(b))[i]                  < 3ϵ/40.
                            r
Further,
                            D                         E
                       1         t
                                Wr,1:d , E(b(t,s) )[i] > 0 = 1 νr,i,b(t,s) [i] > 0 .

Proof. Consider the backward calculation of MLP, it is decided by the input and the corresponding
activation of neurons, which jointly follows the same distribution in the first and second steps. The
proof is similar to Lemmas 12, 14 and 16.

We will now show that while MLP changes little, it is enough to provide high-quality gradient
information to inform the attention layer. To this end, we will define the following terms,
                                                  2m
                                                                            (t)
                                                  X
                                     κt,i,b = −         1 (νr,i,b > 0) hr Wr,d+1:2d
                                                  r=1
                                ∆t,i,b,j,b1 = ⟨κt,i,b , ej,b1 ⟩
Intuitively, the FFN with weight W (1) maps attention output x to −κi,b[i] x at position i.


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 18. For α, β, γ, ζ defined in Appendix B.4.1, when the event in Lemma 17 happens, for any
i and b,
                  1                                         n+k    1 X   1
                                                                                                                        !
            η0 X                                    η0      X X
  κ1,i,b =            ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b eS[i],b1 +                              γi,b,i′ ,b2 ᾱi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b2 eS[i′ ],b1
           8Bmi                                   4Bm2 ′
                b1 =0                                     i =n+1 b1 =0 b2 =0
                                                     
                       n+k 1
              η0  X X
           +                        ζ0,i,b,j,b1 ej,b1  .
             4Bm2 j=1
                                b1 =0


Proof. When the event in Lemma 17 happens, we have that
                  n+k     1  1                                                        n+k 1
   dL(0)      hr X X X 1                                                           hr X X
           =                       1(νr,i ,b2 > 0)ᾱi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b2 eS[i′ ],b1 +
                                         ′                                                  ψ0,r,j,b1 ej,b1 .
dWr,d+1:2d    B ′               i′                                                 B j=1
                       i =n+1 b1 =0 b2 =0                                                                               b1 =0

Summing over the axis of r as in κ,
                    n+k    1 X   1    2m
                                                                         !                                 !
            η0      X X               X                                    1
  κ1,i,b =                                1 (νr,i,b > 0) 1(νr,i′ ,b2 > 0) ′ ᾱi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b2 eS[i′ ],b1
           4Bm2 ′                                                          i
                  i =n+1 b1 =0 b2 =0 r=1
                                                                   !
                     n+k 1             2m
               η0  X X               X
           +                    ej,b1     1 (νr,i,b > 0) ψ0,r,j,b1  .
             4Bm2 j=1                 r=1
                                 b1 =0

                                                                                                    1+1(i=i′ , b=b2 )
                                 P
                                        2m
Recall that γi,b,i′ ,b2 = i1′           r=1 1 (νr,i,b > 0) 1 (νr,i ,b2 > 0)
                                                                  ′                         − i1′         2           m.            We then
have

                                 n+k           1
                                             1 X
                                                                                                                                !
                     η0          X           X   1 1 + 1 (i = i′ , b = b2 )
           κ1,i,b =                                                                           ᾱi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b2 eS[i′ ],b1
                    4Bm                                   i′                2
                               i′ =n+1 b1 =0 b2 =0
                                         n+k       1
                                                 1 X
                                                                                                            !
                         η0              X       X
                      +                                        γi,b,i′ ,b2 ᾱi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b2 eS[i′ ],b1
                        4Bm2
                                    i′ =n+1 b1 =0 b2 =0
                                                                                                    !
                                     n+k 1                     2m
                           η0       XX                        X
                      +                               ej,b1          1 (νr,i,b > 0) ψ0,r,j,b1  .
                          4Bm2 j=1                             r=1
                                              b1 =0
The first term can be greatly simplified, as
                                  αi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,0 + αi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,1 = 0.
This concludes the proof.
Lemma 19. With probability 1 − 0.6δ, inequalities and equalities in Lemmas 7, 17 and 18 hold,
and for all i, b2 , j, b1 ,
                                                                   √
                             η0                                10η0 nk
            ∆1,i,b2 ,j,b1 −      ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b2 1(j = S[i]) ≤     √   log(300mnB/δ).
                            8Bmi                               mn Bd

Proof. Define
                                         1
                              η0 X
                    Hi,b =         ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b eS[i],b1
                             8Bmi
                                      b1 =0
                                                 n+k      1 X
                                                            1
                                                                                                                    !
                                η0               X        X
                             +                                         γi,b,i′ ,b2 ᾱi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b2 eS[i′ ],b1
                               4Bm2
                                               i′ =n+1 b1 =0 b2 =0
                                                          
                                     n+k 1
                                η0  X X
                             +             ζi,b,j,b1 ej,b1 
                               4Bm2 j=1
                                                       b1 =0



                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As the inequalities in Lemma 7 hold, by Lemmas 5 and 30, with probability 1 − δ/50, it holds that,
                          * n+k 1             1
                                                                                            !        +
                     η0          X X X
                                                  γi,b,i′ ,b2 ᾱi′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b2 eS[i′ ],b1 , ej,b1
                  4Bm2
                              i′ =n+1 b1 =0 b2 =0
                                           r                        !
                 η0 sup ᾱ sup γ             k log(200n/δ)
              ≤                    1+4
                      4Bm2                            d
                       s
                         2k log 200n

                  η0                δ
              ≤                          .
                 4mn           md
and,
                                              *n+k 1                        +
                                    η0           XX
                                                     ζi,b,j,b1 ej,b1 , ej,b1
                                                                     
                                   4Bm2               j=1 b1 =0
                                                r                !
                                η0 sup ζ           n log(200n/δ)
                              ≤            1+4
                                 4Bm2                     d
                                      r                     r                !
                                 η0      k                    nk
                              ≤             log(200n/δ) + 4       log(200n/δ) .
                                mn       B                    dB
and,
           *     1
                                                  !             +                                             p
   η0            X                                                     η0                               2      log(200n/δ)
                        ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b eS[i],b1       , ej,b1       −      ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b 1(j = S[i]) ≤             √      .
  8Bmi                                                                8Bmi                                      8mn d
                b1 =0

With d < n and B < nk (Lemma 5), we conclude that,
                                                                       √
                                  η0                               10η0 nk
               ⟨Hi,b , ej,b1 ⟩ −      ᾱi,S[i],b1 ,b 1(j = S[i]) ≤     √   log(300mnB/δ).
                                 8Bmi                              mn Bd
By Lemma 18, we have the desired result.
Lemma 20. Under the setting of Lemma 19, for every b ∈ {b(1,s) | s ∈ [B]},
                                               i
       dℓ(T (b)[i], b[i + 1])        b[i+1]+1
                                              X                          ∂softmax E(b)T AE(b) [j, i]
                              = (−1)              ⟨κ1,i,b[i] , ej,b[j] ⟩                             ,
               dA                             j=1
                                                                                   ∂A

with
                                                           i
                                                                                     !
∂softmax E(b)T AE(b) [j, i]                               X
                            = softmax(Z)[j, i]· E(b)[j] −     softmax(Z)[p, i]E(b)[p] E(b)[i]T
          ∂A                                              p=1


Proof. Our goal is to calculate the gradient of the loss with respect to the attention layer. We will
first calculate the gradient of the loss with respect to the output of the attention layer, and then use
the chain rule. When the event in Lemma 17 happens, for any binary sequence b in the second batch,
we have that for any i,
                                     2m
                     dT (b)[i]       X
                                              (1)         (1)   E (b)
                                  =      hr Wr 1       W                    [i]r > 0
                    dA(E(b))[i] r=1                            A (E (b))
                                              2m
                                                          (1)
                                              X
                                          =           hr Wr,d+1:2d 1 νr,i,b[i] > 0
                                              r=1

This then implies that,
                                                                           2m
                                                                                                                      !
                 dℓ(T (b)[i], b[i + 1])                                    X         (1)
                                        = (−1)b[i+1]

                                                                                 hr Wr,d+1:2d 1   νr,i,b[i] > 0
                     dA(E(b))[i]                                           r=1



                                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now calculate the gradient of A (the attention matrix) to the attention output.

                 ∂A(E(b))[i]      ∂ E(b)softmax E(b)T AE(b) [i]
                               =
                      ∂A                            ∂A
                                  Pi                                T

                                     j=1 ∂E(b)[j]softmax E(b) AE(b) [j, i]
                               =
                                                        ∂A
                                   i
                                  X            ∂softmax E(b)T AE(b) [j, i]
                               =      E(b)[j]
                                  j=1
                                                              ∂A

Hence, the gradient of the loss with respect to the attention matrix is
       dℓ(T (b)[i], b[i + 1])
               dA
        i
       X   dℓ(T (b)[i], b[i + 1])             ∂softmax E(b)T AE(b) [j, i]
   =                                  E(b)[j]
       j=1
                 dA(E(b))[i]                             ∂A
                      i X
                        2m
             b[i+1]
                      X                            (1)           ∂softmax E(b)T AE(b) [j, i]
   =(−1)                hr 1 νr,i,b[i] > 0 ⟨Wr,d+1:2d , E(b)[j]⟩
               j=1 r=1
                                                                            ∂A
                   i
         b[i+1]+1
                  X                          ∂softmax E(b)T AE(b) [j, i]
   =(−1)              ⟨κ1,i,b[i] , ej,b[j] ⟩
                  j=1
                                                        ∂A

We will use Z to denote E(b)T AE(b), and calculate the derivative of th+e softmax function applied
to Z with respect to A.

                                                               !
         ∂softmax(Z)[j, i]    ∂                 eZ[j,i]
                           =               Pi
               ∂A            ∂A              p=1 e
                                                     Z[p,i]
                                                          Pi                           Pi
                                    eZ[j,i] · ∂Z[j,i]
                                               ∂A ·        p=1 e
                                                                     Z[p,i]
                                                                        − eZ[j,i] ·       p=1 e
                                                                                                  Z[p,i]
                                                                                                           · ∂Z[p,i]
                                                                                                              ∂A
                               =                                    P              2
                                                                     i     Z[p,i]
                                                                     p=1 e


Given Z[p, i] = E(b)[p]T AE(b)[i], the derivative with respect to A is:

                                         ∂Z[p, i]
                                                  = E(b)[p] · E(b)[i]T
                                          ∂A
Substituting the derivatives into the quotient rule expression:

                           Z[j,i]
                                                           Pi                             Pi
∂softmax(Z)[j, i]   e               · E(b)[j]E(b)[i]T ·            p=1 e
                                                                           Z[p,i]
                                                                           − eZ[j,i] ·      p=1 e
                                                                                                     Z[p,i]
                                                                                                              · E(b)[p]E(b)[i]T
                  =                                                                   2
      ∂A
                                                                       P
                                                                        i     Z[p,i]
                                                                        p=1 e

Thus, the derivative is:

                                                           i
                                                                                     !
∂softmax E(b)T AE(b) [j, i]                               X
                            = softmax(Z)[j, i]· E(b)[j] −     softmax(Z)[p, i]E(b)[p] E(b)[i]T
           ∂A                                             p=1

The proof is then complete.
Lemma 21. After two training steps, the attention layer will show the following structure. With
probability 1 − 0.7δ, for all i, b, i′ , b2 ,


                                                           32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            η0 η1
      1. If j ′ = S[i′ ], then ej ′ ,b′1 , A(2) ei′ ,b′2 ≥ 256mn  2.


                                                                 η0 η1
      2. If j ′ ̸= S[i′ ], then | ej ′ ,b′1 , A(2) ei′ ,b′2 | ≤ 512mn  2.



Further, events in Lemmas 17 and 18 hold.



Proof. By Lemma 20,

                                                                                    i
                                                                                                       !
               ∂softmax E(b)T AE(b) [j, i]   1                                      X 1
                                           =                       E(b)[j] −                E(b)[p] E(b)[i]T
                          ∂A                 i                                      p=1
                                                                                        i


We can rewrite the gradient as
                                                                          
                                                  i
         dℓ(T (b)[i], b[i + 1])    1            X
                                = − (−1)b[i+1]  ⟨κi,b[i] , E(b)[j]⟩E(b)[j] E(b)[i]T
                 dA                i             j=1
                                                 i       i
                                          1 XX
                                        − 2        (−1)b[i+1] ⟨κi,b[i] , E(b)[j]⟩E(b)[p]E(b)[i]T
                                         i j=1 p=1


If we define

                               B
                                                                                                          !
                                      b(t,s) [i+1]
                               X
                                                      (t,s)             (t,s)             (t,s)
       µt,j,i,p,b1 ,b2 ,b3 =     (−1)              1(b      [j] = b1 , b      [i] = b2 , b      [p] = b3 ) .
                               s=1



Summing over the second batch, we have that

                      n+k   i  1 1
            dL(1) 1 X X X X 1
        −        =                   α1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ej,b1 eTi,b2
             dA    B i=n+1 j=1     i
                                       b1 =0 b2 =0
                               n+k i X i X1 X
                                            1 X
                                              1
                          1    X  X             1
                      −                            µ1,j,i,p,b1 ,b2 ,b3 ∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ep,b3 eTi,b2 .
                          B i=n+1 j=1 p=1       i2
                                               b1 =0 b2 =1 b3 =0



This implies A(2) is updated as,

                           dL(1)
            A(2) = −η1
                            dA
                           n+k   i X
                                   1 X
                                     1
                      η1   X X         1
                  =                                      α1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ej,b1 eTi,b2
                      B i=n+1 j=1                    i
                                       b1 =0 b2 =0
                           n+k    i X
                                    i X
                                      1 X
                                        1 X
                                          1
                      η1   X      X         1
                  −                                                     µ1,j,i,p,b1 ,b2 ,b3 ∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ep,b3 eTi,b2 .
                      B i=n+1 j=1 p=1                              i2
                                            b1 =0 b2 =1 b3 =0



Recall that our goal is to calculate eTj′ ,b′ A(2) ei′ ,b′2 . We can then calculate the contribution from each
                                            1
term by separating the calculation as follows:


                                                              33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 1
        η1                      X                                X 1
 Tj =                                                                         α1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , ej,b1 ⟩⟨ei,b2 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩.
        B                                                                 i
             i∈[max{n+1,j},n+k],b2 ∈{0,1},S[i]̸=j b1 =0
           n+k  1 1
        η1 X X X 1
  R=                  α1,i,S[i],b1 ,b2 ∆1,i,S[i],b1 ,b2 ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , eS[i],b1 ⟩⟨ei,b2 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩.
        B i=n+1     i
                    b1 =0 b2 =0
                         n+k                     1 X
                                                   1 X
                                                     1
       η1                X                       X     1
Uj,p =                                                                          µ1,j,i,p,b1 ,b2 ,b3 ∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , ej,b1 ⟩⟨ep,b3 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩
       B                                                                   i2
             i=max{n+1,j,p},S[i]̸∈{j,p} b1 =0 b2 =0 b3 =0
                   n+k         1 X
                                 1
        η1         X           X   1
 Vp =                                             µ1,S[i],i,p,b1 ,b2 ,b3 ∆1,i,S[i],b1 ,b2 ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , eS[i],b1 ⟩⟨ep,b3 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩
        B                                    i2
             i=max{n+1,p} b1 =0 b2 =0
                   n+k         1 X
                                 1 X
                                   1
        η1         X           X     1
Wj =                                                      µ1,j,i,S[i],b1 ,b2 ,b3 ∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , ej,b1 ⟩⟨ep,b3 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩.
        B                                            i2
             i=max{n+1,j} b1 =0 b2 =0 b3 =0
         n+k  1 1 1
      η1 X X X X 1
  Y =                  µ1,S[i],i,S[i],b1 ,b2 ,b3 ∆1,i,S[i],b1 ,b2 ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , eS[i],b1 ⟩⟨eS[i],b3 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩.
      B i=n+1       i2
                    b1 =0 b2 =0 b3 =0

Then we have that
                                           n+k
                                           X                         n+k
                                                                     X n+k
                                                                         X                    n+k
                                                                                              X              n+k
                                                                                                             X
               eTj′ ,b′1 A(2) ei′ ,b′2 =         Tj + R −                          Uj,p −           Wj −           Vp + Y.
                                           j=1                       j=1 p=1                  j=1            p=1

.By Lemma 31, with probability 1 − δ/100,
                                                                                            r
                                                                                                log(100nd/δ)
                         ⟨ei,b2 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩ − 1(i = i &b2 = b′2 )
                                                             ′
                                                                                      ≤2                     .
                                                                                                      d
We will also assume the event in Lemma 19 holds.
We will now discuss each term separately

1. For Tj , by Lemma 6 and Azuma-Hoeffding bound, with probability 1 − δ/50,
                                                      1
                         X                            X 1
                                                                     α1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , ej,b1 ⟩⟨ei,b2 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩
                                                                 i
      i∈[max{n+1,j},n+k],b2 ∈{0,1},S[i]̸=j b2 =0
       v
     1 u
     X         100n                                        X                                 1 2                                     2                      2
  ≤2   tB log(      )                                                                           ∆1,1,i,j,b1 ,b2 ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , ej,b1 ⟩   ⟨ei,b2 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩
       u
                 δ                                                                           i2
       b1 =0                         i∈[max{n+1,j},n+k],b2 ∈{0,1},S[i]̸=j
       q
      2 B log( 100n
                 δ )
                                                          1
                                                          X                                 s                       X                                                2
  ≤                         sup |∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 |                     ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , ej,b1 ⟩                                                        ⟨ei,b2 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩
               n           j̸=S[i]                     b1 =0                                   i∈[max{n+1,j},n+k],b2 ∈{0,1},S[i]̸=j


  Now by Lemma 19, we have that
                                                            √
                                                        10η0 nk
                                 sup |∆1,i,j,b1 ,b2 | ≤     √   log(300mnB/δ).
                               j̸=S[i]                  mn Bd

  Further by Lemma 31,
                X                                            2 8k log(100nd/δ)
                                         ⟨ei,b2 , ei′ ,b′2 ⟩ ≤                  + 1 ≤ 4.
                                                                       d
    i∈[max{n+1,j},n+k],b2 ∈{0,1},S[i]̸=j
                                                                                       r
                                                                       ′  ′              log(100nd/δ)
                                          ⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , ej,b1 ⟩ ≤1(j = j &b1 = b1 ) + 2                .
                                                                                               d


                                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            √                  r                           !
                     40η1 η0 nk                  log(100nd/δ)
             |Tj | ≤              1.5
                             √ log (300mnB/δ) 4               + 1(j = j ′ ) .
                      mn2 B d                          d

   Summing over j, by Lemma 5, we have that the contribution is bounded by
                                                          √
                   X           160η1 η0    2             n nk        η1 η0
                       |Tj | ≤      2
                                        log (300mnB/δ) √         ≤         .                                          (3)
                    j
                                mn                      d Bd       2000mn2

2. For R, we will directly put everything to an upper bound. We will discuss three cases,
      • ̸ ∃i′′ , S[i′′ ] = j, by Lemma 19,
               16kη1 log(100nd/δ)              η1 1
          |R| ≤                     sup α∆ +        α1,i′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b′2 ∆1,i′ ,S[i′ ],b1 ,b′2 |⟨ej ′ ,b′1 , eS[i],b1 ⟩|
                         Bnd                   B i′         r
               16kη1 log(100nd/δ) B η0         η1     η0         log(100nd/δ)
             ≤                               +     B
                         Bnd        2 4mn Bn 4mn                           d
                                             r
               η0 η1 k log(100nd/δ)    η0 η1    log(100nd/δ)                η0 η1
             =                      +                               ≤                   .
                        mn2 d         4mn2            d                   2000mn2
      • ∃i′′ , S[i′′ ] = j, i′′ ̸= i′ , we can get a similar bound,
                                                               η0 η1
                                                     |R| ≤           .
                                                            2000mn2
      • S[i′ ] = j ′ , in this case, we can show that,
                                             η0 η1 2                     η0 η1
                                      |R −          ᾱ    ′         |≤         .
                                            8B 2 mi′ i,S[i ],b1 ,b2    2000mn2
   This concludes that
                                   η0 η1 2                                       η0 η1
                           R−       2   ′
                                          ᾱi,S[i′ ],b1 ,b2 1(S[i′ ] = j ′ ) ≤         .                              (4)
                                  8B mi                                        2000mn2
3. Uj,p can be bounded in the same way as Tj and we have that,
                                    XX               η1 η0
                                            Uj,p ≤           .                                                        (5)
                                     j   p
                                                   1000mn2

4. For Vp , Wj , Y , we will directly put everything to an upper bound similar to the bound of R, we
   have that
                                               n+k
                                               X                 η1 η0
                                                     |Vp | ≤           .                                              (6)
                                               p=1
                                                               1000mn2
                                              n+k
                                              X                  η1 η0
                                                    |Wj | ≤                                                           (7)
                                              j=1
                                                               1000mn2
                                                                 η1 η0
                                                     |Y | ≤            .                                              (8)
                                                               1000mn2
Summing over Equations (3) to (8), we have that
             D                         E   η0 η1 2                                  η1 η0
              ej ′ ,b′1 , A(2) ei′ ,b′2 −       ᾱ   ′         1(S[i′ ] = j ′ ) ≤         .
                                          8Bmi′ i,S[i ],b1 ,b2                    512mn2
Further
                                        η1      2                  η0 η1
                                              ᾱi,S[i ′ ],b ,b ≥         .
                                        2
                                      8B mi ′              1 2
                                                                 128mn2
Hence, we can show that


                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            η0 η1
      1. If j ′ = S[i′ ], then ej ′ ,b′1 , A(2) ei′ ,b′2 ≥ 256mn  2.


                                                                 η0 η1
      2. If j ′ ̸= S[i′ ], then | ej ′ ,b′1 , A(2) ei′ ,b′2 ⟩ ≤ 512mn  2.



The proof is complete.
Lemma 22. Under the setting of Lemma 21, the attention output is approximately one-hot after the
second step, with
                                    A[A2 ](E(b))[i] − eS[i],b[S[i]] < 1/n10 .

Proof of Lemma 22. This is a direct combination with Lemmas 5, 21 and 32.

B.4.4    T HIRD S TEP : M OVING MLP IN L INEAR R EGIME
Lemma 23. With probability 1 − 0.8δ, the gradient of the FFN layer on the third step can be written
as,
                          p
         dL(2)

                             log(300nB/δ)
                , ei,b ≤          √          .
       dWr,1:d                  m B
                              n+k     1 X  1
              dL(2)            X X             1                                        1
                        =hr                      1(νr,i,b2 > 0)(−1)b1 +b2 eS[i],b1 + O( 8 ).
           dWr,d+1:2d        i=n+1
                                               i                                       n
                                              b1 =0 b2 =0

Further the event in Lemmas 21 and 22 hold.

Proof. The proof is similar to Lemmas 12 and 14, switching the original output with the near one-hot
output of the attention layer.
Lemma 24. With probability 1 − 0.9δ, the attention output is almost unchanged after the third step,
with
                                     A[A3 ](E(b))[i] − eS[i],b[S[i]] < 1/n9 .
Further, events in Lemma 23 hold.

Proof. By Lemmas 5, 20 and 22, A(3) − A(2) is of order 1/n8 , this implies that the attention weight
and output is almost unchanged.
Lemma 25. With probability 1 − 0.91δ,
      D
          (2)
                                   E                        2ϵ                       ϵ
        Wr,d+1:2d , A(A3 )[E(b)][i] + sign(νr,i,b[S[i]] hr ) 1(νr,i,0 νr,i,1 < 0) <     .
                                                            3                       300
Further, events in Lemma 24 hold.

Proof. We will first calculate the projection of the gradient on eS[i′ ],b′ . When the event in Lemma 23
happens,
                                 n+k    1 X   1
    dL(2)
                                 X X                                                                    1
             , eS[i′ ],b′ = hr                   1(νr,i,b2 > 0)(−1)b1 +b2 ⟨eS[i′ ],b′ , eS[i],b1 ⟩ + O( 8 ).
  dWr,d+1:2d                    i=n+1
                                                                                                       n
                                             b1 =0 b2 =0


By Lemmas 5 and 30, with probability 1 − 0.01δ,
                dL(2)

                                                                                        1
                         , eS[i′ ],b′ − sign(νr,i′ ,b′ )hr 1(νr,i′ ,0 νr,i′ ,1 < 0) ≤
             dWr,d+1:2d                                                               200m

By Lemmas 5 and 17, we have that,
 D
     (2)
                         E                                                   (η0 + η1 )    η2     η2
   Wr,d+1:2d , eS[i′ ],b′ + sign(νr,i′ ,b′ )hr η2 1(νr,i′ ,0 νr,i′ ,1 < 0) <            +      <      .
                                                                               20mn       200m   100m

Combining with Lemma 24 and η2 = 4ϵm
                                  3 , we have the result.


                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 26. With probability 1 − δ, for all b ∈ {0, 1}n+k , i ∈ [n + 1, n + k], we have that
                                                        ϵ(−1)b[i+1]+1  ϵ
                                       T (E(b))[i] −                  < .
                                                             3         3

Proof. By Lemma 23, the following holds,
                       D                 E
                            (3)
                         Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] sign(νr,i,b[i] ) ∈ [5ϵ/6, 7ϵ/6].

Combining with Lemma 25,
       D
           (2)
                                    E                        2ϵ                       ϵ
         Wr,d+1:2d , A(A3 )[E(b)][i] + sign(νr,i,b[S[i]] hr ) 1(νr,i,0 νr,i,1 < 0) <     .
                                                             3                       300

Hence, we still have that
                                      D
                                        (3)
                                                                  E   5ϵ
                                     | Wr,d+1:2d , A(A3 )[E(b)][i] | < .
                                                                      6
which implies that,
                                   D                E
                                     (3)
                                 1( Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] > 0) = 1(νr,i,b[i] > 0).

Consider the output contribution of the attention part,
                 2m      D                           E
                           (3)
                 X
                       hr Wr,d+1:2d , A(A3 )[E(b)][i] 1(νr,i,b[i] > 0)
                 r=1
                     2m
                     X  2hr ϵ                                                                      ϵ
                 +               sign(νr,i,b[S[i]] hr )1(νr,i,0 νr,i,1 < 0, νr,i,b[i] > 0) <          .
                     r=1
                             3                                                                    300

The later term with 1 − δ/100 satisfies,
                           2m
                           X  2hr ϵ
                                      sign(νr,i,b[S[i]] hr )1(νr,i,0 νr,i,1 < 0, νr,i,b[i] > 0)
                           r=1
                                 3
                           2m
                           X    ϵ
                       =          sign(νr,i,b[S[i]] )1(νr,i,0 νr,i,1 < 0, νr,i,b[i] > 0)
                           r=1
                               3m
                           2m
                           X    ϵ
                       =          (−1)b[S[i]]+b[i] 1(νr,i,0 νr,i,1 < 0)
                           r=1
                               3m
                        ϵ                      ϵ log(100n/δ)
                       = (−1)b[S[i]]+b[i] + O(      √        )
                        3                             m

This shows that,
        2m
        X     D
                 (3)
                                          E                  ϵ                      ϵ
            hr Wr,d+1:2d , A(A3 )[E(b)][i] 1(νr,i,b[i] > 0) − (−1)1+b[S[i]]+b[i] ≤     .
        r=1
                                                             3                     150

On the other hand, we have that
   2m     D               E
              (3)
  X
       hr Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] 1(νr,i,b[i] > 0)
    r=1
    2m      D                E                   2m   D                         E
              (0)                                       (3)      (0)
    X                                            X
≤         hr Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] 1(νr,i,b[i] > 0) +    hr Wr,1:d − Wr,1:d , E(b)[i] 1(νr,i,b[i] > 0)
    r=1                                                   r=1
 ϵ
≤ .
 4

                                                          37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first term is bounded due to standard concentration inequality over the axis of r. The second
term is bounded by Lemmas 17 and 23. Combining the terms, we have that
                                 ϵ(−1)b[i]+b[S[i]]+1                 ϵ(−1)b[i+1]+1  ϵ
              T (E(b))[i] −                          = T (E(b))[i] −               < .
                                         3                                3         3
This concludes that the model is able to predict the correct output.

B.5   F INAL P ROOF

Lemma 27. The results in Lemmas 18 and 26 can be extended to hinge loss ℓ(ŷ, y) =
max{(−1)y ŷ + 1, 0} with the same probability.

Proof. Our Lemmas 17 and 23 shows that the output of the FFN layer is bounded by ϵ/3 throughout
training. The hinge loss is linear when the output is in [−1, 1]. Hence, the results can be directly
extended to hinge loss.

Proof of Theorem 3. The original theorem is a combination of Lemmas 18, 26 and 27.

B.6   T ECHNICAL L EMMA

Lemma 28 (Theorem 4.4.5 of Vershynin (2018)). There exists universal constant C,let A be an m×
n random matrix whose entries Aij are independent, mean zero, sub-Gaussian random variables.
Then, for any t > 0, we have                 √      √
                                ∥A∥ ≤ CK       m+ n+t
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−t2 ). Here K = maxi,j ∥Aij ∥ψ2 is the maximum sub-Gaussian
norm of Aij .
Lemma 29 (Theorem 4.6.1 of Vershynin (2018)). Let A be an m × n matrix whose rows Ai are
independent, mean zero, sub-Gaussian isotropic random vectors in Rn . Then, for any t ≥ 0, we
have           √            √                           √             √
                 m − CK 2 ( n + t) ≤ sn (A) ≤ s1 (A) ≤ m + CK 2 ( n + t)
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−t2 ). Here, K = maxi ∥Ai ∥ψ2 .
Furthermore, a slightly stronger conclusion holds:
                                           1 ⊤
                                             A A − In ≤ K 2 max(δ, δ 2 ),
                                           m
               p
                   n  √t
where δ = C        m + m     .
                           Pn+k             P1
Lemma 30. Define v =             i=n+1          b=0 λi,b ei,b , then with probability 1 − δ,
                                                        v
                                                        u 2 log 2δ
                                                        u
                                                                                     X
                           |⟨ei′ ,b′ , v⟩ − λi′ ,b′ | ≤ t                                          λ2i,b .
                                                              d
                                                                                (i,b)̸=(i′ ,b′ )


Proof. We aim to bound |⟨ei′ ,b′ , v⟩|, where
                                                         n+k
                                                         X      1
                                                                X
                                                 v=                  λi,b ei,b .
                                                       i=n+1 b=0
                                                                               n           o
Note that each ei,b ∈ Rd has entries that are independent random variables from − √1d , √1d .

First, observe that
                                 X                                                 X
               ⟨ei′ ,b′ , v⟩ =           λi,b ⟨ei′ ,b′ , ei,b ⟩ = λi′ ,b′ +                      λi,b ⟨ei′ ,b′ , ei,b ⟩.
                                 (i,b)                                        (i,b)̸=(i′ ,b′ )


                                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since ⟨ei′ ,b′ , ei′ ,b′ ⟩ = 1 and for (i, b) ̸= (i′ , b′ ), the inner products ⟨ei′ ,b′ , ei,b ⟩ are sums of indepen-
dent random variables with mean zero.
Define
                                                 for (i, b) ̸= (i′ , b′ ).
                                 Xi,b = λi,b ⟨ei′ ,b′ , ei,b ⟩,
                                                                     h              i
                                                                          |λ | |λ |
Each Xi,b is a sum of d independent random variables bounded in − di,b , di,b , because each
component ei′ ,b′ ,j ei,b,j is ± d1 .
By the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, for any t > 0,
                                                                                 !                                          !
         X                                     2dt2                                                                 dt2
Pr           Xi,b ≥ t ≤ 2 exp − P                                       2            = 2 exp − P                                .
                                                       (i,b)̸=(i′ ,b′ ) 4λi,b                   2 (i,b)̸=(i′ ,b′ ) λ2i,b
       (i,b)̸=(i′ ,b′ )

Setting the right-hand side equal to δ and solving for t, we get
                                       v
                                       u 2 log 2δ
                                       u
                                                        X
                                   t=  t                       λ2i,b .
                                              d            ′ ′    (i,b)̸=(i ,b )

Therefore, with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                                           v
                                                           u 2 log 2δ
                                                           u
                                                                                   X
                              |⟨ei′ ,b′ , v⟩ − λi′ ,b′ | ≤ t                                     λ2i,b .
                                                                 d
                                                                              (i,b)̸=(i′ ,b′ )

The proof is then complete.
Lemma 31. With probability 1 − δ, it holds that
                                                                                                       r
                ′                 ′                                                                            log(8nd/δ)
          ∀i, i ∈ [n + k], b, b       ∈ {0, 1}, ∥eTi,b ei′ ,b′ − 1(i = i′ &b = b′ )∥2 ≤                    2              .
                                                                                                                    d

Proof. This is a direct consequence combining Lemma 30 and union bound.
Lemma 32. If for constant C, the attention score before softmax has the following property:

         • for each position i, the target position j = S[i] satisfies:
                                           D                    E
                                            ej,b′1 , A(2) ei,b′2 ≥ 2C log n.

         • For all other positions j ′ ̸= j, the attention weights satisfy:
                                            D                        E
                                              ej ′ ,b′1 , A(2) ei,b′2 ≤ C log n.

The attention output is approximately one-hot, with
                                      A[A2 ](E(b))[i] − eS[i],b[S[i]] < 4/nC−1 .

Proof of Lemma 22. The attention output for position i is given by:
                                 A[A2 ](E(b))[i] = X · softmax X⊤ AX [i],


where the softmax is applied column-wise.
Given the condition from Lemma 5, we set
                                                    ∆ = 2C log n

This implies that:
                                                                              1
                                             e−∆/2 < e−C log n =                .
                                                                             nC

                                                            39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Define zj ′ = ej ′ ,b′1 , A(2) ei,b′2 .
The softmax for the target position j = S[i] is:
                                                                        ezj
                                          softmax(z)j =                                zj ′ .
                                                                ezj +
                                                                        P
                                                                           j ′ ̸=j e

                                          η0 η1
Given that zj ≥ ∆ and |zj ′ | ≤ ∆                 ∆
                                2 (since 512mn2 = 2 ), we have:

                                                                       ∆  ∆
                                               zj − zj ′ ≥ ∆ −           = .
                                                                       2  2

Thus:
                                                     e∆                  1
                        softmax(z)j ≥                          =                  .
                                              e∆ + (T − 1)e∆/2   1 + (T − 1)e−∆/2

Therefore with T ≤ 2n:
                                                                1                2
                              softmax(z)j ≥                             1 ≥ 1 − nC−1 .
                                                         1 + (T − 1) · nC

Therefore                                    X                              2
                                                       softmax(z)j ′ ≤          .
                                                                           nC−1
                                             j ′ ̸=j

The attention output for position i is:
                                                               X
                                  A[A2 ](E(b))[i] =                  ej,b[j] softmax(z)j .
                                                                 j


Substituting the bounds:

                                              X
 A[A2 ](E(b))[i] − eS[i],b[S[i]] =                       ej ′ ,b[j ′ ] softmax(z)j ′ + eS[i],b[S[i]] (softmax(z)S[i] − 1)
                                            j ′ ̸=S[i]
                                             X                                                           4
                                      ≤                 softmax(z)j ′ + (softmax(z)S[i] − 1) ≤
                                                                                                        nC−1
                                           j ′ ̸=S[i]

We conclude our proof.


                                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
In this section, we provide details of the experiment setup and present additional results. All training
was conducted using PyTorch Paszke et al. (2019) on NVIDIA RTX A10 GPUs.

C.1   E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

The transformer architecture adopted in the experiment section is based on the GPT-2 model (Rad-
ford et al., 2019) with a hidden size of 720, an intermediate size of 3072, and trainable position
embeddings. For all experiments, we use Adam (Kingma, 2014) optimizer with random initializa-
tion, using hyperparameters β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, a weight decay of 0 and a linear decay learning
rate schedule. The batch size is set to 512 throughout. The validation set contains 2048 samples
which are nonintersecting with the training data. In all experiments regarding sample complexity, a
test set of size 2048 which is non-intersected with the training data is used.

Details of the experiments in Section 4.3 This section examines the normalized attention entropy
of Qwen2-7B (Yang et al., 2024) and Qwen2-Math-7B models (Qwen, 2024) on the GSM8K dataset
(Cobbe et al., 2021) with and without CoT prompting respectively. Both models consist of 28 layers,
each with 28 attention heads. The normalized attention entropy is computed as the average across
the GSM8K test set. In Figure 6, the entropy values of each attention head in a layer are sorted
separately under the three setups. While Figure 6 presents the normalized attention entropy for
specific attention heads in the first, last, and two intermediate layers, Figure 7 shows the entropy
across all layers.
For With CoT data, the input is concatenated with the ground truth answer from the GSM8K
dataset. For With CoT data, we extract the final answer from the ground truth, and concatenate
the input with the string “The answer is [Final Answer].”.

C.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In Figure 3 (Right), we present the attention pattern of a single-layer, single-head transformer trained
on the (n = 20, k = 40) parity problem with CoT data. In Figure 8, we show the attention patterns
of a multi-layer, multi-head transformer trained on the same problem. We observe that in the first
layer, the attention pattern is sparse and interpretable, with each secret variable attended to by at
least one attention head. In contrast, the second layer exhibits an almost uniform attention pattern.
A possible explanation is that the first layer captures sufficient information, which is then transferred
to subsequent layers via the residual connections.
In Section 4.2, we observe that training with repeated data can help Transformers learn the parity
function, but it still requires significantly more computation compared to trained on CoT data (Fig-
ure 4). To further substantiate this observation, we explore the training of models with and without
CoT on the (n = 20, k = 12) parity problem. Compared with the (n = 20, k = 6) parity problem
considered in Figure 4, this problem is harder for the models to learn as the number of secret vari-
ables k is larger. We examine various configurations: the number of layers and heads ranges from
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8; the learning rate varies from 6 × 10−6 , 8 × 10−8 , to 1 × 10−4 ; and the training
dataset size varies from 104 , 105 to 106 , with corresponding epochs ranging from 1000, 100 to 10.
Across all configurations we examined, training without CoT fails to achieve non-trivial accuracy
(Figure 9). In contrast, models trained with CoT achieve perfect evaluation accuracy when trained
on a dataset with 10, 000 samples for only 6 epochs, or with approximately 60, 000 fresh samples in
one-pass training setting.
In Figure 5, a 4-layer 4-head transformer achieves perfect evaluation accuracy on (n = 20, k = 6)
problem when trained on a small dataset of 50000 samples, but fails to achieve non-trivial accuracy
when trained on a larger dataset. Furthermore, successful learning coincides with a significant de-
crease in attention entropy, indicating the development of sparse attention, while entropy remains
high when trained on a larger dataset. In Figure 10, we present more results across different ar-
chitectures (1-layer 1-head, 2-layer 3-head and 4-layer 4-head transformers) with dataset size of
5000, 10000, 50000, 100000, 1000000, and observe the same pattern.


                                                   41
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Layer 1                  Layer 2                   Layer 3                  Layer 4
          Normalized Attention Entropy
                                                                                       0.8
                                                              0.6                                                0.6
                                     0.4                                               0.6
                                                              0.4                      0.4                       0.4
                                     0.2
                                                              0.2                      0.2                       0.2
                                     0.0 1              28    0.0 1              28    0.0 1               28    0.0 1              28
                                              head                     head                      head                     head
                                             Layer 5                  Layer 6                   Layer 7                  Layer 8
          Normalized Attention Entropy


                                     0.3
                                                             0.15                      0.3                       0.3
                                     0.2
                                                             0.10                      0.2                       0.2
                                     0.1                                                                         0.1
                                                             0.05                      0.1
                                     0.0 1              28 0.00 1                28    0.0 1               28    0.0 1              28
                                              head                      head                      head                     head
                                             Layer 9                  Layer 10                  Layer 11                 Layer 12
          Normalized Attention Entropy


                                                                                       0.4
                                                              0.2                                                0.2
                                     0.2                                               0.3
                                                                                       0.2
                                     0.1                      0.1                                                0.1
                                                                                       0.1
                                     0.0 1              28    0.0 1              28    0.0 1               28    0.0 1              28
                                               head                     head                      head                     head          Qwen2-7B+
                                             Layer 13                 Layer 14                  Layer 15                 Layer 16        No CoT
          Normalized Attention Entropy


                                                              0.4                      0.3                                               Qwen2-7B+
                                                                                                                 0.3
                                     0.2                                                                                                 With CoT
                                                              0.3                                                                        Qwen2-Math-7B+
                                                                                       0.2                       0.2                     With CoT
                                                              0.2
                                     0.1                                               0.1
                                                              0.1                                                0.1

                                     0.0 1              28    0.0 1              28    0.0 1               28    0.0 1              28
                                               head                     head                      head                     head
                                             Layer 17                 Layer 18                  Layer 19                 Layer 20
          Normalized Attention Entropy


                                                              0.3                      0.4
                                                                                                                 0.3
                                     0.2                                               0.3
                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                       0.2
                                     0.1                      0.1
                                                                                       0.1                       0.1
                                     0.0 1              28    0.0 1              28    0.0 1               28    0.0 1              28
                                               head                     head                      head                     head
                                             Layer 21                 Layer 22                  Layer 23                 Layer 24
          Normalized Attention Entropy


                                     0.3                                                                        0.08
                                                           0.20                     0.100
                                                                                                                0.06
                                     0.2                   0.15                     0.075
                                                           0.10                     0.050                       0.04
                                     0.1                                                                        0.02
                                                           0.05                     0.025
                                     0.0 1              28 0.00 1                28 0.000 1                28 0.00 1                28
                                               head                     head                      head                     head
                                             Layer 25                 Layer 26                  Layer 27                 Layer 28
Normalized Attention Entropy


                                                                                      0.20
                           0.08
                                                              0.2                     0.15                      0.10
                           0.06
                           0.04                                                       0.10
                                                              0.1                                               0.05
                           0.02                                                       0.05
                           0.00 1                       28    0.0 1              28 0.00 1                 28 0.00 1                28
                                              head                     head                         head                  head

     Figure 7: The normalized attention entropy of the pre-trained Qwen2-7B and math-specialized
     Qwen2-Math-7B models on the GSM8K dataset with and without CoT prompting (Section 4.3).
     Each bar represents the entropy of an attention head.



                                                                                               42
                                                                                                                        Layer Number                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Layer 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50 49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Layer 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50 49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                       8 6 4 3 2 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    190                                                                                190
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    11                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    189                                                                                189
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                                  2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          problem with CoT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    212                                                                                212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    23                                                                                 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    24                                                                                 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    25                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    26                                                                                 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    27                                                                                 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    289                                                                                289
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30                                                                                 30


                                                                                                   Head Number
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    312                                                                                312
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    33                                                                                 33


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Head 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Head 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    34                                                                                 34


                                                                                                         1 2 3 4 6 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    35                                                                                 35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    36                                                                                 36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    37                                                                                 37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    389                                                                                389
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                        Layer Number                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    412                                                                                412
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    43                                                                                 43
                                                                                                                       8 6 4 3 2 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    445                                                                                445
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    46                                                                                 46
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    47                                                                                 47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    489                                                                                489
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5                                                                                  5


     accuracy under different configurations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    512                                                                                512
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    53                                                                                 53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    545                                                                                545
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    56                                                                                 56
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    57                                                                                 57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    58                                                                                 58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    59                                                                                 59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0


43
                                                                                                   Head Number
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Attention Pattern


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Layer 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50 49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Layer 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50 49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                  0


                                                                                                         1 2 3 4 6 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                        Layer Number                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                       8 6 4 3 2 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  190                                                                                190
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    11                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    145                                                                                145
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    18                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    212                                                                                212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    23                                                                                 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    245                                                                                245
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    26                                                                                 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    27                                                                                 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    28                                                                                 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    29                                                                                 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    312                                                                                312
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    33                                                                                 33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Head 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Head 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    345                                                                                345
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    36                                                                                 36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    378                                                                                378


                                                                                                   Head Number
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    39                                                                                 39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    41                                                                                 41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    42                                                                                 42


                                                                                                         1 2 3 4 6 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    43                                                                                 43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    445                                                                                445
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    46                                                                                 46
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    478                                                                                478
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    49                                                                                 49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    51                                                                                 51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    52                                                                                 52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    53                                                                                 53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    545                                                                                545
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    56                                                                                 56


                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                   0.7
                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                               0.9
                                                                                                                                                     10000 samples × 1000 epochs 100000 samples × 100 epochs 1000000 samples × 10 epochs 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    578                                                                                578
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    59                                                                                 59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                                 60


     Figure 9: Training with CoT on (n = 20, k = 12) parity problem fails to achieve non-trivial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 8: The attention pattern learned by a 2-layer 2-head transformer on (n = 20, k = 6) parity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5000 training samples                                        1 layer 2 heads   1.2
                                                                                                     2 layers 3 heads 1.2                       4 layers 4 heads 1.2
                                                   1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                                               1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                   0.9                                     0.9                                        0.9
                                                                               0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
      Accuracy


                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                           Accuracy
                                                   0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8


                                                                                  Loss


                                                                                                                             Loss


                                                                                                                                                                   Loss
                                                                               0.6                                     0.6                                        0.6
                                                   0.7                         0.4         0.7                         0.4            0.7                         0.4
                                                   0.6                         0.2         0.6                         0.2            0.6                         0.2
                                                   0.5                         0.0         0.5                         0.0            0.5                         0.0
                                                         0        10000    20000                 0         10000   20000                    0         10000   20000
                                                                  Steps                                   Steps                                      Steps
                                                                               1.2                                     1.2                                        1.2
10000 training samples


                                                   1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                                               1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                   0.9                                     0.9                                        0.9
                                                                               0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
      Accuracy


                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                           Accuracy
                                                   0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
                                                                                  Loss


                                                                                                                             Loss


                                                                                                                                                                   Loss
                                                                               0.6                                     0.6                                        0.6
                                                   0.7                         0.4         0.7                         0.4            0.7                         0.4
                                                   0.6                         0.2         0.6                         0.2            0.6                         0.2
                                                   0.5                         0.0         0.5                         0.0            0.5                         0.0
                                                         0        10000    20000                 0         10000   20000                    0         10000   20000
                                                                  Steps                                   Steps                                      Steps
                                                                               1.2                                     1.2                                        1.2
50000 training samples


                                                   1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                                               1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                   0.9                                     0.9                                        0.9
                                                                               0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
      Accuracy


                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                           Accuracy
                                                   0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
                                                                                  Loss


                                                                                                                             Loss


                                                                                                                                                                   Loss
                                                                               0.6                                     0.6                                        0.6
                                                   0.7                         0.4         0.7                         0.4            0.7                         0.4
                                                   0.6                         0.2         0.6                         0.2            0.6                         0.2
                                                   0.5                         0.0         0.5                         0.0            0.5                         0.0
                                                         0        10000    20000                 0         10000   20000                    0         10000   20000
                                                                  Steps                                   Steps                                      Steps
                                                                               1.2                                     1.2                                        1.2
1000000 training samples 100000 training samples


                                                   1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                                               1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                   0.9                                     0.9                                        0.9
                                                                               0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
                               Accuracy


                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                           Accuracy


                                                   0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
                                                                                  Loss


                                                                                                                             Loss


                                                                                                                                                                   Loss
                                                                               0.6                                     0.6                                        0.6
                                                   0.7                         0.4         0.7                         0.4            0.7                         0.4
                                                   0.6                         0.2         0.6                         0.2            0.6                         0.2
                                                   0.5                         0.0         0.5                         0.0            0.5                         0.0
                                                         0        10000    20000                 0         10000   20000                    0         10000   20000
                                                                  Steps                                   Steps                                      Steps
                                                                               1.2                                     1.2                                        1.2
                                                   1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                                               1.0                                     1.0                                        1.0
                                                   0.9                                     0.9                                        0.9
                                                                               0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
       Accuracy


                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                           Accuracy


                                                   0.8                                     0.8                                        0.8
                                                                                  Loss


                                                                                                                             Loss


                                                                                                                                                                   Loss


                                                                               0.6                                     0.6                                        0.6
                                                   0.7                         0.4         0.7                         0.4            0.7                         0.4
                                                   0.6                         0.2         0.6                         0.2            0.6                         0.2
                                                   0.5                         0.0         0.5                         0.0            0.5                         0.0
                                                         0        10000    20000                 0         10000   20000                    0         10000   20000
                                                                  Steps                                   Steps                                      Steps
                                                                                                     Evaluation Accuracy
                                                                                                     Training Loss
                                                                                                     Evaluation Loss

    Figure 10: Transformer trained on the (n = 20, k = 6) parity problem without CoT with different
    sizes of training dataset and a fixed number of iterations.


                                                                                                          44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         Layer 1                          Layer 2                                                                                          Layer 1
Normalized Attention Entropy Normalized Attention Entropy


                                                                                                                                 Normalized Attention Entropy Normalized Attention Entropy
                                                            1.0                              1.0                                                                                             1.0
                               50000 training samples


                                                                                                                                                                50000 training samples
                                                            0.8                              0.8                                                                                             0.8
                                                            0.6                              0.6                                                                                             0.6
                                                            0.4                              0.4                                                                                             0.4
                                                            0.2                              0.2                                                                                             0.2
                                                            0.00.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                                                                           0.00.00
                                                                                                                                                                                             head 0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                             head 1 Iterations × Batch Size 1e7   head 0
                                                                   Iterations × Batch Size 1e7     Iterations × Batch Size 1e7                                                                                                    head 1
                                                            1.0                                1.0                                                                                           head
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0 2
 1000000 training samples


                                                                                                                                  1000000 training samples

                                                            0.8                              0.8                                                                                             0.8
                                                            0.6                              0.6                                                                                             0.6
                                                            0.4                              0.4                                                                                             0.4
                                                            0.2                              0.2                                                                                             0.2
                                                            0.00.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                                                                          0.00.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                                                   Iterations × Batch Size 1e7 Iterations × Batch Size 1e7                                                                          Iterations × Batch Size 1e7
                                                                        (a) 2-layer 3-head transformer                                                    (b) 1-layer 2-head transformer

Figure 11: Normalized attention entropy curve of transformers training on the (n = 20, k = 6)
parity problem without CoT. Each line in the graph represents the attention entropy for a head of a
certain layer.


                                                                                                          45
