Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF S ELF -S UPERVISED
L EARNING FOR V ISION T RANSFORMERS
 Yu HuangвҖ вҲ—, Zixin WenвҖЎвҲ—, Yuejie ChiвҖЎ , Yingbin LiangВ§
 вҖ 
   University of Pennsylvania вҖЎ Carnegie Mellon University В§ The Ohio State University



                                                     A BSTRACT

             Self-supervised learning has become a cornerstone in computer vision, primarily
             divided into reconstruction-based methods like masked autoencoders (MAE) and
             discriminative methods such as contrastive learning (CL). Recent empirical ob-
             servations reveal that MAE and CL capture different types of representations: CL
             tends to focus on global patterns, while MAE adeptly captures both global and
             subtle local information simultaneously. Despite a flurry of recent empirical inves-
             tigations to shed light on this difference, theoretical understanding remains limited,
             especially on the dominant architecture vision transformers (ViTs). In this paper,
             to provide rigorous insights, we model the visual data distribution by considering
             two types of spatial features: dominant global features and comparatively minus-
             cule local features, and study the impact of imbalance among these features. We
             analyze the training dynamics of one-layer softmax-based ViTs on both MAE and
             CL objectives using gradient descent. Our analysis shows that as the degree of
             feature imbalance varies, ViTs trained with the MAE objective effectively learn
             both global and local features to achieve near-optimal reconstruction, while the
             CL-trained ViTs favor predominantly global features, even under mild imbalance.
             These results provide a theoretical explanation for distinct behaviors of MAE and
             CL observed in empirical studies.



1       I NTRODUCTION

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has been a leading approach to pretrain neural networks for down-
stream applications since the introduction of BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT (Radford et al.,
2018) in natural language processing (NLP). On the other hand, in vision, self-supervised learning
focused more on discriminative methods, which include contrastive learning (CL) (He et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020) and non-contrastive learning methods (Grill et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Caron
et al., 2021; Zbontar et al., 2021). Inspired by masked language models in NLP and the seminal
work of vision transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), generative approaches, such as masked
reconstruction-based methods, have gained prominence in self-supervised vision pretraining. The
masked autoencoders (MAE) (He et al., 2022) and SimMIM (Xie et al., 2022) have demonstrated the
effectiveness of visual representation learning via reconstruction-based objectives.
Contrastive learning-like objectives promote instance discrimination among samples in the same
batch of training. With suitable data augmentation, CL returns well-trained vision encoders like
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and DINO (Caron et al., 2021) that can serve as backbones for state-
of-the-art multimodal large language models (MLLMs) (Tong et al., 2024). Masked reconstruction
objectives (e.g., MAE), on the other hand, enforce neural networks to reconstruct some or all patches
of an image given masked inputs. In practice, the MAE-like approach proves to have intriguing
generalization properties that differ significantly from the behaviors in CL. The seminal work (He
et al., 2022) showed that MAE can visibly conduct visual reasoning to fill missing patches even under
very high masking rates. Some critical observations from recent research (Wei et al., 2022b; Park
et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023) provide comparative studies of these SSL approaches. They concluded
that the ViTs trained via generative objectives display diverse attention patterns: different query
patches pay attention to distinct local areas. This is in sharp contrast to the discriminative approaches,
    *
        The first two authors contributed equally.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        DINO              MoCo          MAE


                             Query 2                                            Generative: diverse
                                                                                  local patterns
                                                                                  associated with
                                                                                   query patches


                             Query 1


                                       Discriminative: collapse into
                                       analogous attention patterns


Figure 1: Visualization of attention maps in the last layer of ViT for query patches from two different
spatial locations, similar to those presented in Park et al. (2023). The ViTs were trained by the
generative self-supervised learning approach of masked reconstruction (MAE) and discriminative
methods: DINO (Caron et al., 2021) and MoCo (Chen et al., 2021b).

whose attention heads focus primarily on the most significant global pattern regardless of where the
query patches are, as shown in Figure 1. These empirical observations motivate the question: from
a theoretical standpoint, how do ViTs pick up these observed attention patterns during the training
process, respectively for different SSL methods?
Despite extensive empirical efforts of studying SSL in vision pretraining, its theoretical understanding
is still nascent. Most existing theories of SSL focused on the discriminative approach (Arora et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2021a; Robinson et al., 2021; HaoChen et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; Wen & Li, 2021; 2022), especially (non-)contrastive learning. There are also a few attempts
towards understanding methods using the generative approach like masked reconstructions (Cao et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2022; HaoChen et al., 2021; Pan et al., 2022), which mainly adapt the theories
developed for CL to their context. In fact, there are two major limitations of these prior works: i)
Transformers, as the dominant architecture in practice, were not studied in the aforementioned
works of self-supervised learning and ii) there still lacks a suitable theoretical framework that can
provide convincing explanations for the empirical findings in Park et al. (2023); Xie et al. (2023),
especially on the difference of the attention patterns learned by the different approaches of SSL. The
above limitations highlight a significant gap in the literature on SSL for vision pretraining1 .
Motivated by the limited theoretical characterization of SSL for vision with transformers, especially
in comparing CL and masked reconstruction objectives, we aim to address the following research
questions:
                                     Our Research Questions
 Can we theoretically characterize the solutions that ViTs converge to in these two mainstream
 self-supervised learning approaches? How do differences in attention patterns emerge during their
 respective training processes?

Contributions. In this paper, we take a step toward answering the above questions. We study the
gradient descent (GD) training process of one-layer softmax-based ViTs for both masked reconstruc-
tion and contrastive learning, focusing on spatially structured data distributions generalized from
supervised learning settings (Jelassi et al., 2022). In our setting, each image is sampled from distinct
clusters characterized by unique patch-wise feature associations. Each cluster contains two types
of features: a large portion of patches reside in a global area and share global features, while the
remaining local areas contain relatively few patches with their own local features. We measure the
imbalance of feature distribution by a condition called the information gap вҲҶ, which is defined in
eq. (4.1). Under such setting:


   1
       More detailed discussions for related work can be found in Appendix A.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. We provide global convergence guarantees for training ViTs on both the MAE and the
         CL loss fucntions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first end-to-end guarantee for
         learning ViTs with self-supervised learning objectives;
      2. We provide a comprehensive characterization of the training dynamics of attention corre-
         lations (see Definition 3.1) to illustrate the attention patterns to which ViTs converge: i).
         MAE provably learns diverse attention patterns, with each patch concentrating its attention
         on its designated area based on its position, even under a substantial information gap вҲҶ; ii).
         CL primarily learns a global attention pattern, causing all patches to focus on the global
         area regardless of their locations, even with a minor вҲҶ. These qualitative differences in
         the solutions learned by these two SSL methods provide strong theoretical support for the
         empirical behavior gaps observed in Park et al. (2023); Xie et al. (2023), and highlight the
         theoretical advantage of MAE in handling highly imbalanced data structures.

Notation. We introduce notations to be used throughout the paper. For any two functions h(x) and
g(x), we use h(x) = в„Ұ(g(x)) resp. h(x) = O(g(x)) to denote that there exist           some universal
constants C1 > 0 and a1 , s.t. |h(x)| вүҘ C1 |g(x)| resp. |h(x)| вүӨ C1 |g(x)| for all x вүҘ a1 ;
Furthermore, h(x) = Оҳ(g(x)) indicates h(x) = в„Ұ(g(x)) and h(x) = O(g(x)) hold simultaneously.
We use 1{В·} to denote the indicator function, and let [N ] := {1, 2, . . . , N }. We use O,
                                                                                         e в„Ұ,
                                                                                            e and Оҳ
                                                                                                  e
to further hide logarithmic factors in the respective notations. We use poly(P ) and polylog(P ) to
represent large constant-degree polynomials of P and log(P ), respectively.

2     P ROBLEM S ETUP
In this section, we present our problem formulations for studying the training process of ViTs in
self-supervised pretraining. We begin with some background information, followed by a description
of our data distribution. We then detail the pretraining strategies using MAE and CL respectively
with the specific transformer architecture considered in this paper.

2.1   BACKGROUND ON S ELF - SUPERVISED L EARNING

Masked reconstruction-based learning. We follow the masked reconstruction frameworks in He
et al. (2022); Xie et al. (2022). Each data sample X вҲҲ RdГ—P has the form X = (Xp )pвҲҲP , which
has |P| = P patches, and each patch Xp вҲҲ Rd . Given a collection of images {Xi }iвҲҲ[n] , we select a
masking set Mi вҠӮ P for each image Xi , and mask these patches to a uniform value M вҲҲ Rd . The
resulting masked images {M(Xi )}iвҲҲ[n] are given by

                                          [Xi ]p p вҲҲ Ui
                            M(Xi )p =                    ,      i вҲҲ [n],                      (2.1)
                                            M    p вҲҲ Mi

where Ui = P \ Mi is the index set of unmasked patches. Let F : X 7вҶ’ X       b be an architecture that
                               b вҲҲR   dГ—P                              dГ—P
outputs a reconstructed image X           for any given input X вҲҲ R        . The pretraining objective
is then defined as the mean-squared reconstruction loss over a series of subsets PiвҖІ вҠӮ P of the image
as follows:
                                      Pn P                                      2
                     Lmasked (F ) = n1 i=1 pвҲҲP вҖІ [Xi ]p вҲ’ [F (M(Xi ))]p .                        (2.2)
                                                      i                        2
MAE (He et al., 2022) chose the subset PiвҖІ as the set of masked patches Mi , whereas SimMIM (Xie
et al., 2022) aimed to reconstruct the full image PiвҖІ = P. We do not explore the trade-offs between
these two approaches in our study.
Contrastive learning. Contrastive learning (Chen et al., 2020) aims to learn meaningful representa-
tions F by distinguishing between similar and dissimilar data points. For a given batch {Xi }iвҲҲ[n] , we
                           (1)    (2)
generate a positive pair (Xi , Xi ) for each i by applying random augmentations to Xi . Negative
         (1)   (2)
pairs (Xi , Xj ) for j Мё= i are formed from different data points. The model F is trained to
minimize the following contrastive loss:
                                           "                                           !#
                                                                    (1)    (2)
                                                          e F( i           i )
                                      Pn                   Sim    X     ,X      /П„
                                    1
                Lcontrastive (F ) = n i=1 вҲ’П„ log P                       (1)    (2)       , (2.3)
                                                               e F( i           j )
                                                                Sim   X      ,X     /П„
                                                           jвҲҲ[n]


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Sampling                                     рқ’«!,&         Global
                                                      рқ’«#,$       рқ’«!,%
                                             рқ’«#,#
                    head!
                                                                         рқ’«!,#         Local
               рқ’ҹ#                                                рқ’«!,$
                                                      рқ’«#,&

                       вҖҰ
                                          рқ’«#,%
                     вҖҰ      {рқ’ҹ' }!
                                 '(#



Figure 2: Illustration of our data distribution (see Definition 2.1). Each cluster Dk is segmented into
distinct areas Pk,j , with squares in the same color representing the same area Pk,j . The global area
Pk,1 (depicted in orange) contains a larger count of patches compared to any other local areas. It is
important to note that while we use spatially contiguous partitions for clarity in this illustration, our
data model is also applicable to non-contiguous cases.

where SimF measures the similarity between two representations, and П„ is a temperature parameter
controlling the sharpness of the distribution.

2.2        DATA D ISTRIBUTION

We assume the data samples X вҲҲ RdГ—P are drawn independently based on some data distribution D.
To capture the feature-position (FP) correlation in the learning problem, we consider the following
setup for vision data. We assume that the data distribution consists of many different clusters, where
each cluster captures a distinct spatial pattern, and hence is defined by a different partition of patches
with a different set of visual features. We define the data distribution D formally as follows. An
intuitive illustration of data generation is given in Figure 2.
Definition 2.1 (Data distribution D). The data distribution D has K = O(polylog(P )) different
clusters {Dk }Kk=1 . For every cluster Dk , k вҲҲ [K], there is a corresponding partition of P into Nk
                      SN k
disjoint subsets P = j=1 Pk,j which we call areas. For each sample X = (Xp )pвҲҲP , its sampling
process is as follows:
вҖў We draw Dk uniformly at random from all clusters and draw a sample X from Dk .
вҖў Given k вҲҲ [K], for any j вҲҲ [Nk ], all patches Xp in the area Pk,j are given the same content
  Xp = vk,j zj (X), where vk,j вҲҲ Rd is the visual feature and zj (X) is the latent variable. We
         SK SNk
  assume k=1 j=1    {vk,j } are orthogonal to each other with unit norm.

вҖў Given k вҲҲ [K], for any j вҲҲ [Nk ], zj (X) вҲҲ [L, U ], where 0 вүӨ L < U are on the order of Оҳ(1).2

Global and local features, and empirical observations in prior works. Image data naturally
contains two types of features: the global features and the local features. For instance, in an image of
an object, global features can capture the shape and texture of the object, such as the fur color of an
animal, whereas local features describe specific details of local areas, such as the texture of leaves in
the background. Recent empirical studies on self-supervised pretraining with ViTs (Park et al., 2023;
Wei et al., 2022b) and observations in Figure 1 collectively show that masked pretraining exhibits
the capacity to avoid attention collapse concentrating towards those global shapes by identifying
diverse local attention patterns. Consequently, unraveling their mechanisms necessitates a thorough
examination of data characteristics that embody both global and local features. In this paper, we
characterize these two types of features by the following assumption on the data.
Assumption 2.2 (Global feature vs local feature). Let Dk with k вҲҲ [K] be a cluster from D. We let
Pk,1 be the global area of cluster Dk , and all the other areas Pk,j , j вҲҲ [Nk ] \ {1} be the local areas.
Since each area corresponds to an assigned feature, we also call them the global and local features,
respectively. Moreover, we assume:
вҖў Global area: given k вҲҲ [K], we set Ck,1 = |Pk,1 | = Оҳ(P Оәc ) with Оәc вҲҲ [0.5005, 1], where Ck,1 is
  the number of patches in the global area Pk,1 .
      2
          The distribution of zj (X) can be arbitrary within the above support set.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Attention Diversity Metric: We design a novel empirical metric, the attention diversity
metric, to probe the last layer of ViTs trained by masked reconstructions (MAE), CL (MoCo), another
discriminative SSL approach (DINO), and supervised learning (DeiT). Lower values of this metric
signify focused attention on a similar area across different patches, reflecting a global pattern of
focus. Conversely, higher values suggest that attention is dispersed, focusing on different, localized
areas. The results show that the MAE model excels in capturing diverse local patterns compared to
discriminative methods like CL. (see Appendix B for details).

вҖў Local area: given k вҲҲ [K], we choose Ck,j = Оҳ(P Оәs ) with Оәs вҲҲ [0.001, 0.5] for j > 1, where
  Ck,j denotes the number of patches in the local area Pk,j .

The rationale for defining the global feature in this manner stems from observing that patches
representing global features (Ck,1 ) typically occur more frequently than those representing local
features (Ck,j , for j > 1), since global features capture the primary visual information of an image,
offering a dominant view, while local features focus on subtler details within the image. Our empirical
observations (see Figure 3) further substantiate the significance of distinguishing between global and
local patterns in data distributions, which is essential for elucidating the distinct behaviors exhibited
by MAE and CL.

2.3   M ASKED R ECONSTRUCTION WITH T RANSFORMERS

Transformer architecture. A transformer block (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)
consists of a self-attention layer followed by an MLP layer. The self-attention layer has multiple
heads, each of which consists of the following components: a query matrix W Q , a key matrix W K ,
and a value matrix W V . Given an input X, the output of one head in the self-attention layer can be
described by the following mapping:
                G(X; W Q , W K , W V ) = softmax (W Q X)вҠӨ W K X В· (W V X)вҠӨ ,

                                                                                                (2.4)

where the softmax(В·) function is applied row-wisely and for a vector input z вҲҲ RP , the i-th entry of
softmax(z) is given by PPexp(z i)
                             exp(z )
                                     .
                           s=1      s


To simplify the theoretical analysis, we consolidate the product of query and key matrices (W Q )вҠӨ W K
into one weight matrix denoted as Q. Furthermore, we set W V to be the identity matrix and fixed
during the training. These simplifications are often taken in recent theoretical works (Jelassi et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a) in order to allow tractable analysis. With these
simplifications in place, eq. (2.4) can be rewritten as
                                G(X; Q) = softmax X вҠӨ QX В· X вҠӨ .

                                                                                                   (2.5)
Input tokens in transformers are indistinguishable without explicit spatial information. Therefore,
positional encodings should be added to the input embeddings to retain this crucial positional context
as in practices (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; He et al., 2022). Our assumptions regarding the positional
encodings are as follows:
Assumption 2.3 (Positional encoding). We assume fixed positional encodings, which is consistent
with the implementation in MAE (He et al., 2022): E = (ep )pвҲҲP вҲҲ RdГ—P where positional
embedding vectors ep are orthogonal to each other and to all the features vk,j , and are of unit-norm.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now include positional embeddings in eq. (2.5) and introduce the network architecture for masked
reconstruction used in this study.
Definition 2.4 (ViTs for MAE). We assume that our vision transformer F mae (X; Q) consists of
a single-head self-attention layer with an attention weight matrix Q вҲҲ RdГ—d . For an input image
X вҲј D, we add positional encoding by letting X   e = X + E. The attention score from patch Xp to
patch Xq is denoted by
                                                   fвҠӨ QX
                                                   X     fq
                                                     p
                        attnmpвҶ’q (X; Q) := P e         fвҠӨ QX
                                                       X    fr   ,   for p, q вҲҲ P.                (2.6)
                                                        p
                                                 rвҲҲP e

Then the output of the transformer is given by
                                       X
                    [F mae (X; Q)]p =      attnmpвҶ’q (X; Q) В· Xq ,          for p вҲҲ P.             (2.7)
                                       qвҲҲP


Then we formally define the masking operation and the objective for our masked pretraining task.
Definition 2.5 (Random masking). Let M(X) вҶ’ RdГ—P denote the random masking operation,
which randomly selects (without replacement) a subset of patches M in X with a masking ratio
Оі = Оҳ(1) вҲҲ (0, 1) and masks them to be M := 0 вҲҲ Rd . The masked samples obey eq. (2.1).

MAE objective. To train the model F mae (M(X); Q), following the methodology described in MAE
practice (He et al., 2022), we minimize the squared reconstruction error in eq. (2.2) only on masked
patches, where M(X) follows Def. 2.5. The training objective thus can be written as
                                 пЈ®                                                 пЈ№
                              1 пЈ°X                                               2
                 Lmae (Q) := E         1{p вҲҲ M} [F mae (M(X); Q)]p вҲ’ Xp пЈ» ,                     (2.8)
                              2
                                   pвҲҲP

where the expectation is with respect to both the data distribution and the masking. Note that our
objective remains highly nonconvex with the model defined in Definition 2.4.
Training algorithm. The learning objective in eq. (2.8) is minimized via GD with learning rate
О· > 0. At t = 0, we initialize Q(0) := 0dГ—d as the zero matrix. The parameter is updated as follows:
                                 Q(t+1) = Q(t) вҲ’ О·вҲҮQ Lmae (Q(t) ).
Note that the initialization of Q(0) results in any query patch uniformly attending to all patches.

2.4   C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING WITH TRANSFORMERS

The transformer architecture used for CL is similar to that of MAE, but with a minor modification to
accommodate contrastive loss, as outlined below.
Definition 2.6 (ViTs for CL). We consider a vision transformer F cl (X; Q) consisting of a single-
head self-attention layer with an attention weight matrix Q вҲҲ RdГ—d . For an input image X, the
attention score from patch Xp to patch Xq is denoted by
                                                   eвҠӨ
                                                    p QXq
                        attncpвҶ’q (X; Q) := P e          вҠӨ QXr
                                                       ep
                                                                 ,   for p, q вҲҲ P.                (2.9)
                                                 rвҲҲP e

The output of the transformer is then computed as
                                      1 X
                      F cl (X; Q) =          attncpвҶ’q (X; Q) В· Xq             вҲҲ Rd .            (2.10)
                                     P
                                         p,qвҲҲP

which represents the average pooling of all the patches.

The key distinction is that we separate the positional and patch embeddings within the attention
mechanism for technical simplicity. However, it is important to emphasize that these two types of
embeddings remain coupled for attention calculations.
Definition 2.7 (Data augmentation). For a sample X вҲҲ Rd , we generate two new samples X + and
X ++ by independently applying random masking as in Def. 2.5 with a ratio Оі0 = Оҳ(1), similar to
the crop-resize operations used in practice. The unmasked sets for them are denoted as U + and U ++ .


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CL objective. Given a sample X, we first generate a pair of positive samples {X + , X ++ } via
Def. 2.7. Then we generate a batch of i.i.d. negative samples N = {X вҲ’,s }sвҲҲ[Nc ] . Denoting
B = N вҲӘ {X ++ }, we minimize the expected contrastive loss in eq. (2.3) with в„“2 -regularization:
                                                       +     ++
                                "                                         !#
                                            eSimF cl (X ,X )/П„                О»
        Lcl (Q) := EX + ,X ++ ,N вҲ’П„ log P           SimF cl (X + ,X вҖІ )/П„
                                                                             + вҲҘQвҲҘ2F ,       (2.11)
                                             вҖІ
                                           X вҲҲB   e                           2

where вҲҘ В· вҲҘF denotes the Frobenius norm, О» > 0 is the regularization parameter, and the similarity of
the representations of X and X вҖІ obtained by F cl (В·; Q) is defined as
                   SimF cl (X, X вҖІ ) := F cl (X; Q), StopGrad F cl (X вҖІ ; Q) .


The StopGrad(В·) operator ensures that no gradient is computed for this term. Additionally, no
augmentation is applied to the negative samples. Both practices are standard in the literature on the
theory of contrastive learning (Wen & Li, 2021; 2022). Similar to MAE, we update Q by GD with
zero-initialization:
                                   Q(t+1) = Q(t) вҲ’ О·вҲҮQ Lcl (Q(t) ).                                  (2.12)
In the following, any variable with a superscript (t) represents that variable at the t-th step of training.

3    ATTENTION PATTERNS AND F EATURE -P OSITION C ORRELATIONS
To show the significance of the data distribution design and understand the nature of our self-
supervised learning tasks, in this section, we will provide some preliminary implications of the spatial
structures in Def. 2.1. Intuitively, for MAE, for a given cluster Dk , to reconstruct a missing patch
p вҲҲ Pk,j вҲ© M, the attention head should exploit all unmasked patches in the target area Pk,j to
find the same visual feature vk,j to fill in the blank, which emphasizes the locality for p in different
areas. However, CL focuses on any discriminative patterns regardless of the location of p, which can
align positive pairs but may lead to collapsed attention patterns. We will elaborate on these points
by describing the area attentions and illustrating the intuition about how they can be learned via
attention correlations (Def. 3.1).
Area attention. We first define a new notation for a cleaner presentation. For X вҲј D and p вҲҲ P, we
write the attention of patch Xp to a subset A вҠӮ P of patches by
                        вҖ 
                                                    вҖ 
                                          P
                  ^pвҶ’A (X; Q) :=
                  Attn                      qвҲҲA attnpвҶ’q (X; Q),           for вҖ  вҲҲ {m, c}.
MAEвҖҷs ability to learn locality with ViTs. Let us first explain why the above notion of area attention
matters in understanding how attention works in masked reconstruction. Suppose we have a sample
X picked from Dk , and the patch Xp with p вҲҲ Pk,j is masked. Then the prediction of Xp given
masked input M(X) can be written as
      [F mae (M(X); Q)]p = qвҲҲP M(X)q В· attnmpвҶ’q (M(X); Q)
                             P

              P                        m
           = iвҲҲ[Nk ] zi (X)vk,i В· Attn
                                  ^pвҶ’U вҲ©P (M(X); Q) (since M(X)q = 0 if q вҲҲ M).
                                               k,i


To reconstruct the original patch Xp , the transformer should not only focus on the correct area Pk,j ,
but must also prioritize attention to the unmasked patches within this area. This specificity is denoted
                             m
                       ^pвҶ’U вҲ©P over U вҲ© Pk,j , a requirement imposed by masking operations.
by the area attention Attn           k,j
We refer to these location-dependent attention patterns as locality.
To further explain how ViTs perform such prioritization, we introduce the following quantities, which
capture the major insights of our analysis to distinguish between MAE and contrastive learning.
Definition 3.1. (Attention correlations) Let p вҲҲ P, and we define attention correlations as:
1. Feature-Position (FP) Correlation: ОҰpвҶ’vk,m := eвҠӨ
                                                  p Qvk,m , for k вҲҲ [K] and m вҲҲ [Nk ];

2. Position-Position (PP) Correlation: ОҘpвҶ’q := eвҠӨ
                                                p Qeq , вҲҖq вҲҲ P.
                                                         (0)        (0)
Due to our (zero) initialization of Q(0) , we have ОҰpвҶ’vk,m = ОҘpвҶ’q = 0.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These two types of attention correlations, FP correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,m and PP correlation ОҰpвҶ’q , act as
the exponent terms within the softmax calculations for attention scores. Given p вҲҲ Pk,j is masked,
the (unnormalized) attention attnmpвҶ’q directed towards an unmasked patch q is influenced jointly
by these correlations. Hence, the described attention pattern for MAE can emerge from either a
substantial FP correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,j or a significant PP correlation ОҰpвҶ’q for q in the same area as p.
However, in our setting, the latter mechanismвҖ”learning via PP correlationвҖ”fails to produce desired
attention patterns: i). such a mechanism inadvertently directs attention to the masked patches, which
is not desirable; ii). such position association could be vulnerable to the variation across different
clusters, i.e., p, q вҲҲ Pk,j does not necessarily hold for all k вҲҲ [K]. This also highlights that prior
work (Jelassi et al., 2022) that relied solely on pure positional attention cannot fully explain the ViTsвҖҷ
ability to learn locality when the patch-wise associations are not fixed.
Why CL may fail to explore the locality. Now turning to CL, for X вҲҲ Dk , we have the following
form of similarity between the positive pair:
         вҹЁF cl (X + ; Q), F cl (X ++ ; Q)вҹ©
                              PNk          c                        c
            = P12 p,pвҖІ вҲҲP i=1       ^pвҶ’U + вҲ©P (X + ; Q)Attn   ^pвҖІ вҶ’U ++ вҲ©P (X ++ ; Q).
                    P
                                    Attn          k,i                         k,i

Thus, to align the positive representations effectively, the optimal strategy is also to direct atten-
tion toward a specific area for each patch p, i.e., greedily ensuring that only one area attention
      c
^pвҶ’U + вҲ©P is activated for some i вҲҲ [Nk ]. However, the above expression suggests that the
Attn            k,i
selected area by the optimal strategy may not necessarily depend on the location p, which could
lead to a collapsed attention scenario where all patches focus on the same area. Regarding attention
correlations, the attention mechanism defined in eq. (2.9) requires us to handle only the FP corre-
lations among different features for CL. Theorem 4.4 in the next section confirms that a collapsed
solution indeed occurs: ViTs trained with CL concentrate attention on the global area across all
patches by exclusively capturing global FP correlations across all patches, i.e., ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 becomes
large for вҲҖp вҲҲ P.

4     S TATEMENTS OF M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we present our main theorems on the learning processes of ViTs in MAE and CL. We
begin by introducing notations that will be used in theorem presentations.
Information gap and a technical condition. Based on our data model in Section 2.2, we introduce
a notion of information gap to quantify the degree of imbalance between global and local areas
(cf. Assumption 2.2). Denoted as вҲҶ, the information gap is defined as follows:
                                     вҲҶ := (1 вҲ’ Оәs ) вҲ’ 2(1 вҲ’ Оәc ).                                   (4.1)
Broadly speaking, a larger вҲҶ means that the number of global features is much greater than local
ones, indicating a significant imbalance. In contrast, a smaller value reflects only a slight imbalance.3
Unmasked area attention. Based on the crucial role of those unmasked patches for both reconstruc-
tion task and positive contrastive pairs, we further define the unmasked area attention as follows:
                                                  вҖ 
                 AttnвҖ pвҶ’Pk,m (X; Q) := Attn
                                       ^pвҶ’U вҲ©P (X; Q), for вҖ  вҲҲ {m, c}.
                                              k,m


4.1   MAE LEARNS DIVERSE ATTENTION PATTERNS

Our results are structured into two parts: i). analysis of convergence (Theorem 4.1), which includes
the global convergence guarantee of the masked reconstruction loss and characterization of the
attention pattern at the end of training to demonstrate the diverse locality; ii). learning dynamics of
attention correlations (Theorem 4.2), which shows how transformers capture target FP correlations
while downplaying PP correlations as discussed in Section 3.
To properly evaluate the reconstruction performance, we further introduce the following notion of the
reconstruction loss with respect to a specific patch p вҲҲ P:

                                 1                                             2
                  Lmae,p (Q) = E 1{p вҲҲ M} [F mae (M(X); Q)]p вҲ’ Xp                  .            (4.2)
                                 2
    3
      Our study focuses on the regime where вҲҶ is not too close to zero, i.e., |вҲҶ| = в„Ұ(1), which allows for
cleaner induction arguments. This condition could be potentially relaxed via more involved analysis.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: The mechanism of how the masked patch attends to other patches via attention correlations.
Now we present our first main result regarding the convergence of MAE.
Theorem 4.1 (Training convergence). Suppose the information gap вҲҶ вҲҲ [вҲ’0.5, вҲ’в„Ұ(1)] вҲӘ [в„Ұ(1), 1].
For any 0 < Пө < 1, suppose polylog(P ) вү« log( 1Пө ). We train the ViTs in Def. 2.4 by GD to minimize
reconstruction loss in eq. (2.8) with О· вүӘ poly(P ). Then for each patch p вҲҲ P, we have
                                  вӢҶ
                                                                                      U
1. Loss converges: Lmae,p (Q(T ) ) вҲ’ LвӢҶmae,p вүӨ Пө in T вӢҶ = O О·1 log(P )P max{2( L вҲ’1),1}(1вҲ’Оәs ) +

    1      P

    О·Пө log Пө     iterations, where LвӢҶmae,p is the global minimum of the patch-level reconstruction loss
   in equation 4.2.
2. Area-wide pattern of attention: given cluster k вҲҲ [K], and p вҲҲ Pk,j for some j вҲҲ [Nk ], if Xp is
   masked, then the one-layer transformer nearly вҖңpays all attention" to all unmasked patches in the
   same area Pk,j as p, i.e.,
                                                         вӢҶ   2

                                1 вҲ’ AttnmpвҶ’Pk,j X; Q(T )        вүӨ O(Пө).

Theorem 4.1 indicates that, at the time of convergence, for any masked query patch Xp in the k-th
cluster, the transformer exhibits an area-wide pattern of attention, concentrating on those unmasked
patches within the area that p lies in, as demonstrated in Section 3. The location of the patch
determines such area-wide attention and can be achieved no matter if p belongs to the global or local
areas, which jointly highlight the diverse local patterns for masked vision pretraining no matter
degree of the imbalance.
Next, we detail the training phases of attention correlations in the following theorem, which explicitly
confirms that the model learns target FP correlations while ignoring PP correlations to achieve the
desirable area-wide attention patterns as suggested in Section 3 (illustrated in Figure 4).
Theorem 4.2 (Learning Feature-Position correlations). Following the same assumptions in Theo-
rem 4.1, for p вҲҲ P, given k вҲҲ [K], if p вҲҲ Pk,j for some j вҲҲ [Nk ], we have
For positive information gap вҲҶ вҲҲ [в„Ұ(1), 1]:
                                                                   (t)
a. Global areas (j = 1) learn FP correlation in one-phase: ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 monotonically increases to
   O(log(P/Пө)) throughout the training, with all other attention correlations remain close to 0.
                                                                                               (t)
b. Local areas (j > 1) learn FP correlation in two-phase: In phase one, FP correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,1
   between local area and the global area feature quickly decreases to вҲ’Оҳ(log(P )) whereas all
                                                                                  (t)
   other attention correlation stay close to zero; In phase two, FP correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,j for the target
   local area starts to grow until convergence with all other attention correlations nearly unchanged.
For negative information gap вҲҶ вҲҲ [вҲ’0.5, вҲ’в„Ұ(1)]:
                                                                 (t)
c. All areas learn FP correlation through one-phase: ОҰpвҶ’vk,j monotonically increases to
   O(log(P/Пө)) throughout the training, with all other attention correlations remain close to 0.
The training dynamics are different depending on whether вҲҶ is positive or negative, and further vary
for positive вҲҶ depending on whether Xp is situated in global or local areas. Typically, the target FP
correlations are learned directly in a single phase. However, for a positive information gap вҲҶ, when
patch p is located in a local area, the learning process contains an additional decoupling phase, to
reduce the FP correlation with the non-target global features.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2        C ONTRASTIVE LEARNING COLLAPSES TO GLOBAL ATTENTION PATTERNS

In contrast to MAEвҖҷs ability to learn diverse local features regardless of the information gap, our
results in this section demonstrate that CL inevitably collapses to global attention patterns by solely
learning global FP correlations, even under a slight structural imbalance.
To prevent trivial solutions in CL, we adopt a noisy variant of the data distribution.
Assumption 4.3 (Noisy data). We assume that the data used for contrastive learning is sampled
from Dcl . Specifically, to generate a sample X вҲј Dcl , we first draw Z вҲј D, then add independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) noise О¶p вҲј N (0, Пғ02 Id ) to each patch Zp . The resulting sample is
defined as Xp = Zp + О¶p . We denote X вҲҲ Dkcl if Z вҲҲ Dk .
Theorem 4.4 (Learning with contrastive objective). Suppose the information gap вҲҶ вҲҲ
[вҲ’0.5, вҲ’в„Ұ(1)] вҲӘ [в„Ұ(1), 1]. We train the ViTs in Def. 2.6 by GD to minimize eq. (2.11) with
О· вүӘ poly(P ), Пғ02 = d1 , П„ = O( log1 d ). Then after T вӢҶ = O( poly(PО·) log P ) iterations, we have
                                    вӢҶ
                                            1
1. Loss converges: Lcl (Q(T ) ) вүӨ LвӢҶcl + poly(P            вӢҶ
                                                ) , where Lcl is the global minimum of the contrastive
   loss in eq. (2.11).
2. Attention concentration on global area : given X вҲҲ Dkcl with k вҲҲ [K], for any p вҲҲ P, with high
                                                  вӢҶ
   probability, we have 1 вҲ’ AttncpвҶ’Pk,1 (X вҖІ ; Q(T ) ) = poly(P
                                                            1          вҖІ     +
                                                                ) for X вҲҲ {X , X
                                                                                  ++ 4
                                                                                     }.
                                                                                              (t)
3. All patches learn global FP correlation: given k вҲҲ [K], for any p вҲҲ P, t вҲҲ [0, T вӢҶ ], ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вү«
    (t)                                             (T вӢҶ )               (T вӢҶ )
   ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m > 1, and at the convergence, ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 = Оҳ(log P ), ОҰpвҶ’vk,m = o(1).

Intuition behind learning global correlations. As discussed in Section 3, the optimal alignment of
two positive representations F cl (Q; X + ) and F cl (Q; X ++ ) involves directing attention towards the
same feature for each patch p, possibly irrespective of its location. As long as the imbalanced structure,
where global features dominate the data distribution, existsвҖ”even to a small degreeвҖ”it leads to an
order-wise stronger concentration of attention on global areas at initialization. Consequently, global
FP correlations receive larger gradients compared to local ones. Therefore, global FP correlations are
learned first, and focusing on these global correlations is sufficient for the CL objective to converge.
Significance of the results. Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 4.4 address a critical gap in understanding self-
supervised pretraining by offering the first theoretical framework for learning with ViTs, one of the
most advanced architectures in vision practice, whereas prior studies have primarily focused on linear
models, CNNs, or MLPs (Wen & Li, 2021; Ji et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2022). Moreover, by identifying
the collapsed solution in CL and emphasizing the effectiveness of MAE in capturing diverse attention
patterns, we provide a qualitative comparison between MAE and contrastive learning, validating a
non-trivial empirical observation (Park et al., 2023). This offers a comprehensive theoretical analysis
of self-supervised learning with ViTs.


5         C ONCLUSION
In this work, we study the training process of MAE and CL with one-layer softmax-based ViTs. Our
key contribution is providing the first end-to-end convergence guarantees for these two prominent
self-supervised approaches with transformer architectures. We characterize the attention patterns
at convergence and show that MAE exhibits diverse attention patterns by learning feature-position
correlations across all features, even with highly skewed feature distributions. In contrast, CL
collapses to global attention patterns by focusing solely on global feature-position correlations,
despite minimal distributional deviations between features. This provides theoretical justification for
the behavior gap of MAE and CL observed in practice. Our proof techniques use phase decomposition
based on the interplay between feature-position and position-wise correlations, avoiding the need to
disentangle patches and positional encodings as in prior work. We anticipate that our theory will be
valuable for future studies of spatial or temporal structures in state-of-the-art transformers and will
advance theoretical research in deep learning.

      4
          This also holds when no data augmentation is applied to X.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The work of Y. Huang is partially supported in part by the ONR grant N00014-22-1-2354, and the
NSF grants CCF-2418156 and DMS-2143215. The work of Z. Wen and Y. Chi is supported in part
by NSF under CCF-1901199, CCF-2007911, DMS-2134080, DMS-2134133, and by ONR under
N00014-19-1-2404. The work of Y. Liang is supported in part by NSF under RINGS-2148253,
CCF-1900145, and DMS-2134145.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT:

The main body of the paper presents only theoretical results, with all proofs provided in the appendices.
Additionally, the appendices include proof sketches that offer intuitive explanations of the proof
steps. The appendix also contains experimental results, with detailed descriptions of the experimental
settings to facilitate result reproduction.

R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00297, 2023.
Sanjeev Arora, Hrishikesh Khandeparkar, Mikhail Khodak, Orestis Plevrakis, and Nikunj Saun-
  shi. A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.09229, 2019.
Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ayan Chakrabarti, Daniel Glasner, Daliang Li, Thomas Unterthiner, and
  Andreas Veit. Understanding robustness of transformers for image classification. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10231вҖ“10241, 2021.
Shuhao Cao, Peng Xu, and David A Clifton. How to understand masked autoencoders. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.03670, 2022.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, HervГ© JГ©gou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650вҖ“9660, 2021.
Sitan Chen and Yuanzhi Li. Provably learning a multi-head attention layer. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2402.04084, 2024.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1597вҖ“1607. PMLR, 2020.
Ting Chen, Calvin Luo, and Lala Li. Intriguing properties of contrastive losses. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:11834вҖ“11845, 2021a.
Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision
  transformers. 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 9620вҖ“
  9629, 2021b. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:233024948.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Benjamin L Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, and Cyril Zhang. Inductive biases and variable
  creation in self-attention mechanisms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5793вҖ“5831. PMLR, 2022.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amin Ghiasi, Hamid Kazemi, Eitan Borgnia, Steven Reich, Manli Shu, Micah Goldblum, An-
 drew Gordon Wilson, and Tom Goldstein. What do vision transformers learn? a visual exploration.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06727, 2022.
Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, Jy-yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D Lee, and Dimitris Pa-
  pailiopoulos. Looped transformers as programmable computers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13196,
  2023.
Evan Greene and Jon A Wellner. Exponential bounds for the hypergeometric distribution. Bernoulli:
  official journal of the Bernoulli Society for Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 23(3):1911,
  2017.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent AltchГ©, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:21271вҖ“21284, 2020.
Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Transactions of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:156вҖ“171, 2020.
Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Provable guarantees for self-supervised
   deep learning with spectral contrastive loss. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   volume 34, pp. 5000вҖ“5011, 2021.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729вҖ“9738, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr DollГЎr, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000вҖ“16009, 2022.
Yu Huang, Yuan Cheng, and Yingbin Liang. In-context convergence of transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.05249, 2023.
Samy Jelassi, Michael Sander, and Yuanzhi Li. Vision transformers provably learn spatial structure.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 37822вҖ“37836, 2022.
Wenlong Ji, Zhun Deng, Ryumei Nakada, James Zou, and Linjun Zhang. The power of contrast for
 feature learning: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(330):1вҖ“78,
 2023.
Jason D Lee, Qi Lei, Nikunj Saunshi, and Jiacheng Zhuo. Predicting what you already know
  helps: Provable self-supervised learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 34, pp. 309вҖ“323, 2021.
Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Sijia Liu, and Pin-Yu Chen. A theoretical understanding of shallow vision
  transformers: Learning, generalization, and sample complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06015,
  2023a.
Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Tengfei Ma, Sijia Liu, Zaixi Zhang, and Pin-Yu Chen. What improves the
  generalization of graph transformer? a theoretical dive into self-attention and positional encoding.
  In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop: New Frontiers in Graph Learning, 2023b.
Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Songtao Lu, Xiaodong Cui, and Pin-Yu Chen. Training nonlinear
  transformers for efficient in-context learning: A theoretical learning and generalization analysis,
  2024.
Bingbin Liu, Daniel J Hsu, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Andrej Risteski. Masked prediction: A parameter
  identifiability view. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 21241вҖ“21254,
  2022.
Luke Melas-Kyriazi. Do you even need attention? a stack of feed-forward layers does surprisingly
  well on imagenet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02723, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D Lee. How transformers learn causal structure with
  gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14735, 2024.
Jiachun Pan, Pan Zhou, and YAN Shuicheng. Towards understanding why mask reconstruction
   pretraining helps in downstream tasks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2022.
Namuk Park and Songkuk Kim. How do vision transformers work? arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06709,
  2022.
Namuk Park, Wonjae Kim, Byeongho Heo, Taekyung Kim, and Sangdoo Yun. What do self-
  supervised vision transformers learn? In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Sayak Paul and Pin-Yu Chen. Vision transformers are robust learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 2071вҖ“2081, 2022.
Ashwini Pokle, Jinjin Tian, Yuchen Li, and Andrej Risteski. Contrasting the landscape of contrastive
  and non-contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15702, 2022.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
  understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748вҖ“8763. PMLR, 2021.
Maithra Raghu, Thomas Unterthiner, Simon Kornblith, Chiyuan Zhang, and Alexey Dosovitskiy.
 Do vision transformers see like convolutional neural networks? Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34:12116вҖ“12128, 2021.
Joshua Robinson, Li Sun, Ke Yu, Kayhan Batmanghelich, Stefanie Jegelka, and Suvrit Sra. Can
  contrastive learning avoid shortcut solutions? Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:4974вҖ“4986, 2021.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition
  challenge. International journal of computer vision, 115:211вҖ“252, 2015.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Transformers, parallel computation, and logarith-
  mic depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09268, 2024a.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel J Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Representational strengths and limitations of
  transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh, Yingcong Li, Christos Thrampoulidis, and Samet Oymak. Transformers as
  support vector machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16898, 2023a.
Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh, Yingcong Li, Xuechen Zhang, and Samet Oymak. Max-margin token
  selection in attention mechanism. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WXc8O8ghLH.
Yuandong Tian, Xinlei Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Understanding self-supervised learning dynamics
  without contrastive pairs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10268вҖ“10278.
  PMLR, 2021.
Yuandong Tian, Yiping Wang, Beidi Chen, and Simon Du. Scan and snap: Understanding training
  dynamics and token composition in 1-layer transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16380, 2023.
Yuandong Tian, Yiping Wang, Zhenyu Zhang, Beidi Chen, and Simon Shaolei Du. JoMA: Demystify-
  ing multilayer transformers via joint dynamics of MLP and attention. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=LbJqRGNYCf.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shengbang Tong, Ellis Brown, Penghao Wu, Sanghyun Woo, Manoj Middepogu, Sai Charitha
  Akula, Jihan Yang, Shusheng Yang, Adithya Iyer, Xichen Pan, et al. Cambrian-1: A fully open,
  vision-centric exploration of multimodal llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16860, 2024.
Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and HervГ©
  JГ©gou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 10347вҖ“10357. PMLR, 2021.
Asher Trockman and J Zico Kolter. Patches are all you need? arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.09792,
  2022.
Bhavya Vasudeva, Puneesh Deora, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Implicit bias and fast convergence
  rates for self-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05738, 2024.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, ЕҒukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, JoГЈo Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151вҖ“35174. PMLR, 2023.
James Vuckovic, Aristide Baratin, and Remi Tachet des Combes. A mathematical theory of attention.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02876, 2020.
Xiang Wang, Xinlei Chen, Simon S Du, and Yuandong Tian. Towards demystifying representation
  learning with non-contrastive self-supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04947, 2021.
Colin Wei, Sang Michael Xie, and Tengyu Ma. Why do pretrained language models help in
  downstream tasks? an analysis of head and prompt tuning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:16158вҖ“16170, 2021.
Colin Wei, Yining Chen, and Tengyu Ma. Statistically meaningful approximation: a case study on
  approximating turing machines with transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:12071вҖ“12083, 2022a.
Yixuan Wei, Han Hu, Zhenda Xie, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, and Baining
  Guo. Contrastive learning rivals masked image modeling in fine-tuning via feature distillation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14141, 2022b.
Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 11080вҖ“11090. PMLR, 2021.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding the feature learning process of self-supervised
  contrastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11112вҖ“11122. PMLR,
  2021.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. The mechanism of prediction head in non-contrastive self-supervised
  learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 24794вҖ“24809, 2022.
Zhenda Xie, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Yutong Lin, Jianmin Bao, Zhuliang Yao, Qi Dai, and Han Hu.
  Simmim: A simple framework for masked image modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9653вҖ“9663, 2022.
Zhenda Xie, Zigang Geng, Jingcheng Hu, Zheng Zhang, Han Hu, and Yue Cao. Revealing the dark
  secrets of masked image modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14475вҖ“14485, 2023.
Tong Yang, Yu Huang, Yingbin Liang, and Yuejie Chi. In-context learning with representations:
  Contextual generalization of trained transformers. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank J Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar.
  Are transformers universal approximators of sequence-to-sequence functions? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.10077, 2019.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and StГ©phane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
  learning via redundancy reduction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12310вҖ“
  12320. PMLR, 2021.
Qi Zhang, Yifei Wang, and Yisen Wang. How mask matters: Towards theoretical understandings
  of masked autoencoders. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27127вҖ“27139,
  2022.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09927, 2023a.
Yufeng Zhang, Fengzhuo Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. What and how does in-context
  learning learn? bayesian model averaging, parameterization, and generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.19420, 2023b.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      A PPENDIX
A Related Work                                                                                        17

B Experiments                                                                                         17

C Overview of the Proof Techniques                                                                    18
C.1 GD Dynamics of Attention Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           19
C.2 Phase I: Decoupling the Global FP Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          20
C.3 Phase II: Growth of Target Local FP Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
C.4 Learning Processes in Other Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21

D Preliminaries                                                                                       22
D.1 Gradient Computations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22
D.2 High-probability Event . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29
D.3 Properties of Loss Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29

E Overall Induction Hypotheses and Proof Plan for MAE                                                 31
E.1 Positive Information Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32
E.2 Negative Information Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          32
E.3 Proof Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32

F Analysis for the Local Area with Positive Information Gap                                           32
F.1    Phase I, Stage 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33
F.2    Phase I, Stage 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
F.3    Phase II, Stage 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    42
F.4    Phase II, Stage 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    45

G Analysis for Local Areas with Negative Information Gap                                              48

H Analysis for the Global area                                                                        50

I     Proof of Main Theorems for MAE                                                                  51
I.1    Proof of Induction Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      51
I.2    Proof of Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 4.2 with Positive Information Gap . . . . . . . . .           52
I.3    Proof of Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 4.2 with Negative Information Gap . . . . . . . .             53

J     Proof of Main Theorems in Contrastive Learning                                                  53
J.1    Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    54
J.2    Initial Stage: Global Correlations Emerge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      55
J.3    Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      61


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORK
Empirical studies of transformers in vision. A number of works have aimed to understand the
transformers in vision from different perspectives: comparison with CNNs (Raghu et al., 2021; Ghiasi
et al., 2022; Park & Kim, 2022), robustness (Bhojanapalli et al., 2021; Paul & Chen, 2022), and role
of positional embeddings (Melas-Kyriazi, 2021; Trockman & Kolter, 2022). Recent studies (Xie
et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022b; Park et al., 2023) have delved into ViTs with self-supervision to
uncover the mechanisms at play, particularly through visualization and analysis of metrics related to
self-attention. Xie et al. (2023) compared the masked image modeling (MIM) method with supervised
models, revealing MIMвҖҷs capacity to enhance diversity and locality across all ViT layers, w which
significantly boosts performance on tasks with weak semantics following fine-tuning. Building on
MIMвҖҷs advantages, Wei et al. (2022b) further proposed a simple feature distillation method that
incorporates locality into various self-supervised methods, leading to an overall improvement in the
finetuning performance. Park et al. (2023) conducted a detailed comparison between masked image
modeling (MIM) and contrastive learning. They demonstrated that contrastive learning will make the
self-attentions collapse into homogeneity for all query patches due to the nature of discriminative
learning, while MIM leads to a diverse self-attention map since it focuses on local patterns.

Theory of self-supervised learning. A major line of theoretical studies falls into one of the most
successful self-supervised learning approaches, contrastive learning (Wen & Li, 2021; Robinson
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021a; Arora et al., 2019), and its variant non-contrastive self-supervised
learning (Wen & Li, 2022; Pokle et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021). Some other works study the mask
prediction approach (Lee et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022), which is the focus of this
paper. Lee et al. (2021) provided statistical downstream guarantees for reconstructing missing patches.
Wei et al. (2021) studied the benefits of head and prompt tuning with masked pretraining under a
Hidden Markov Model framework. Liu et al. (2022) provided a parameter identifiability view to
understand the benefit of masked prediction tasks, which linked the masked reconstruction tasks to
the informativeness of the representation via identifiability techniques from tensor decomposition.

Theory of transformers and attention models. Prior work has studied the theoretical properties
of transformers from various aspects: representational power (Yun et al., 2019; Edelman et al., 2022;
Vuckovic et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022a; Sanford et al., 2024a), internal mechanism (Tarzanagh et al.,
2023a; Weiss et al., 2021), limitations (Hahn, 2020; Sanford et al., 2024b), and PAC learning (Chen
& Li, 2024). Recently, there has been a growing body of research studying in-context learning with
transformers due to the remarkable emergent in-context ability of large language models (Zhang
et al., 2023b; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Giannou et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a;
Huang et al., 2023; Nichani et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024). Regarding the training dynamics of attention-
based models, Li et al. (2023a) studied the training process of shallow ViTs in a classification
task. Subsequent research expanded on this by exploring the graph transformer with positional
encoding (Li et al., 2023b) and in-context learning performance of transformers with nonlinear
self-attention and nonlinear MLP (Li et al., 2024). However, all of these analyses rely crucially on
stringent assumptions on the initialization of transformers and hardly generalize to our setting. Tian
et al. (2023) mathematically described how the attention map evolves trained by SGD for one-layer
transformer but did not provide any convergence guarantee, and the follow-up work Tian et al. (2024)
considered a generalized case with multiple layers. Tarzanagh et al. (2023b); Vasudeva et al. (2024)
investigated the implicit bias for self-attention models trained with GD. Furthermore, Huang et al.
(2023) proved the in-context convergence of a one-layer softmax transformer trained via GD and
illustrated the attention dynamics throughout the training process. Yang et al. (2024) generalized such
an in-context learning problem to a mult-head setting with non-linear task functions. Nichani et al.
(2024) studied GD dynamics on a simplified two-layer attention-only transformer and proved that
it can encode the causal structure in the first attention layer. However, none of the previous studies
analyzed the training of transformers under self-supervised learning, which is the focus of this paper.

B    E XPERIMENTS
Previous studies on the attention mechanisms of ViT-based pre-training approaches have mainly
utilized a metric known as the attention distance (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Such a metric quantifies the
average spatial distance between the query and key tokens, weighted by their self-attention coefficients.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The general interpretation is that larger attention distances indicate global understanding, and smaller
values suggest a focus on local features. However, such a metric does not adequately determine if the
self-attention mechanism is identifying a unique global pattern. A high attention distance could result
from different patches focusing on varied distant areas, which does not necessarily imply that global
information is being effectively synthesized. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel and
revised version of average attention distance, called the attention diversity metric, which is designed
to assess whether various patches are concentrating on a similar region, thereby directly capturing
global information.

Attention diversity metric, in distance. This metric is computed for self-attention with a single
head of the specific layer. For a given image divided into N Г— N patches, the process unfolds as
follows: for each patch, it is employed as the query patch to calculate the attention weights towards
all N 2 patches, and those with the top-n attention weights are selected. Subsequently, the coordinates
(e.g. (i, j) with i, j вҲҲ [N ]) of these top-n patches are concatenated in sequence to form a 2 Г— n-
dimensional vector. The final step computes the average distance between all these 2n-dimensional
vectors, i.e., N 2 Г— N 2 vector pairs.

Setup. In this work, we compare the performance of ViT-B/16 encoder pre-trained on ImageNet-
1K (Russakovsky et al., 2015) among the following four models: masked reconstruction model
(MAE), contrastive learning model (MoCo v3 (Chen et al., 2021b)), other self-supervised model
(DINO Caron et al. (2021)), and supervised model (DeiT Touvron et al. (2021)). We focus on 12
different attention heads in the last layer of ViT-B on different pre-trained models. The box plot
visualizes the distribution of the top-10 averaged attention focus across 152 example images, as
similarly done in Dosovitskiy et al. (2020).

Implications. The experiment results based on our new metric are provided in Figure 3. Lower
values of the attention diversity metric signify a focused attention on a coherent area across different
patches, reflecting a global pattern of focus. On the other hand, higher values suggest that attention is
dispersed, focusing on different, localized areas. It can be seen that the masked pretraining model is
particularly effective in learning more diverse attention patterns, setting it apart from other models
that prioritize a uniform global information with less attention diversity. This aligns with and provides
further evidence for the findings in Park et al. (2023).

C    OVERVIEW OF THE P ROOF T ECHNIQUES
In this section, we explain our key proof techniques in analyzing the self-supervised pretraining of
transformers, using MAE as an example. We focus on the reconstruction of a specific patch Xp for
p вҲҲ P. We aim to elucidate the training phases through which the model learns FP correlations
related to the area associated with p across different clusters k вҲҲ [K].
Our characterization of training phases differentiates between whether Xp is located in the global
or local areas and further varies based on whether вҲҶ is positive or negative. Specifically, for
вҲҶ вҲҲ [в„Ұ(1), 1], we observe distinct learning dynamics for FP correlations between local and global
areas:

       вҖў Local area attends to FP correlation in two-phase: given k вҲҲ [K], if ak,p Мё= 1, then
                (t)                                                 (t)                         (t)
           1. ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 first quickly decreases whereas all other ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m Мё= 1 and ОҘpвҶ’q do
              not change much;
                                                   (t)                                   (t)
           2. after some point, the increase of ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p takes dominance. Such ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p will
               keep growing until convergence with all other FP and PP attention correlations nearly
               unchanged.
       вҖў Global areas learn FP correlation in one-phase: given k вҲҲ [K], if ak,p = 1, the update of
           (t)                                                             (t)
         ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 will dominate throughout the training, whereas all other ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m Мё= 1 and
         learned PP correlations remain close to 0.

For вҲҶ вҲҲ [вҲ’0.5, вҲ’в„Ұ(1)], the behaviors of learning FP correlations are uniform for all areas. Namely,
all areas learn FP correlation through one-phase: given k вҲҲ [K], throughout the training, the increase


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (t)                                                 (t)                                                     (t)
of ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p dominates, whereas all other ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m Мё= ak,p and PP correlations ОҘpвҶ’q
remain close to 0.
For clarity, this section will mainly focus on the learning of local feature correlations with a positive
information gap вҲҶ вүҘ в„Ұ(1) in Appendices C.2 and C.3, which exhibits a two-phase process. The
other scenarios will be discussed briefly in Appendix C.4.

C.1     GD DYNAMICS OF ATTENTION C ORRELATIONS

Based on the crucial roles that attention correlations play in determining the reconstruction loss, the
main idea of our analysis is to track the dynamics of those attention correlations. We first provide the
                            (t)             (t)
following GD updates of ОҰpвҶ’vk,m and ОҘpвҶ’q (see Appendix D.1.1 for formal statements).
                                                                                                            (t)
Lemma C.1 (FP correlations, informal). Given k вҲҲ [K], for p вҲҲ P, denote n = ak,p , let ОұpвҶ’vk,m =
1  (t+1)      (t)
О· ОҰpвҶ’vk,m вҲ’ ОҰpвҶ’vk,m for m вҲҲ [Nk ], and suppose Xp is masked. Then
                                                          2
                       (t)          (t)            (t)
1. for the same area, ОұpвҶ’vk,n вүҲ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n ;

2. if k вҲҲ Bp , for the global area,
                                                                                                                           !

    (t)            (t)                      (t)                       (t)                     (t)                 (t)
   ОұpвҶ’v k,1
            вүҲ вҲ’AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·             AttnpвҶ’Pk,1            1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1            + AttnpвҶ’Pk,n      1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n    ;


3. for other area m вҲҲ
                    / {n} вҲӘ {1},
                                                                                                                        !
                                                                      2
    (t)           (t)                                       (t)                           (t)                (t)
   ОұpвҶ’v k,m
            вүҲ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m               1 {n Мё= 1}       AttnpвҶ’Pk,1        вҲ’       1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n         AttnpвҶ’Pk,n       .


                                                                                                 (t)
From Lemma C.1, it is observed that for p вҲҲ Pk,n , the feature correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,n exhibits a
                                                   (t)
monotonically increasing trend over time because ОұpвҶ’vk,n вүҘ 0. Furthermore, if n > 1, i.e., Pk,n is
                 (t)
the local area, ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 will monotonically decrease.
                                                                       (t)       (t+1)      (t)
Lemma C.2 (PP attention correlations, informal). Given p, q вҲҲ P, let ОІpвҶ’q = О·1 ОҘpвҶ’q вҲ’ ОҘpвҶ’q ,
                                   (t)     P         (t)             (t)
and suppose Xp is masked. Then ОІpвҶ’q = kвҲҲ[N ] ОІk,pвҶ’q , where ОІk,pвҶ’q satisfies
                                                       2
                        (t)         (t)         (t)
1. if ak,p = ak,q = n, ОІk,pвҶ’q вүҲ attnpвҶ’q 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n ;

2. if k вҲҲ Bp вҲ© Cq , where ak,p = n > 1 and ak,q = 1:
                                                                                                                                !

    (t)                              (t)                        (t)                 (t)                      (t)
   ОІk,pвҶ’q вүҲ вҲ’attn(t)
                 pвҶ’q В·           AttnpвҶ’Pk,1             1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1        + AttnpвҶ’Pk,n           1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n             ;


3. if ak,q = m вҲҲ
               / {n} вҲӘ {1}, where ak,p = n,
                                                                                  !
                                                       2
       (t)                                      (t)              (t)        (t)
      ОІk,pвҶ’q вүҲ attn(t)
                   pвҶ’q В·         1 {n Мё= 1} AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n .

                                                 (t)
Based on the above gradient update for ОҘpвҶ’q , we further introduce the following auxiliary quantity
  (t)
ОҘk,pвҶ’q , which can be interpreted as the PP attention correlation вҖңprojected" on the k-th cluster Dk ,
and will be useful in the later proof.
                         (t+1)            (t)              (t)                    (0)
                       ОҘk,pвҶ’q := ОҘk,pвҶ’q + О·ОІk,pвҶ’q ,                  with ОҘk,pвҶ’q = 0.                             (C.1)
                                 (t)       P           (t)
We can directly verify that ОҘpвҶ’q =              kвҲҲ[K] ОҘk,pвҶ’q .


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The key observation by comparing Lemma C.1 and C.2 is that the gradient of projected PP attention
 (t)                                                  (t)                                 (t)
ОІk,pвҶ’q is smaller than the corresponding FP gradient ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,q in magnitude since attnpвҶ’q вүҲ
      (t)
AttnpвҶ’P
        k,ak,q                                                           (t)
 (1вҲ’Оі)Ck,ak,q . We will show that the interplay between the increase of ОҰpвҶ’vk,n and the decrease
    (t)
of ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 determines the learning behaviors for the local patch p вҲҲ Pk,n with n > 1, and which
effect will happen first depends on the initial attention, which is also determined by the value of
information gap вҲҶ.

C.2     P HASE I: D ECOUPLING THE G LOBAL FP C ORRELATIONS

We now explain how the attention correlations evolve at the initial phase of the training to decouple
the correlations of the non-target global features when p is located in the local area for the k-th
cluster. This phase can be further divided into the following two stages.

                                                  (0)        (0)                           (0)
Stage 1. At the beginning of training, ОҰpвҶ’vk,m = ОҘk,pвҶ’q = 0, and hence attnpвҶ’q = P1 for
any q вҲҲ P, which implies that the transformer equally attends to each patch. However, with high
probability, the number of unmasked global features in the global area Pk,1 is much larger than
                     (0)           |U вҲ©Pk,1 |         1             1           (0)
others. Hence, AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 =            P      вүҘ в„Ұ( P 1вҲ’Оәc ) вү« Оҳ( P 1вҲ’Оәs ) = AttnpвҶ’Pk,m for m > 1.

Therefore, by Lemma C.1 and C.2, we immediately obtain

     (0)                 1                    (0)               1
 вҖў ОұpвҶ’vk,1 = вҲ’Оҳ P 2(1вҲ’Оә    c)
                                , whereas ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p = Оҳ P (1вҲ’Оә    s)
                                                                        ;
                                            (0)
 вҖў all other FP correlation gradients ОұpвҶ’vk,m with m Мё= 1, ak,p are small;
                                                  (0)
 вҖў all projected PP correlation gradients ОІk,pвҶ’q are small.

                                                                   (t)
Since вҲҶ = (1 вҲ’ Оәs ) вҲ’ 2(1 вҲ’ Оәc ) вүҘ в„Ұ(1), it can be seen that ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 enjoys a much larger decreasing
rate initially. This captures the decoupling process of the feature correlations with the global feature
vk,1 in the global area for p. It can be shown that such an effect will dominate over a certain period
                                                                               (t)
that defines stage 1 of phase I. At the end of this stage, we will have ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ (log(P )),
                                        (t)                                                       (t)
whereas all FP attention correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m > 1 and all projected PP correlations ОҘk,pвҶ’q
stay close to 0 (see Appendix F.1).
                                                                               (t)
During stage 1, the significant decrease of the global FP correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 leads to a reduction
                             (t)                                          (t)
in the attention score AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 . Meanwhile, attention scores AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (where m > 1) for
other patches remain consistent, reflecting a uniform distribution over unmasked patches within each
                                  (t)                                                          (t)
area. By the end of stage 1, AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 drops to a certain level, resulting in a decrease in |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 |
                   (t)
as it approaches ОұpвҶ’vk,n , which indicates that stage 2 begins.

                                                                         (t)
Stage 2. Soon as stage 2 begins, the dominant effect switches as |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | reaches the same order
                 (t)                                          (t)
of magnitude as ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p . The following result shows that ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p must update during stage 2.
Lemma C.3 (Switching of dominant effects (See Appendix F.2)). Under the same conditions as
Theorem 4.1, for p вҲҲ P, there exists Te1 , such that at iteration t = Te1 + 1, we have

     1(Te +1)                       1   (Te +1)
a. ОҰpвҶ’v k,ak,p вүҘ в„Ұ (log(P )), and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 = вҲ’Оҳ(log(P ));

                                (t)
b. all other FP correlations ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m Мё= 1, ak,p are small;
                                      (t)
c. all projected PP correlations ОҘk,pвҶ’q are small.
                                        (t)                 вҲҶ                                    (t)
Intuition of the transition. Once ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 decreases to вҲ’ 2L    log(P ), we observe that |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | is
                          (t)                                    (t)
approximately equal to ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p . After this point, reducing ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 further is more challenging
                               (t)                                                   (t)
compared to the increase in ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p . To illustrate, a minimal decrease of ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 by an amount


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       (t)            Оұ(t)
                                                       pвҶ’v
of 0.001                                       k,n
     L log(P ) will yield |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | вүӨ O( P 0.002 ). Such a discrepancy triggers the switch of the
dominant effect.

C.3    P HASE II: G ROWTH OF TARGET L OCAL FP C ORRELATION
                                                     (t)
Moving beyond phase I, FP correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p within the target local area p already enjoys a
                     (t)                            (t)
larger gradient ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p than other ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m Мё= ak,p and all projected PP correlations
 (t)                                                        (t)
ОҘk,pвҶ’q . We can show that the growth of ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p will continue to dominate until the end of
training by recognizing the following two stages.

                                                                       (t)                        (t)
Rapid growth stage.         At the beginning of phase II, ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p is mainly driven by AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                                                                         k,p
               (t)                                                                       (t)
since 1вҲ’AttnpвҶ’Pk,a               remains at the constant order. Therefore, the growth of ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p naturally
                           k,p
                                 (t)                                                              (t)
results in a boost in AttnpвҶ’Pk,a , thereby promoting an increase in its own gradient ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p ,
                                 k,p
which defines the rapid growth stage. On the other hand, we can prove that the following gap holds
for FP and projected PP correlation gradients (see Appendix F.3):
                                              (t)
 вҖў all other FP correlation gradients ОұpвҶ’vk,m with m Мё= ak,p are small;
                                                      (t)
 вҖў all projected PP correlation gradients ОІk,pвҶ’q are small.

Convergence stage. After the rapid growth stage, the desired local pattern with a high target
                                (t)
feature-position correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p is learned. In this last stage, it is demonstrated that the
above conditions for non-target FP and projected PP correlations remain valid, while the growth of
  (t)                               (t)                                            (t)
ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p starts to decelerate as ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p reaches Оҳ(log(P )), resulting in AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вүҲ в„Ұ(1),
which leads to convergence (see Appendix F.4).

C.4    L EARNING P ROCESSES IN OTHER S CENARIOS

In this section, we talk about the learning process in other settings, including learning FP correlations
for the local area when the information gap is negative, learning FP correlations for the global area,
and failure to learn PP correlations.

What is the role of positive information gap? As described in stage 1 of phase 1 in Appendix C.2,
                                                                          (0)          (0)
the decoupling effect happens at the beginning of the training because ОұpвҶ’vk,1 вү« ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p
attributed to вҲҶ вүҘ в„Ұ(1). However, in cases where вҲҶ вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ(1), this relationship reverses, with
  (0)                                         (0)                                        (0)
ОұpвҶ’vk,1 becoming significantly smaller than ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p . Similarly, other FP gradients ОұpвҶ’vk,m
                                                                               (0)
with m Мё= 1, ak,p and all the projected gradients of PP correlation ОІpвҶ’q are small in magnitude.
                  (t)
Consequently, ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p starts with a larger gradient, eliminating the need to decouple FP correla-
tions for the global area. As a result, training skips the initial phase, and moves directly into Phase II,
                 (t)
during which ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p continues to increase until it converges (see Appendix G).

Learning FP correlations for the global area. When the patch Xp is located in the global area
                                                       (0)
of cluster k, i.e., ak,p = 1, the attention score AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 directed towards the target area Pk,1
is initially higher compared to other attention scores due to the presence of a significant number
                                                                                     (0)
of unmasked patches in the global area. This leads to an initially larger gradient ОұpвҶ’vk,ak,p . Such
an effect is independent of the value of вҲҶ. As a result, the training process skips the initial phase,
which is typically necessary for the cases where ak,p > 1 with a positive information gap, and moves
directly into Phase II (see Appendix H).

All PP correlations are small. Integrating the analysis from all previous discussions, we establish
that for every cluster k вҲҲ [K], regardless of its association with Cp (global area) or Bp (local area),


                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         (t)
and for any patch Xq with q вҲҲ P, the projected PP correlation ОҘk,pвҶ’q remains nearly zero in
                                                                                            (t)
comparison to the significant changes observed in the FP correlation, because the gradient ОІk,pвҶ’q is
                                                              (t)    PK       (t)
relatively negligible. Therefore, the overall PP correlation ОҘpвҶ’q = k=1 ОҘk,pвҶ’q also stays close
to zero, given that the number of clusters K = Оҳ(1).

D     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we will introduce warm-up gradient computations and probabilistic lemmas that
establish essential properties of the data and the loss function, which are pivotal for the technical
proofs in the upcoming sections for masked pretraining. Throughout the appendix, we assume
Nk = N and Ck,n = Cn for all k вҲҲ [K] for simplicity. We will also omit the explicit dependence
on X for zn (X). We use kX вҲҲ [K] to denote the cluster index that a given image X is drawn
from. Furthermore, we will abbreviate Lmae (Lmae,p ) as L(Lp ), and F mae as F for simplicity,
when the context makes it clear. We abbreviate AttnmpвҶ’Pk,m (X; Q(t) ) (attnmpвҶ’q (X; Q(t) )) as
      (t)           (t)
AttnpвҶ’Pk,m ( attnpвҶ’q ), when the context makes it clear.

D.1    G RADIENT C OMPUTATIONS

We first calculate the gradient with respect to Q. We omit the superscript вҖҳ(t)вҖҷ and write L(Q) as L
here for simplicity.
Lemma D.1. The gradient of the loss function with respect to Q is given by
                             пЈ®
                  вҲӮL            X X
                       = вҲ’E пЈ°            attnpвҶ’q M(X)вҠӨ  q (Xp вҲ’ [F (M(X); Q)]p )В·
                  вҲӮQ
                               pвҲҲM q
                                                                              !вҠӨ пЈ№
                                                       X
                                   M(X)  p M(X)q вҲ’         attnpвҶ’r M(X)
                                   e          e                      e      r
                                                                                 пЈ».
                                                            r


Proof. We begin with the chain rule and obtain
                вҲӮL        X вҲӮ[F (M(X); Q)]p
                    = E[                       ([F (M(X); Q)]p вҲ’ Xp )]
                вҲӮQ                    вҲӮQ
                           pвҲҲM
                             X X вҲӮattnpвҶ’q
                      = E[                         M(X)вҠӨ
                                                       q ([F (M(X); Q)]p вҲ’ Xp )].                 (D.1)
                                         вҲӮQ
                           pвҲҲM q

We focus on the gradient for each attention score:

                                      вҠӨ
      вҲӮattnpвҶ’q       X   exp    M(X)
                                e
                                      p Q( M(X)
                                           e     r  +  M(X)
                                                       e   q )
                                                                                     вҠӨ
                  =                                        2 M(X)  p (M(X)q вҲ’ M(X)r )
                                                                e     e       e
         вҲӮQ
                              P
                                              вҠӨ
                                 r exp(M(X)p QM(X)r )
                      r                 e          e
                                X
                                                                       вҠӨ
                  = attnpвҶ’q         attnpвҶ’r M(X)     p (M(X)q вҲ’ M(X)r )
                                              e         e        e
                                   r
                                         "                                      #вҠӨ
                                                        X
                   = attnpвҶ’q M(X)p В· M(X)q вҲ’                    attnpвҶ’r M(X)r        .
                             e       e                                  e
                                                        r

Substituting the above equation into equation D.1, we complete the proof.

                             (t)             (t)
Recall that the quantities ОҰpвҶ’vk,m and ОҘpвҶ’q are defined in Definition 3.1. These quantities are
associated with the attention weights for each token, and they play a crucial role in our analysis of
learning dynamics. We will restate their definitions here for clarity.
Definition D.2. (Attention correlations) Given p, q вҲҲ P , for t вүҘ 0, we define two types of attention
correlations as follows:


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  (t)
1. Feature Attention Correlation: ОҰpвҶ’vk,m := eвҠӨ  (t)
                                              p Q vk,m for k вҲҲ [K] and m вҲҲ [N ];

                                                        (t)
2. Positional Attention Correlation: ОҘpвҶ’q := eвҠӨ  (t)
                                              p Q eq .

                                            (0)               (0)
By our initialization, we have ОҰpвҶ’vk,m = ОҘpвҶ’q = 0.

Next, we will apply the expression in Lemma D.1 to compute the gradient dynamics of these attention
correlations.

D.1.1   F ORMAL S TATEMENTS AND P ROOF OF L EMMA C.1 AND C.2

We first introduce some notations. Given r вҲҲ U, for p вҲҲ P, k вҲҲ [K] and n вҲҲ [N ] define the
following quantities:

                                  Jrp := M(X)вҠӨ
                                             r (Xp вҲ’ [F (M(X); Q)]p )
                                                                                              !вҠӨ
                                                              X
                               Irp,k,n :=         M(X)
                                                  e   rвҲ’              attnpвҶ’w M(X)
                                                                              e    w               vk,n
                                                              wвҲҲP
                                                                                              !вҠӨ
                                                              X
                                Krp,q :=          M(X)
                                                  e   rвҲ’              attnpвҶ’w M(X)
                                                                              e    w               eq
                                                              wвҲҲP

Lemma D.3 (Formal statement of Lemma C.1). Given k вҲҲ [K], for p вҲҲ P, denote n = ak,p , let
 (t)          (t+1)      (t)
ОұpвҶ’vk,m = О·1 ОҰpвҶ’vk,m вҲ’ ОҰpвҶ’vk,m for m вҲҲ [Nk ], then


a. for m = n,
                                  "
                (t)                                                      (t)
               ОұpвҶ’v k,n
                        =E          1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В·
                                      пЈ«                                                                             пЈ¶#
                                                                          2                                     2
                                      пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ Attn(t)                                                  (t)
                                                                                   X
                                                   pвҶ’Pk,n                      +          za2 zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,a         пЈё ;
                                                                                   aМё=n


b. for m Мё= n,
                          "
                                                                                                              2
                                                                (t)                                    (t)
                                                                                    X
     (t)
    ОұpвҶ’v k,m
             =E               1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}AttnpвҶ’Pk,m В·                                  za2 zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,a вҲ’
                                                                                   aМё=m,n
                                                                                                                              !#

                                 (t)                      (t)                              (t)                  (t)
            zm zn2       1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                             3
                                                      AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + zm              1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m           AttnpвҶ’Pk,m             .


Proof. From Lemma D.1, we have
                                             вҲӮL
                           (t)
                          ОұpвҶ’v     = eвҠӨ
                                      p (вҲ’      )vk,m
                               k,m
                                             вҲӮQ
                                                    X
                                      = E[1{p вҲҲ M}    attnpвҶ’r Jrp В· Irp,k,m ]
                                                              rвҲҲU
                                                                          X
                                      = E[1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}                         attnpвҶ’r Jrp В· Irp,k,m ]
                                                                          rвҲҲU

where the last equality holds since when kX Мё= k, Irp,k,m = 0 due to orthogonality. Thus, in the
following, we only need to consider the case kX = k.

Case 1: m = n.


                                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,n , since vk,nвҖІ вҠҘ vk,n for nвҖІ Мё= n, and vk,n вҠҘ {eq }qвҲҲP we have
                                       пЈ«                                     пЈ¶
                                                      X
                                   вҠӨ пЈӯ
                       Jrp = zn vk,n    zn vk,n вҲ’            attnpвҶ’q zn vk,n пЈё
                                                     qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n

                             = zn2

                                   1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
                                           X
                     Irp,k,n = (zn vk,n вҲ’       attnpвҶ’q zn vk,n )вҠӨ vk,n = Jrp /zn
                                          qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n


      вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,nвҖІ with nвҖІ Мё= n
                                         пЈ«                                           пЈ¶
                                                           X
                                      вҠӨ пЈӯ
                           Jrp = znвҖІ vk,n вҖІ zn vk,n вҲ’                attnpвҶ’q znвҖІ vk,nвҖІ пЈё
                                                        qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,nвҖІ

                              = вҲ’zn2 вҖІ AttnpвҶ’Pk,nвҖІ
                                 пЈ«                                           пЈ¶вҠӨ
                                                 X
                      Irp,k,n = пЈӯznвҖІ vk,nвҖІ вҲ’               attnpвҶ’q zn vk,n пЈё vk,n
                                               qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n

                              = вҲ’zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,n


Putting it together, then we obtain:
               вҲӮL            h
                                                      (t)
        eвҠӨ
         p  (вҲ’    )v k,n = E   1{{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В·
               вҲӮQ
                                пЈ«                                              пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                     2 X                     2
                                пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ Attn(t)      +
                                                                      (t)
                                                           za2 zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈёпЈ»
                                             pвҶ’Pk,n
                                                                 aМё=n


Case 2: m Мё= n. Similarly

      вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,n
                                         пЈ«                                          пЈ¶
                                                           X
                                      вҠӨ пЈӯ
                            Jrp = zn vk,n zn vk,n вҲ’                 attnpвҶ’q zn vk,n пЈё
                                                        qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n

                               = zn2 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n )
                                     пЈ«                                        пЈ¶вҠӨ
                                                  X
                       Irp,k,m = пЈӯzn vk,n вҲ’                attnpвҶ’q zm vk,m пЈё vk,m
                                               qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,m

                               = вҲ’zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m

      вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,m
                                         пЈ«                                           пЈ¶
                                                           X
                                     вҠӨ пЈӯ
                           Jrp = zm vk,m zn vk,n вҲ’                   attn(t)
                                                                         pвҶ’q zm vk,m
                                                                                     пЈё
                                                        qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,m
                                   2
                               = вҲ’zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m
                                 пЈ«                                            пЈ¶вҠӨ
                                                  X
                      Irp,k,n = пЈӯzm vk,m вҲ’                 attn(t)
                                                               pвҶ’q zm vk,m
                                                                           пЈё vk,m
                                               qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,m

                               = zn (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m )



                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,a , a Мё= n, m
                                                            пЈ«                                         пЈ¶
                                                                              X
                                                     вҠӨ пЈӯ
                                           Jrp = za vk,a zn vk,n вҲ’                    attn(t)
                                                                                          pвҶ’q za vk,a
                                                                                                      пЈё
                                                                        qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,a

                                                 = вҲ’za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                   пЈ«                                             пЈ¶вҠӨ
                                                                    X
                                      Irp,k,n = пЈӯza vk,a вҲ’                    attn(t)
                                                                                  pвҶ’q zm vk,m
                                                                                              пЈё vk,m
                                                                  qвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,m

                                                 = вҲ’zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m


Putting them together, then we complete the proof.
                                                                (t)       (t+1)   (t)
Lemma D.4 (Formal statement of Lemma C.2). Given p, q вҲҲ P, let ОІpвҶ’q = О·1 ОҘpвҶ’q) вҲ’ ОҘpвҶ’q) ,


then                           X (t)
                      (t)                              (t)
                    ОІpвҶ’q  =       ОІk,pвҶ’q ,     where ОІk,pвҶ’q satisfies
                                                  kвҲҲ[K]

a. if ak,p = ak,q = n,
                                       "
                                                                                                           2
                    (t)                                                                             (t)
                                                                                     X
                   ОІk,pвҶ’q = E              1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}attn(t)
                                                               pвҶ’q В·                        za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a +
                                                                                     aМё=n
                                                                                                      !#

                                                         (t)                         (t)
                                       zn2       1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n       1{q вҲҲ U} вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                ;


b. for ak,p = n Мё= m = ak,q ,
                     "
                                                                                                      2
             (t)                                                                               (t)
                                                                                X
           ОІk,pвҶ’q = E 1{p вҲҲ M, , kX = k}attn(t)
                                            pвҶ’q В·                                      za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a вҲ’
                                                                                aМё=n
                                                                                                                   !#

                                            (t)                     (t)                     (t)
                          zn2       1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                    2
                                                                AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + 1{q вҲҲ U}zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                  .


Proof.
                                                   вҲӮL                  X
                       (t)
                      ОІpвҶ’q = eвҠӨ
                              p (вҲ’                    )eq = E[1{p вҲҲ M}   attn(t)  p p,q
                                                                             pвҶ’r Jr Kr ]
                                                   вҲӮQ
                                                                               rвҲҲU
Then we let
                                (t)
                                                                          X
                           ОІk,pвҶ’q := E[1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}                         attn(t)  p p,q
                                                                                    pвҶ’r Jr Kr ].
                                                                          rвҲҲU
In the following, we denote ak,p = n and ak,q = m for simplicity.

Case 1: m = n. If q вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,n :

         вҖў For r = q
                                                            пЈ«                                         пЈ¶
                                                                              X
                                                  вҠӨ пЈӯ
                                        Jrp = zn vk,n zn vk,n вҲ’                        attnpвҶ’w zn vk,n пЈё
                                                                        wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n

                                                 = zn2

                                                          1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
                                                                               X
                                      Krp,q = (eq вҲ’ (attnpвҶ’q eq +                    attnpвҶ’w ew ))вҠӨ eq
                                                                              wМё=q

                                                 = 1 вҲ’ attnpвҶ’q .


                                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,n , and r Мё= q
                                             пЈ«                                                пЈ¶
                                                               X
                                        вҠӨ пЈӯ
                              Jrp = zn vk,n zn vk,n вҲ’                   attnpвҶ’w zn vk,n пЈё
                                                         wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n

                                 = zn2

                                          1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
                                                               X
                         Krp,q = (er вҲ’ (attnpвҶ’q eq +                  attnpвҶ’w ew ))вҠӨ eq
                                                               wМё=q

                                 = вҲ’attnpвҶ’q
          Thus
                                  X
                                           attnpвҶ’r Jrp В· Krp,q
                               rвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n
                                      пЈ«                               пЈ¶
                                                  X
                               = zn2 пЈӯ1 вҲ’                attnpвҶ’w пЈё
                                             wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n
                                пЈ«                                                         пЈ¶
                                          X
                               В· пЈӯвҲ’               attnpвҶ’r attnpвҶ’q + attnpвҶ’q пЈё
                                      rвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n
                                                           2
                               = zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n            attn(t)
                                                                   pвҶ’q

       вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,a , a Мё= n
                                             пЈ«                                                пЈ¶
                                                               X
                                        вҠӨ пЈӯ
                              Jrp = za vk,a zn vk,n вҲ’                  attnpвҶ’w za vk,a пЈё
                                                         wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,a
                                              X
                                 = вҲ’za2                attnpвҶ’w
                                           wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,a
                                                               X
                         Krp,q = (er вҲ’ (attnpвҶ’q eq +                  attnpвҶ’w ew ))вҠӨ eq
                                                               wМё=q

                                 = вҲ’attnpвҶ’q

Thus
                                            пЈ«                                                                 пЈ¶
   X                                                                     2       X                        2
         attnpвҶ’r Jrp Krp,q = attnpвҶ’q В· пЈӯzn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                   +          za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a        пЈё
   rвҲҲU                                                                           aМё=n

If q вҲҲ M вҲ© Pk,n :

       вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,n ,
                                             пЈ«                                                пЈ¶
                                                               X
                                        вҠӨ пЈӯ
                              Jrp = zn vk,n zn vk,n вҲ’                   attnpвҶ’w zn vk,n пЈё
                                                         wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n

                                 = zn2

                                          1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
                                                               X
                         Krp,q = (er вҲ’ (attnpвҶ’q eq +                  attnpвҶ’w ew ))вҠӨ eq
                                                               wМё=q

                                 = вҲ’attnpвҶ’q

       вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,a , a Мё= n
                                             пЈ«                                                пЈ¶
                                                               X
                                        вҠӨ пЈӯ
                              Jrp = za vk,a zn vk,n вҲ’                  attnpвҶ’w za vk,a пЈё
                                                         wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,a



                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                             X
                                  = вҲ’za2               attnpвҶ’w
                                           wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,a
                                                             X
                             Krp,q = (er вҲ’ (attnpвҶ’q eq +            attnpвҶ’w ew ))вҠӨ eq
                                                             wМё=q

                                  = вҲ’attnpвҶ’q

Thus
 X
        attnpвҶ’r Jrp Krp,q
  rвҲҲU
                 пЈ«                                                                                         пЈ¶
                                             2                                X                        2
  = attnpвҶ’q В· пЈӯzn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                вҲ’ zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n +              za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a

                                                                                                           пЈё
                                                                              aМё=n

Putting it together,
 (t)
ОІk,pвҶ’q = E [1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}attnpвҶ’q В·
 пЈ«                                                                        пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                     2 X                2
 пЈӯвҲ’zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n 1{q вҲҲ M} + zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n +     2

                                                         zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m пЈёпЈ»
                                                                             mМё=n


Case 2: m Мё= n. Similarly, if q вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,m :

        вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,n ,
                                            пЈ«                                           пЈ¶
                                                            X
                                         вҠӨ пЈӯ
                               Jrp = zn vk,n zn vk,n вҲ’                attnpвҶ’w zn vk,n пЈё
                                                          wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n

                                   = zn2 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n )
                                                          X
                             Krp,q = (er вҲ’ attnpвҶ’q eq вҲ’     attnpвҶ’w ew )вҠӨ eq
                                                            wМё=q

                                  = вҲ’attnpвҶ’q

        вҖў For r = q
                                            пЈ«                                            пЈ¶
                                                            X
                                        вҠӨ пЈӯ
                              Jrp = zm vk,m zn vk,n вҲ’                 attnpвҶ’w zm vk,m пЈё
                                                          wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,m
                                     2
                                 = вҲ’zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m
                                                           X
                            Krp,q = (eq вҲ’ attnpвҶ’q eq вҲ’            attnpвҶ’w ew )вҠӨ eq
                                                           wМё=w

                                 = 1 вҲ’ attnpвҶ’q

        вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,a , a Мё= n, and r Мё= q
                                            пЈ«                                           пЈ¶
                                                            X
                                         вҠӨ пЈӯ
                               Jrp = za vk,a zn vk,n вҲ’                attnpвҶ’w za vk,a пЈё
                                                          wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,a

                                  = вҲ’za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                            X
                             Krp,q = (er вҲ’ attnpвҶ’q eq вҲ’            attnpвҶ’w ew )вҠӨ eq
                                                            wМё=q

                                  = вҲ’attnpвҶ’q


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus
X
    attnpвҶ’r Jrp Krp,q
rвҲҲU
                   пЈ«                                                                                                       пЈ¶
                                                                                          X                            2
= attnpвҶ’q В· пЈӯвҲ’zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ zm
                                               2
                                                                                                 za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a

                                                 AttnpвҶ’Pk,m +                                                              пЈё
                                                                                          aМё=n

If q вҲҲ M вҲ© Pk,m :

       вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,n ,
                                                  пЈ«                                        пЈ¶
                                                                 X
                                              вҠӨ пЈӯ
                                    Jrp = zn vk,n zn vk,n вҲ’               attnpвҶ’w zn vk,n пЈё
                                                              wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,n

                                       = zn2 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n )
                                                                X
                              Krp,q = (er вҲ’ attnpвҶ’q eq вҲ’               attnpвҶ’w ew )вҠӨ eq
                                                                wМё=q

                                       = вҲ’attnpвҶ’q

       вҖў For r вҲҲ U вҲ© Pk,a , a Мё= n
                                                  пЈ«                                        пЈ¶
                                                                 X
                                              вҠӨ пЈӯ
                                    Jrp = za vk,a zn vk,n вҲ’               attnpвҶ’w za vk,a пЈё
                                                              wвҲҲU вҲ©Pk,a

                                       = вҲ’za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                                 X
                              Krp,q = (er вҲ’ attnpвҶ’q eq вҲ’               attnpвҶ’w ew )вҠӨ eq
                                                                wМё=q

                                       = вҲ’attnpвҶ’q

Thus
       X
             attnpвҶ’r Jrp Krp,q
       rвҲҲU
                       пЈ«                                                                                 пЈ¶
                                                                           X                         2
       = attnpвҶ’q В· пЈӯвҲ’zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n +                              za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a

                                                                                                         пЈё.
                                                                           aМё=n

Therefore
             (t)
            ОІk,pвҶ’q = E [1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}attnpвҶ’q В·
                    вҲ’zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ 1{q вҲҲ U}zm
                                                              2

                                                                AttnpвҶ’Pk,m
                                          пЈ¶пЈ№
                     X                  2
                   +     za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈёпЈ» .
                       aМё=n


                                                  (t)
Based on the above gradient update for ОҘpвҶ’q , we further introduce the following auxiliary quantity,
which will be useful in the later proof.
                           (t+1)            (t)         (t)                 (0)
                        ОҘk,pвҶ’q := ОҘk,pвҶ’q + О·ОІk,pвҶ’q ,               with ОҘk,pвҶ’q = 0                            (D.2)
                              (t)       P         (t)
It is easy to verify that ОҘpвҶ’q =           kвҲҲ[K] ОҘk,pвҶ’q .


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2   H IGH - PROBABILITY E VENT

We first introduce the following exponential bounds for the hypergeometric distribution Hyper
(m, D, M ). Hyper (m, D, M ) describes the probability of certain successes (random draws for
which the object drawn has a specified feature) in m draws, without replacement, from a finite
population of size M that contains exactly D objects with that feature, wherein each draw is either a
success or a failure.
Proposition D.5 (Greene & Wellner (2017)). Suppose S вҲј Hyper (m, D, M ) with 1 вүӨ m, D вүӨ M .
Define ВөM := D/M . Then for all t > 0
                                                                 t2

                        P (|S вҲ’ mВөM | > t) вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                       .
                                                           4mВөM + 2t
We then utilize this property to prove the high-probability set introduced in Appendix C.1.
Lemma D.6. For k вҲҲ [K] n вҲҲ [N ], define
                             Ek,n (Оі, P ) := {M : |Pk,n вҲ© U| = Оҳ(Cn )},                         (D.3)
we have
                                P(M вҲҲ Ek,n ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2 exp(вҲ’cn,1 Cn )                             (D.4)
where cn,0 > 0 is some constant.

Proof. Under the random masking strategy, given k вҲҲ [K] and n вҲҲ [N ], Yk,n = |U вҲ© Pk,n | follows
the hypergeometric distribution, i.e. Yk,n вҲј Hyper((1 вҲ’ Оі)P, Cn , P ). Then by tail bounds, for t > 0,
we have:
                                                                    t2
                    P[|Yk,n вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ Оі)Cn | > t] вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’                      )
                                                           4(1 вҲ’ Оі)Cn + 2t
Letting t = Оҳ(Cn ), we have
                                P[Yk,n = Оҳ(Cn )] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’cn,1 Cn .



We further have the following fact, which will be useful for proving the property of loss objective in
the next subsection.
Lemma D.7. For k вҲҲ [K] and n вҲҲ [N ], we have
                               P(|U вҲ© Pk,n | = 0) вүӨ exp(вҲ’cn,0 Cn ).                              (D.5)
where cn,0 > 0 is some constant.

Proof. By the form of probability density for Hyper((1 вҲ’ Оі)P, Cn , P ), we have
                                                 Cn (P вҲ’Cn )

                                                       0     (1вҲ’Оі)P
                           P(|U вҲ© Pk,n | = 0) =               P

                                                           (1вҲ’Оі)P

                                               вүӨ Оі Cn = exp(вҲ’cn,0 Cn )).


D.3   P ROPERTIES OF L OSS F UNCTION

Recall the training and regional reconstruction loss we consider are given by:
                                 пЈ®                                               пЈ№
                             1 пЈ°X                                              2
                    L(Q) := E          1{p вҲҲ M} вҲҘ[F (M(X); Q, E)]p вҲ’ Xp вҲҘ пЈ»                     (D.6)
                             2
                                   pвҲҲP
                             1   h
                                                                       2
                                                                         i
                  Lp (Q) = E 1{p вҲҲ M} вҲҘ[F (M(X), E)]p вҲ’ Xp вҲҘ                                    (D.7)
                             2
In this part, we will present several important lemmas for such a training objective. We first single
out the following lemma, which connects the loss form with the attention score.


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma D.8 (Loss Calculation). The population loss L(Q) can be decomposed into the following
form:
                  X
         L(Q) =       Lp (Q), where
                       pвҲҲP
                            K
                       1X
            Lp (Q) =         E [1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k} В·
                       2
                         k=1
                       пЈ«                                                пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                 2                    2
                                         (t)                   (t)
                                                     X
                       пЈӯza2      1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,a    +   za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈёпЈ»
                           k,p                           k,p
                                                                  aМё=ak,p



Proof.

Lp (Q)
     K
  1X h                                           2
                                                   i
=       E 1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k} вҲҘ[F (M(X), E)]p вҲ’ Xp вҲҘ
  2
    k=1
          пЈ®                                                            пЈ№
                                                                     2
     K
  1 X                         X
=       E пЈ°1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k}       AttnpвҶ’Pk,m zm vk,m вҲ’ zak,p vk,ak,p пЈ»
          пЈҜ                                                            пЈә
  2
     k=1                                mвҲҲ[N ]
            пЈ®                          пЈ«                                    пЈ¶пЈ№
      K                                                2
(i) 1

      X                                                  X                2
        E пЈ°1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k} пЈӯza2k,p 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,ak,p +     2

=                                                          zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m пЈёпЈ»
    2
      k=1                                                                   mМё=ak,p


where (i) follows since the features are orthogonal.


We then introduce some additional crucial notations for the loss objectives.

                LвҲ—p = min Lp (Q),                                                            (D.8a)
                       QвҲҲRdГ—d

                        1 2      L2    X
                Llow
                 p =      (Пғz +      )  P |U вҲ© Pk,zak,p | = 0                                (D.8b)
                        2       N вҲ’1
                                               kвҲҲ[K]
                            K
                            X
                Lep (Q) =         Lek,p (Q),     where
                            k=1
                             1 h
                Lek,p (Q) = E 1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k, M вҲҲ Ek,zak,p } В·
                    пЈ«        2                                         пЈ¶пЈ№
                                              2                      2
                                      (t)                       (t)
                                                  X
                    пЈӯza2      1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,a    +    za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈёпЈ»                       (D.8c)
                        k,p                        k,p
                                                               aМё=ak,p


Here Пғz2 = E[Zn (X)2 ]. LвӢҶp denotes the minimum value of the population loss in equation D.7, and
Llow
  p represents the unavoidable errors for p вҲҲ P, given that all the patches in Pk,ak,p are masked.
                                                        вӢҶ
We will show that Llow
                     p serves as a lower bound for Lp , and demonstrate that the network trained
                                                    low
with GD will attain nearly zero error compared to Lp . Our convergence will be established by the
                                                                                         вӢҶ
sub-optimality gap with respect to Llow
                                      p , which necessarily implies the convergence to Lp . (It also
         вӢҶ     low
implies Lp вҲ’ Lp is small.)
Lemma D.9. For LвӢҶp and Llow p defined in equation D.8a and equation D.8b, respectively, we have

          вӢҶ                                              Оәc
Llow
 p вүӨ Lp and they are both at the order of Оҳ exp вҲ’ c1 P      + 1 1 МёвҲҲ вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c2 P Оәs
where c1 , c2 > 0 are some constants.


                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            вӢҶ
Proof. We first prove Llow
                       p вүӨ Lp :
                         K
                      1X
     LвӢҶp = min              E [1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k} В·
              QвҲҲR dГ—d 2
                        k=1
                         пЈ«                                                      пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                   2                          2
                                           (t)                         (t)
                                                       X
                         пЈӯza3      1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,a    +   za2 zak,p AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈёпЈ»
                             k,p                        k,p
                                                              aМё=ak,p
                        K
                     1X
           вүҘ min           E 1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k} 1{|U вҲ© Pk,ap,k | = 0} В·
              QвҲҲRdГ—d 2
                       k=1
                        пЈ«                                                          пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                  2                              2
                                          (t)                             (t)
                                                      X
                        пЈӯza3      1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,a    +       za2 zak,p AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈёпЈ»
                            k,p                         k,p
                                                              aМё=ak,p


                                                              (t)
Notice that when all patches in Pk,ak,p are masked, AttnpвҶ’Pk,a                = 0. Moreover,
                                                                        k,p

                                        X
                                                  2    (t)           L2
                                                 zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m вүҘ
                                                                    N вҲ’1
                                       mМё=ak,p
by CauchyвҖ“Schwarz inequality. Thus
                                K
                             1X 2        L2
                     LвӢҶp вүҘ                     )P |U вҲ© Pk,ak,p | = 0 = Llow

                                  (Пғz +                                 p .
                             2          N вҲ’1
                               k=1

Llow
  p    = Оҳ exp вҲ’ c1 P Оәc + 1 1 МёвҲҲ вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c2 P Оәs              immediately comes from

Lemma D.7. Furthermore, we only need to show LвӢҶp = O exp вҲ’ c1 P Оәc + 1 1 МёвҲҲ

вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c2 P Оәs     . This can be directly obtained by choosing Q = ПғId for some suffi-
ciently large Пғ and hence omitted here.
Lemma D.10. Given p вҲҲ P, for any Q, we have

 Lep (Q) вүӨ Lp (Q) вҲ’ Llow вүӨ Lep (Q) + O exp вҲ’ c3 P Оәc + 1 1 МёвҲҲ вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c4 P Оәs

                             p                                                           .
where c3 , c4 > 0 are some constants.

Proof. The lower bound is directly obtained by the definition and thus we only prove the upper
bound.
Lp (Q) вҲ’ Lep (Q)
           пЈ®                                                                                               пЈ№
      K                                                                      2                         2
    1X пЈ°                              c

                                                                  (t)
                                                                                  X
                                                                                               (t)
 =       E 1{p вҲҲ M, kX = k, M вҲҲ Ek,z          } В· za2k,p 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,a        +       za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a      пЈ»
    2                                    ak,p                           k,p
     k=1                                                                                       aМё=ak,p
    K
    X
вүӨ         U 2 P(M вҲҲ Ek,z
                     c
                         a
                                   )
                             k,p
    k=1

вүӨ O exp вҲ’ c3 P Оәc + 1 1 МёвҲҲ вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c4 P Оәs

                                                      .
where the last inequality follows from Lemma D.6.



E    OVERALL I NDUCTION H YPOTHESES AND P ROOF P LAN FOR MAE
Our main proof utilizes the induction hypotheses. In this section, we introduce the main induction
hypotheses for the positive and negative information gaps, which will later be proven to be valid
throughout the entire learning process.


                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.1    P OSITIVE I NFORMATION G AP

We first state our induction hypothesis for the case that the information gap вҲҶ is positive.
Induction Hypothesis E.1. For t вүӨ T , given p, q вҲҲ P, for k вҲҲ [K], the following holds

           (t)                                             (t)
      a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p вҲҲ [0, O(1)];
                                                                      e

                             (t)                                     (t)
      b. if ak,p Мё= 1, then ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically decreasing and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ [вҲ’O(1),
                                                                                e     0];
           (t)             1
      c. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | = O(
                      e 1вҲ’Оә
                         P   s ) for m вҲҲ
                                       / {1} вҲӘ {ak,p };
                      (t)   e 1Оәs );
      d. for q Мё= p, ОҘpвҶ’q = O( P

          (t)   e 1 ).
      e. ОҘpвҶ’p = O( P



E.2    N EGATIVE I NFORMATION G AP

Now we turn to the case that вҲҶ вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ(1).
Induction Hypothesis E.2. For t вүӨ T , given p, q вҲҲ P, for k вҲҲ [K], the following holds

          (t)                                         (t)
      a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p вҲҲ [0, O(1)];
                                                                      e

                             (t)                                          (t)        1
      b. if ak,p Мё= 1, then ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically decreasing and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ [вҲ’O(
                                                                                e вҲ’вҲҶ
                                                                                   P   ), 0];
            (t)            1
      c. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | = O(
                      e 1вҲ’Оә
                         P   s ) for m вҲҲ
                                       / {1} вҲӘ {ak,p };
                      (t)   e 1Оәs );
      d. for q Мё= p, ОҘpвҶ’q = O( P

          (t)   e 1 ).
      e. ОҘpвҶ’p = O( P



E.3    P ROOF O UTLINE

In both settings, we can classify the process through which transformers learn the feature attention
              (t)
correlation ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p into two distinct scenarios. These scenarios hinge on the spatial relation of
the area p within the context of the k-th partition Dk , specifically, whether p is located in the global
area of the k-th cluster, i.e. whether ak,p = 1. The learning dynamics exhibit different behaviors
of learning the local FP correlation in the local area with different вҲҶ, while the behaviors for
features located in the global area are very similar, unaffected by the value of вҲҶ. Therefore, through
Appendices F to H, we delve into the learning phases and provide technical proofs for the local area
with вҲҶ вүҘ в„Ұ(1), local area with вҲҶ вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ(1) and the global area respectively. Finally, we will put
this analysis together to prove that the Induction Hypothesis E.1 (resp. Induction Hypothesis E.2)
holds during the entire training process, thereby validating the main theorems in Appendix I.


F     A NALYSIS FOR THE L OCAL A REA WITH P OSITIVE I NFORMATION G AP

In this section, we focus on a specific patch p вҲҲ P with the k-th cluster for k вҲҲ [K], and present the
analysis for the case that Xp is located in the local area for the k-th cluster, i.e. ak,p > 1. We will
analyze the case that вҲҶ вүҘ в„Ұ(1). Throughout this section, we denote ak,p = n for simplicity. We
will analyze the convergence of the training process via two phases of dynamics. At the beginning of
each phase, we will establish an induction hypothesis, which we expect to remain valid throughout
that phase. Subsequently, we will analyze the dynamics under such a hypothesis within the phase,
aiming to provide proof of the hypothesis by the end of the phase.


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1     P HASE I, S TAGE 1

In this section, we shall discuss the initial stage of phase I. Firstly, we present the induction hypothesis
in this stage.
We define the stage 1 of phase I as all iterations t вүӨ T1 , where

                                         (t)          1 вҲҶ
                     T1 вүң max t : ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вүҘ вҲ’                 вҲ’ 0.01 log(P ) .
                                                      U 2
We state the following induction hypotheses, which will hold throughout this period:
Induction Hypothesis F.1. For each 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 , q вҲҲ P \ {p}, the following holds:

            (t)                                                          (t)                         ( вҲҶ2 вҲ’0.01) log(P )
        a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,n is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вҲҲ [0, O                                           P 0.02            ];

            (t)                                                          (t)
        b. ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically decreasing and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ [вҲ’ U1                               вҲҶ

                                                                                                 2 вҲ’ 0.01            log(P ), 0];
                              ОҰ(t)           (t)
                                   pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        c. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | = O              P 1вҲ’Оәs                 for m Мё= 1, n;

                            ОҰ(t)                                                        ОҰ(t)       (t)
                                                                                          pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

            (t)              pвҶ’vk,n                                  (t)
        d. ОҘk,pвҶ’q = O          Cn           for ak,q = n, |ОҘk,pвҶ’p | = O                                P                   ;

                             |ОҰ(t)                     ОҰ(t)      (t)
                               pвҶ’vk,1 |                 pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        e. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O           C1           +O                   P                for ak,q = 1;

                             ОҰ(t)       (t)
                               pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        f. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O                P                  for ak,q Мё= 1, n.


F.1.1     P ROPERTY OF ATTENTION S CORES

We first introduce several properties of the attention score if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction
Hypothesis F.1 hold.
Lemma F.1. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1 hold at iteration
t вүӨ T1 , then the following holds
                    (t)                      (t)
        1. 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вүҘ в„Ұ(1);

                             (t)           1
        2. If M вҲҲ Ek,n , AttnpвҶ’Pk,n = Оҳ P 1вҲ’Оәs   ;

                                               (t)                                       1
        3. Moreover, if M вҲҲ Ek,1 , we have AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 = в„Ұ                             1вҲ’Оәs
                                                                                           вҲ’0.01
                                                                                                          ;
                                                                                  P     2


                                                                             1вҲ’Attn(t)            (t)
                                                                                      pвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’AttnpвҶ’Pk,n

                                                        (t)
        4. For q вҲҲ M вҲ© (Pk,n вҲӘ Pk,1 ), attnpвҶ’q = O                                           P                             .
Lemma F.2. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1 hold at iteration
t вүӨ T1 , then for m Мё= n, 1, the following holds:

                                               1вҲ’Attn(t)
                                                     pвҶ’P
                                                                  (t)
                                                             вҲ’AttnpвҶ’P
                                    (t)                  k,1          k,n
     1. For any q вҲҲ Pk,m , attnpвҶ’q вүӨ O                      P               ).

                                                     1вҲ’Attn(t)             (t)
                                                               pвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’AttnpвҶ’Pk,n

                             (t)
        2. Moreover, AttnpвҶ’Pk,m вүӨ O                                      N                       .

The above properties can be easily verified through direct calculations by using the definition in
equation 2.6 and conditions in Induction Hypothesis F.1, which are omitted here for brevity.


                                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1.2       B OUNDING THE G RADIENT U PDATES FOR FP C ORRELATIONS
Lemma F.3. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1 hold at iteration
                   (t)
0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 , then ОұpвҶ’vk,n вүҘ 0 and satisfies:
                                              C        1
                               (t)             n
                             ОұpвҶ’v      =  Оҳ       = Оҳ           .
                                   k,n
                                              P        P 1вҲ’Оәs

Proof. By Lemma C.2, we have
 (t)
ОұpвҶ’v k,n
     пЈ®                                   пЈ«                                                                                       пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                            2                                                2
                                (t)                                  (t)                                         (t)
                                                                                         X
= E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                            +             2
                                                                                              zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                   пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                     mМё=n
     пЈ®                                               пЈ«                                                                                       пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                          2                                              2
                                       (t)                                 (t)                                             (t)
                                                                                                  X
= E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                  +           2
                                                                                                         zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                    пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                  mМё=n
         пЈ®                                               пЈ«                                                                                    пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                            2                                             2
                                         (t)                                   (t)                                             (t)
                                                                                                      X
                  c
  + E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                    +           2
                                                                                                             zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                 пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                      mМё=n

вүӨP(M вҲҲ Ek,n )
    пЈ®                                        пЈ«                                                                                      пЈ¶        пЈ№
                                                                             2                                                  2
                           (t)                               (t)                                                 (t)
                                                                                         X
  В· E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3             1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                  +           2
                                                                                                zm zn        AttnpвҶ’Pk,m             пЈё Ek,n пЈ»
                                                                                         mМё=n
                  c
  + O(1) В· P(M вҲҲ Ek,n )
      C
             n
вүӨO     ) + O(exp(вҲ’cn,1 Cn )
    P
    C
     n
вүӨO       ,
    P
where the second inequality invokes Lemma F.1 and Lemma D.6, and the last inequality is due to
                                                    (t)
exp(вҲ’cn,1 Cn ) вүӘ CPn . Similarly, we can show that ОұpвҶ’vk,n вүҘ в„Ұ( CPn ).


Lemma F.4. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1 hold at iteration
                   (t)
0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 , then ОұpвҶ’vk,1 < 0 and satisfies

                         (t)
                                              1                 1
                       |ОұpвҶ’v     |вүҘв„Ұ        1вҲ’Оәs       = в„Ұ 0.98вҲ’Оәs .
                             k,1
                                       P 2( 2 вҲ’0.01)        P

Proof. We first single out the following fact:
                                                                                          2
                    (t)             (t)          (t)        (t)                   (t)
                                                                     X
вҲ’ z1 zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ z13 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 +   za2 z1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                                                                            aМё=1,n

                       (t)             (t)                           (t)                          (t)                    (t)
вүӨ z1   max za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a вҲ’ zn2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ z12 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 )
            aМё=1,n

                (t)             (t)              (t)           (t)                 (t)
= вҲ’z1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 ) zn2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + z12 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ max za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a .
                                                                                                        aМё=1,n
                                                                                                                       (F.1)
Therefore, by Lemma C.1, we have
             "
 (t)                                             (t)
ОұpвҶ’v k,1
         вүӨ E 1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                       #
                              (t)          (t)                                 (t)              (t)                  (t)
                 вҲ’z1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 )                    zn2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + z12 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ max za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                                                                         aМё=1,n
                   пЈ®                                                                                                  пЈ№
                                                                                                                  2
                                             (t)                                                       (t)
                                                                              X
                             c
             + E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·                                 z12 za       AttnpвҶ’Pk,a         пЈ»
                                                                             aМё=1,n
                                                             1                             c
         вүӨ P(M вҲҲ Ek,1 ) В·            вҲ’ в„Ұ(1) В· в„Ұ(        1вҲ’Оәs             ) + O(1) В· P(M вҲҲ Ek,1 )
                                                 P 2Г—( 2 вҲ’0.01)
                             1                        1
         вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ              1вҲ’Оәs              = вҲ’в„Ұ 0.98вҲ’Оәs
                 P 2Г—( 2 вҲ’0.01)                    P
where the second inequality invokes Lemma F.1 and the last inequality comes from Lemma D.6.
Lemma F.5. At each iteration t вүӨ T1 , if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1
hold, then for any m > 1 with m Мё= n, the following holds
                                  Оұ(t)        (t)            Оұ(t)        (t)
                                   pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1           pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                  (t)
                |ОұpвҶ’v     | вүӨ O                       =  O          1вҲ’Оә
                                                                                 .
                      k,m
                                          N                       P    s



Proof. By Lemma C.1, for m Мё= n, we have
               пЈ®                                                       пЈ«                                              пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                                  2
                                                       (t)                                             (t)
                                                                             X
     (t)
    ОұpвҶ’v k,m
             вүӨ E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,m В· пЈӯ                                     za2 zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,a                пЈёпЈ» (F.2)
                                                                         aМё=m,n
                       "

    (t)                              (t)              2            (t)           (t)
  вҲ’ОұpвҶ’v k,m
            вүӨ E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}Attn pвҶ’P k,m
                                             В·   zm zn    1 вҲ’ Attn pвҶ’P k,n
                                                                             AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
                                                                                 #

                         3               (t)               (t)
                       +zm       1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m        AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                                                           (F.3)

For equation F.2, we have
 (t)
ОұpвҶ’v k,m
     пЈ®                                                                  пЈ«                                              пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                                   2
                                                        (t)                                               (t)
                                                                              X
 вүӨ E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,m В· пЈӯ                                    za2 zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,a                пЈёпЈ»
                                                                             aМё=m,n
         пЈ®                                                                       пЈ«                                             пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                 (t)                                            (t)
                                                                                      X
   + E пЈ°1{kX = k, (Ek,1 вҲ© Ek,n )c вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,m В· пЈӯ                                       za2 zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,a               пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                     aМё=m,n
     пЈ®
                                                                       (t)                     (t)         !
                                                       1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
 вүӨ E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}O
                                                             N
                              2       1
                      (t)
     В· z12 zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 + O                 + O(1) В· P(M вҲҲ (Ek,1 вҲ© Ek,n )c )
                                       N
       |Оұ(t)
         pвҶ’vk,1 |

 вүӨO                 + O(1) В· P(M вҲҲ (Ek,1 вҲ© Ek,n )c )
           N
       |Оұ(t)
         pвҶ’vk,1 |

 вүӨO        1вҲ’Оә
         P     s


where the second inequality is due to Lemma F.2, the last inequality follows from Lemma F.4 and
Lemma D.6.
On the other hand, for equation F.3, we can use the similar argument by invoking Lemma F.2 and
Lemma F.3, and thus obtain
                                                    Оұ(t)
                                      (t)             pвҶ’vk,n
                                  вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,m вүӨ O          1вҲ’Оә
                                                                .
                                                      P    s


                                                        35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Putting them together, we have
                                                       Оұ(t)           (t)
                                                           pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                                       (t)
                                     |ОұpвҶ’v     |вүӨO                            .
                                           k,m
                                                               P 1вҲ’Оәs



F.1.3    B OUNDING THE G RADIENT U PDATES FOR P OSITIONAL C ORRELATIONS
Lemma F.6. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1 hold at iteration
                                                         (t)
0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 , then for q вҲҲ P \ {p} and ak,q = n, we have ОІk,pвҶ’q вүҘ 0 and satisfies:
                                                  Оұ(t)
                                    (t)             pвҶ’vk,n
                                  ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ                 .
                                                     Cn
                                     Оұ(t)       (t)
                                       pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                       (t)
Furthermore, we have |ОІk,pвҶ’p | = O            P         .


Proof. By Lemma C.2, for q вҲҲ Pk,n with q Мё= p, we have
 (t)
ОІk,pвҶ’q =
        пЈ®                                                     пЈ«                                                               пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                              2                             2
                                                                                 (t)                                 (t)
                                                                                                      X
         E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ U}attn(t)
                                       pвҶ’q В·
                                             пЈӯzn2 1 вҲ’ Attn
                                                           pвҶ’Pk,n                                 +           2
                                                                                                             zm  AttnpвҶ’Pk,m пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                      mМё=n
         |                                                              {z                                                         }
                                                                        H1
             h                                                                i
                                                      (t)            (t)
         + E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ M}attn(t)     2
                                        pвҶ’q В· вҲ’zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,n 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
           |                                {z                                }
                                                               H2
                   пЈ®                                               пЈ«                          пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                            2
                                                                                     (t)
                                                                       X
         + E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ M}attn(t)
                                         pвҶ’q В·
                                               пЈӯ                              2
                                                                             zm  AttnpвҶ’Pk,m пЈёпЈ» .
                                                                    mМё=n
              |                                        {z                                                    }
                                                       H3

Firstly, for H1 , notice that
                    пЈ®                                              пЈ«                                                                   пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                   2                               2
                                                     (t)                               (t)                               (t)
                                                                                                           X
(Cn вҲ’ 1)H1 = E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                       +           2
                                                                                                                  zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m        пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                           mМё=n
                        (t)
                   = Оҳ(ОұpвҶ’v k,n
                                ).

                                                                                (t)               1
For H2 , since p, q вҲҲ M, by Lemma F.1, we can upper bound attnpвҶ’q by O                            P    , thus
                           1                                         Оұ(t)
                                2     (t)            (t)              pвҶ’vk,n
вҲ’H2 вүӨ E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}O    В· zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,n 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n     вүӨO             .
                           P                                            P
Further notice that H3 can be upper bounded by O(H1 ), putting it together, we have
                                                      Оұ(t)
                                           (t)         pвҶ’vk,n
                                          ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ            .
                                                         Cn

             (t)
Turn to ОІk,pвҶ’p , when q = p,
                h                                                                i
                                                      (t)               (t)
      ОІn(t) = E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}attn(t)
                                    pвҶ’p В·   вҲ’z 2
                                               n Attn pвҶ’Pk,n   1 вҲ’ Attn pвҶ’Pk,n
              |                              {z                                  }
                                                              J2


                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                   пЈ®                             пЈ«                                             пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                           2
                                                                                (t)
                                                      X
              + E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}attn(t)
                                       pвҶ’p В·
                                             пЈӯ                  2
                                                               zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                   пЈёпЈ» .
                                                   mМё=n
               |                           {z                                                    }
                                           J3

We can bound J2 in a similar way as H2 . Thus, we only focus on further bounding J3 :
       пЈ®                                                             пЈ«                        пЈ¶пЈ№
                                          (t)             (t)
                                1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n             X
                                                                             2

                                                                                      (t)
                                                                                            2
J3 вүӨ E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}O(                                        )В·пЈӯ       zm   AttnpвҶ’Pk,m пЈёпЈ»
                                                P
                                                                       mМё=n
           (t)
                    !
         |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 |
   вүӨO                 .
             P
where the first inequality holds by invoking Lemma F.1 and the last inequality follows similar
arguments as analysis for equation F.2.
Lemma F.7. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1 hold at iteration
                                                         (t)
0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 , then for q вҲҲ P \ {p} and ak,q = 1, we have ОІk,pвҶ’q satisfies:
                                     (t)        (t)
                                                        !         (t)
                                                                           !
                      (t)          |ОұpвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1 |         |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 |
                    |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                         +O                .
                                            P                       C1

Proof. By Lemma C.2, for q вҲҲ Pk,1 , we have
    (t)
ОІk,pвҶ’q =
     h
вҲ’ E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ U}attn(t)  pвҶ’q В·
 пЈ«                                                                                     пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                     2
 пЈӯz12 Attn(t)             (t)                   (t)        (t)                (t)
                                                                    X
                                      2
          pвҶ’Pk,1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 ) + zn 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’   za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                           aМё=1,n
                                                                                                                    (F.4)
          h                                                                                                     i
                                                                               (t)                   (t)
вҲ’E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ M}attn(t)    2
                              pвҶ’q В· zn 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
|                                 {z                             }
                                           G2
          пЈ®                                       пЈ«                                            пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                           2
                                                                           (t)
                                                      X
+E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ M}attn(t)
                               pвҶ’q В·
                                     пЈӯ     za2                         AttnpвҶ’Pk,a              пЈёпЈ» .
                                      aМё=n
|                                     {z                                                         }
                                      G3

For equation F.4 denoted as G1 , following the direct calculations, we have
                                                     (t)
                                    вҲ’(C1 вҲ’ 1)G1 = Оҳ(ОұpвҶ’v k,1
                                                             )
We can further bound G2 and G3 in a similar way as H2 and H3 in Lemma F.6 and thus obtain
                                                    Оұ(t)
                                                         pвҶ’vk,n
                                      вҲ’G2 вүӨ O                              ,
                                                               P           !
                                                           (t)
                                                      |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 |
                                       G3 вүӨ O                    .
                                                         P
which completes the proof.
Lemma F.8. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1 hold at iteration
                                                   (t)
0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 , then for q вҲҲ P \ {p} and n Мё= ak,q , ОІk,pвҶ’q satisfies:
                                                  Оұ(t)         (t)
                                                     pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                                  (t)
                                |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                                         .
                                                                   P

                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. By Lemma C.2, for q вҲҲ Pk,m , we have
    (t)
ОІk,pвҶ’q =
    h
вҲ’ E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ U}attn(t)
                               pвҶ’q В·
 пЈ«                                                                                                                                                                  пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                                                                                2
        (t)             (t)                    (t)        (t)                                                                                            (t)
                                                                                                                                  X
  2
пЈӯzm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m ) + zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’                                                                        za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a            пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                                                 aМё=n,m
                                                                                                                                                 (F.5)
          h                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                             (t)                     (t)
вҲ’E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ M}attn(t)    2
                              pвҶ’q В· zn 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
|                                 {z                             }
                                                              I2
          пЈ®                                                        пЈ«                                           пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                              (t)
                                                                       X
+E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M, q вҲҲ M}attn(t)
                               pвҶ’q В·
                                     пЈӯ                                             za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a              пЈёпЈ» .
                                                                       aМё=n
|                                                     {z                                                         }
                                                      I3
                                                      |Оұ(t)                |Оұ(t)      (t)
                                                        pвҶ’vk,m |             pвҶ’vk,1 вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1 |

equation F.5 can be upper bounded by O                    Cm       = O           N Cm            =
    |Оұ(t)      (t)
      pвҶ’vk,1 вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1 |

O            P            , where the first equality holds by invoking Lemma F.5. I2 and I3 can
be bounded similarly as G2 and G3 , which is omitted here.

F.1.4           AT THE END OF P HASE I, S TAGE 1
Lemma F.9. For  n > 1, if Induction
                                          Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.1 hold for all
                log(P )P 0.98вҲ’Оәs
0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 = O          О·          , At iteration t = T1 + 1, we have

                  (T +1)
                   1          1     вҲҶ

              a. ОҰpвҶ’v k,1 вүӨ вҲ’ U     2 вҲ’ 0.01          log(P );

                      (T +1)
                      1                               1
              b. AttnpвҶ’P    =O                      L вҲҶ                    .
                        k,1
                                         P (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U ( 2 вҲ’0.01)

                                                                                                    (t)                    (t)
                                  Lemma F.4, we have |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | вү« ОұpвҶ’vk,n . Then the
Proof. By comparing Lemma F.3 and
                                 log(P )P 0.98вҲ’Оәs
existence of T1,k = O                    О·                 directly follows from Lemma F.4.

F.2           P HASE I, S TAGE 2
                           (t)
During stage 1, ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 significantly decreases to decouple the FP correlations with the global
                                         (t)                      (t)
feature, resulting in a decrease in AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 , while other AttnpвҶ’Pk,n with m > 1 remain
                                     1
                                                 1
                                                                                      (t)     2
approximately at the order of O P 1вҲ’Оә  s   (Оҳ P 1вҲ’Оәs ). By the end of phase I, (AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 )

                     1                                                             (t)                                                 (t)
decreases to O( P 1.96вҲ’2Оәs ), leading to a decrease in |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | as it approaches towards ОұpвҶ’vk,n . At
this point, stage 2 begins. Shortly after entering this phase, the prior dominant role of the decrease
      (t)                                             (t)
of ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 in learning dynamics diminishes as |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | reaches the same order of magnitude as
  (t)
ОұpвҶ’vk,n .

We define stage 2 of phase I as all iterations T1 < t вүӨ Te1 , where
                                                                0.01 cвҲ—1 (1 вҲ’ Оәs )

                              (t)           (t)          вҲҶ
      T1 вүң max t > T1 : ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вүӨ
       e                                                      +     +                log(P ) .
                                                        2L       L         U
for some small constant cвҲ—1 > 0.
For computational convenience, we make the following assumptions for Оәc and Оәs , which can be
easily relaxed with the cost of additional calculations.
                     вҲҶ  1      1   0.01 0.01           cвҲ— (1 вҲ’ Оәs )
                            вҲ’      +        +        вүӨ 0                                (F.6a)
                     2 L U              L       U           U

                                                                       38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                cвҲ—1 L                         U вҲҶ
                                      (1 вҲ’            )(1 вҲ’ Оәs ) вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Оәc ) + ( + 0.01)                                            (F.6b)
                                                 U                            L 2
Here cвҲ—0 is some small. We state the following induction hypotheses, which will hold throughout this
period:
Induction Hypothesis F.2. For each T1 < t вүӨ Te1 , q вҲҲ P \ {p}, the following holds:
            (t)                                                               (t)                 cвҲ— +cвҲ—
        a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,n is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вҲҲ [0, 0 U 1 log(P )];
            (t)                                                                                                       (t)
        b. ОҰpвҶ’vk,1      is      monotonically       decreasing                                      and              ОҰpвҶ’vk,1            вҲҲ
           [вҲ’ L1 вҲҶ
                 2 + 0.01   log(P ), вҲ’ 1 вҲҶ
                                       U 2 вҲ’ 0.01   log(P )];
                                 ОҰ(t)          (t)
                                     pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        c. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | = O                P 1вҲ’Оәs                     for m Мё= 1, n;
                            ОҰ(t)                                                                 ОҰ(t)      (t)
                                                                                                  pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

            (t)                pвҶ’vk,n                                     (t)
        d. ОҘk,pвҶ’q = O            Cn           for ak,q = n, |ОҘk,pвҶ’p | = O                                        P              ;
                             |ОҰ(t)                           ОҰ(t)       (t)
                                  pвҶ’vk,1 |                     pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        e. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O             C1           +O                      P                  for ak,q = 1.;
                             ОҰ(t)         (t)
                                 pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        f. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O                  P                      for ak,q Мё= 1, n.


F.2.1     P ROPERTY OF ATTENTION S CORES
We first single out several properties of attention scores that will be used for the proof of Induction
Hypothesis F.2.
Lemma F.10. if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.2 hold at iteration T1 + 1 вүӨ
t вүӨ Te1 , then the following holds
                    (t)                         (t)
        1. 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вүҘ в„Ұ(1);
                                     h                                                                       i
                             (t)           1
                                                                                           1
        2. if M вҲҲ Ek,n , AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲҲ в„Ұ P 1вҲ’Оә s ,O                                  (1вҲ’cвҲ—   вҲ—
                                                                                        1 вҲ’c0 )(1вҲ’Оәs )
                                                                                                                 ;
                                                                                P

                               (t)                                    1                                             (t)
        3. Moreover, AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 = O                                  L вҲҶ                ; if M вҲҲ Ek,1 , we have AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 =
                                                          P (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U ( 2 вҲ’0.01)
           в„Ұ (1вҲ’Оәc )+ 1U ( вҲҶ +0.01) ;
              P       L    2

                                                                                1вҲ’Attn(t)                (t)
                                                                                             pвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’AttnpвҶ’Pk,1

                                                              (t)
        4. for q вҲҲ M вҲ© (Pk,n вҲӘ Pk,1 ), attnpвҶ’q = O                                                 P                        .
Lemma F.11. if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.2 hold at iteration T1 + 1 вүӨ
t вүӨ Te1 , then for m Мё= n, the following holds:
                                                               1вҲ’Attn(t)              (t)
                                                                          pвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’AttnpвҶ’Pk,1

                                          (t)
        1. for any q вҲҲ Pk,m , attnpвҶ’q вүӨ O                                            P                           ;

                                                        1вҲ’Attn(t)                (t)
                                                                     pвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’AttnpвҶ’Pk,n

                               (t)
        2. Moreover, AttnpвҶ’Pk,m вүӨ O                                           N                         .

F.2.2     B OUNDING THE G RADIENT U PDATES OF FP C ORRELATIONS
Lemma F.12. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.2 hold at iteration
                         (t)
T1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ Te1 , then ОұpвҶ’vk,n вүҘ 0 and satisfies:
                                                     1
                                     (t)
                                    ОұpвҶ’v      = в„Ұ 1вҲ’Оәs .
                                         k,n
                                                    P

                                                                     39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. By Lemma C.2, we have
 (t)
ОұpвҶ’v k,n
     пЈ®                                        пЈ«                                                                            пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                        2                                2
                         (t)                                         (t)                                          (t)
                                                                                                   X
= E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3                       1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                  +           2
                                                                                                        zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                 mМё=n
     пЈ®                                                       пЈ«                                                                                    пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                    2                                         2
                                (t)                                              (t)                                               (t)
                                                                                                            X
= E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3                            1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                 +           2
                                                                                                                   zm zn       AttnpвҶ’Pk,m         пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                            mМё=n
         пЈ®                                                       пЈ«                                                                                 пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                      2                                        2
                                              (t)                                        (t)                                        (t)
                                                                                                                X
                   c
   + E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                             +           2
                                                                                                                       zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m            пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                                mМё=n

вүіP(M вҲҲ Ek,n )
    пЈ®                                          пЈ«                                                                                         пЈ¶        пЈ№
                                                                                         2                                           2
                                       (t)                                    (t)                                           (t)
                                                                                                   X
   В· E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                       +           2
                                                                                                          zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m               пЈё Ek,n пЈ»
                                                                                                   mМё=n
      C
           n
вүҘв„Ұ
       P
where the last inequality invokes Lemma F.10.


Lemma F.13. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.2 hold at iteration
                         (t)
T1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ Te1 , then ОұpвҶ’vk,1 < 0 and satisfies

                               (t)
                                                         1
                             |ОұpвҶ’v k,1
                                       | вүҘ в„Ұ               U            .
                                               P 2(1вҲ’Оәc )+ L (вҲҶ+0.02)

Proof. Following equation F.1, we have
                                                                                          2
                   (t)            (t)            (t)        (t)                   (t)
                                                                     X
вҲ’ z1 zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ z13 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 +   za2 z1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                                                                                   aМё=1,n

               (t)          (t)                  2     (t)       2     (t)           2     (t)
вүӨ вҲ’z1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 )            zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + z1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ max za AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                                                                                 aМё=1,n

Therefore, by Lemma C.1, we obtain
                   h
     (t)                                            (t)
    ОұpвҶ’v  k,1
              вүӨ E    1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·

                                (t)             (t)
                  вҲ’z1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 )

                  2      (t)          2     (t)              2  (t)
              В· zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + z1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ max za AttnpвҶ’Pk,a           ]
                                                      aМё=1,n
                      пЈ®                                                                пЈ№
                                                                                     2
                                                        (t)                   (t)
                                                               X
                                    c
                + E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,1     вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·       z12 za AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈ»
                                                                                    aМё=1,n
                                                                                             !
                                                                     1
                                                                                                                 c
               вүӨ P(M вҲҲ Ek,1 ) В·       вҲ’ в„Ұ(1) В· в„Ұ                         2U   вҲҶ                  + O(1) В· P(M вҲҲ Ek,1 )
                                                       P 2(1вҲ’Оәc )+ L ( 2 +0.01)
                                  1
               вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ               U
                    P 2(1вҲ’Оәc )+ L (вҲҶ+0.02)
where the second inequality invokes Lemma F.10 and the last inequality comes from Lemma D.6.
The upper bound can be obtained by using similar arguments and invoking the upper bound for
     (t)
AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 in Lemma F.10.


                                                         40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma F.14. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.2 hold at iteration
T1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ Te1 , then for any m > 1 with m Мё= n, the following holds
                                                                         Оұ(t)        (t)
                                                                          pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                                                 (t)
                                               |ОұpвҶ’v     |вүӨO                    1вҲ’Оә
                                                                                             .
                                                     k,m
                                                                              P    s



The proof is similar to Lemma F.5, and thus omitted here.

F.2.3     B OUNDING THE G RADIENT U PDATES OF P OSITIONAL C ORRELATIONS
We then summarize the properties for gradient updates of positional correlations, which utilize the
identical calculations as in Section F.1.3.
Lemma F.15. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.2 hold at iteration
T1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ Te1 , then
                                                           Оұ(t)
                                    (t)         (t)         pвҶ’vk,n         (t)
        a. if ak,q = n and q Мё= p, ОІk,pвҶ’q вүҘ 0; ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ     Cn     and |ОІn | =
               Оұ(t)
                pвҶ’v          вҲ’Оұ(t)
                               pвҶ’v
                       k,n               k,1
          O(                 P                 ).
                                                          Оұ(t)      (t)                        |Оұ(t)
                                                           pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1                       pвҶ’vk,1 |

                                   (t)
        b. if ak,q = 1, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                                 P                 +O         C1            .
                                                                                 Оұ(t)      (t)
                                                                                  pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                                                           (t)
        c. if ak,q = m and m Мё= 1, n, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                                        P                 .

F.2.4     E ND OF P HASE I, S TAGE 2

Lemma
           F.16.  Induction Hypothesis F.2 holds for all iteration T1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ Te1 = T1 +
    log(P )P 1вҲ’Оәs
O         О·        , and at iteration t = Te1 + 1, we have

             (Te +1)
             1                   cвҲ—
                                  1 (1вҲ’Оәs ) log(P )
        a. ОҰpвҶ’v k,n вүҘ                   U           ;
             (Te +1)
             1           вҲҶ    0.01
        b. ОҰpвҶ’v k,1 вүҘ вҲ’( 2L +  L ) log(P ).


                                                                     log(P )P 1вҲ’Оәs
Proof. The existence of Te1 = T1 + O                                       О·             directly follows from Lemma F.12 and
                             (t)
Lemma F.13. Moreover, since ОұpвҶ’vk,1 < 0, then
                          0.01 cвҲ—1 (1 вҲ’ Оәs )                                                  (cвҲ— + cвҲ—1 )(1 вҲ’ Оәs )

                     вҲҶ                                                            1 вҲҶ
 ОҰ(pвҶ’v
    Te1 +1)
             вүӨ          +     +                                      log(P ) вҲ’     ( вҲ’ 0.01) вүӨ 0                   log(P )
         k,n
                     2L    L         U                                            U 2                  U
                                                               1                  cвҲ—
                                                                                   1 (1вҲ’Оәs ) log(P )   (Te +1)
where the last inequality invokes equation F.6a. Now suppose ОҰpвҶ’v k,n <                  U           , then
  (Te1 +1)       вҲҶ     0.01                                    (t)                  вҲҶ     0.001
ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 < вҲ’( 2L + L ) log(P ). Denote the first time that ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 reaches вҲ’( 2L + L ) log(P )
                                 (t)                     (t)                  (t)
as Te. Note that Te < Te1 since ОұpвҶ’vk,1 , the change of ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 , satisfies |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | вүӘ log(P ). Then
for t вүҘ Te, the following holds:

               (t)           1

        1. AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вүҘ в„Ұ P 1вҲ’Оәs ;


               (t)
        2. AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вүӨ O 1вҲ’Оәs1+0.001 .
                                               P    2



Therefore,
                h
  (t)                                        (t)
|ОұpвҶ’v k,1
          | вүӨ E  1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·

                        (t)             (t)                (t)             (t)
             z1 zn2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,n (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n ) + z12 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 ) ]


                                                                          41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                         пЈ®                                                                                                            пЈ№
                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                   (t)                             (t)
                                                                                               X
                                c
                + E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·                                             z12 za AttnpвҶ’Pk,a                пЈ»
                                                                                           aМё=1,n
                             (t)
                         ОұpвҶ’vk,1                                                                    1                             c
            вүӨ O(         1вҲ’Оәs                 ) + P(M вҲҲ Ek,1 ) В· O(1) В· O                      1вҲ’Оәs               + O(1) В· P(M вҲҲ Ek,1 )
                      P    2  +0.001                                                      P      2  +0.001

                       Оұ(t)                                          1
                         k,1 pвҶ’v
            вүӨO    1вҲ’Оәs          +O                    .
                P 2 +0.001          P (1вҲ’Оәs )+0.002
Lemma F.12 still holds, and thus
                                                    Оұ(t)
                                   (t)               pвҶ’vk,n
                                 |ОұpвҶ’v      | вүӨ O              .
                                        k,1
                                                     P 0.002
         1(Te +1)            (Te)
Since |ОҰpвҶ’v k,1 вҲ’ ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 | вүҘ в„Ұ (log(P )), we have


           ОҰ(pвҶ’v
              T1 +1)
                      вүҘ |ОҰ(pвҶ’v
                            T1 +1)
                                    вҲ’ ОҰ(pвҶ’v
                                         T)
                                                | В· в„Ұ(P 0.002 ) + ОҰ(pвҶ’v
                                                                     T)
                                                                            вү« в„Ұ(P 0.002 log(P )),
               e                     e                    e                                e
                  k,n           k,1         k,1                         k,n

                                        1                     (Te +1)        cвҲ—
                                                                              1 (1вҲ’Оәs ) log(P )
which contradicts the assumption that ОҰpвҶ’v k,n <                                    U           .

F.3     P HASE II, S TAGE 1

For n > 1, we define stage 1 of phase II as all iterations Te1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2 , where

                                            (t)         (1 вҲ’ Оәs )
                         T2 вүң max t : ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вүӨ                   log(P ) .
                                                             L
We state the following induction hypotheses, which will hold throughout this stage:
Induction Hypothesis F.3. For each Te1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2 , q вҲҲ P \ {p}, the following holds:
                                                                                               h вҲ—                                        i
              (t)                                                                   (t)          c1 (1вҲ’Оәs )
        a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,n is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вҲҲ                                         U     log(P ), (1вҲ’Оә
                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                                         s)
                                                                                                                            log(P ) ;

              (t)
        b. ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically decreasing and
                           h 1  вҲҶ
                                                                1 вҲҶ
                                                                                  i
                  (t)
                ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ вҲ’            + 0.01 log(P ) вҲ’ o(1), вҲ’     вҲ’ 0.01 log(P ) ;
                                L 2                             U 2
                                       ОҰ(t)            (t)
                                             pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

              (t)
        c. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | = O                        P 1вҲ’Оәs                  for m Мё= 1, n;
                                 ОҰ(t)                                                            ОҰ(t)        (t)
                                                                                                    pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

              (t)                     pвҶ’vk,n                                   (t)
        d. ОҘk,pвҶ’q = O                    Cn           for ak,q = n, |ОҘk,pвҶ’p | = O                         P                  ;
                                      |ОҰ(t)                      ОҰ(t)       (t)
                                         pвҶ’vk,1 |                  pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

               (t)
        e. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O                     C1           +O                   P               for ak,q = 1.;
                                      ОҰ(t)        (t)
                                         pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

               (t)
        f. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O                          P                  for ak,q Мё= 1, n.

F.3.1     P ROPERTY OF ATTENTION S CORES
We first single out several properties of attention scores that will be used for the proof of Induction
Hypothesis F.3.
Lemma F.17. if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.3 hold at iteration Te1 + 1 вүӨ
t вүӨ T2 , then the following holds

                              (t)                     1                               (t)
      1. if M вҲҲ Ek,n , AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вүҘ в„Ұ              cвҲ—
                                                    1 L         . Moreover, if AttnpвҶ’Pk,n does not
                                          P (1вҲ’ U )(1вҲ’Оәs )
                                              (t)                             (t)
          reach the constant level, 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n = в„Ұ(1); otherwise, 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                      =

                         1
          в„Ұ          U                   .
                P ( L вҲ’1)(1вҲ’Оәs )


                                                                          42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     1вҲ’Attn(t)
               (t)                          pвҶ’Pk,n                              (t)
        2. AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 = O (1вҲ’Оәc )+ L ( вҲҶ вҲ’0.01)     ; if M вҲҲ Ek,1 , we have AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 =
                                     P     U 2

           в„Ұ (1вҲ’Оәc )+ 1U ( вҲҶ +0.01) ;
             P       L   2

                                                                              1вҲ’Attn(t)
                                                         (t)                                    pвҶ’Pk,n
        3. for q вҲҲ M вҲ© (Pk,n вҲӘ Pk,1 ), attnpвҶ’q = O                                              P

Lemma F.18. if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.3 hold at iteration Te1 + 1 вүӨ
t вүӨ T2 , then for m Мё= n, the following holds:
                                                          1вҲ’Attn(t)
                                       (t)                              pвҶ’Pk,n
        1. for any q вҲҲ Pk,m , attnpвҶ’q вүӨ O                               P                   .
                                                   1вҲ’Attn(t)               (t)
                                                               pвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’AttnpвҶ’Pk,n

                             (t)
        2. Moreover, AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вүӨ O                                         N                            .

F.3.2     B OUNDING THE G RADIENT U PDATES OF FP C ORRELATIONS
Lemma F.19. if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.3 hold at iteration Te1 + 1 вүӨ
               (t)
t вүӨ T2 , then ОұpвҶ’vk,n вүҘ 0 and satisfies:

                    (t)                        1                       1
                   ОұpвҶ’v     вүҘ min   в„Ұ(       вҲ—
                                            c1 L
                                                        ), в„Ұ        U              .
                        k,n
                                       P (1вҲ’ U )(1вҲ’Оәs )        P 2( L вҲ’1)(1вҲ’Оәs )

Proof. By Lemma C.2, we have
 (t)
ОұpвҶ’v k,n
     пЈ®                                                  пЈ«                                                                                  пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                      2                                  2
                                        (t)                                             (t)                                       (t)
                                                                                                                 X
= E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                        +           2
                                                                                                                        zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                                 mМё=n
     пЈ®                                                                 пЈ«                                                                                          пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                                   2                                          2
                                                   (t)                                               (t)                                           (t)
                                                                                                                            X
= E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                            +            2
                                                                                                                                    zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m              пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                                            mМё=n
         пЈ®                                                                 пЈ«                                                                                       пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                                     2                                         2
                                                        (t)                                              (t)                                           (t)
                                                                                                                                X
                   c
   + E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                             +           2
                                                                                                                                       zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m            пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                                                mМё=n

вүіP(M вҲҲ Ek,n )В·
  пЈ®                                                пЈ«                                                                                                   пЈ¶     пЈ№
                                                                                                     2                                             2
                                   (t)                                              (t)                                                 (t)
                                                                                                               X
 E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                     +           2
                                                                                                                    zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                   пЈё Ek,n пЈ»
                                                                                                             mМё=n
                   c
   + O(1) В· P(M вҲҲ Ek,n )

                     1                                    1
вүі min в„Ұ            cвҲ—
                                       ,в„Ұ           U
                    1L
              P (1вҲ’ U )(1вҲ’Оәs )                  P 2( L вҲ’1)(1вҲ’Оәs )

where the last inequality invokes Lemma F.17 by observing that for M вҲҲ Ek,n ,
                                                                !
     (t)                 (t)      2                    1                                     1
AttnpвҶ’Pk,n (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n ) вүҘ min в„Ұ                cвҲ—
                                                                  В· в„Ұ(1), в„Ұ(1) В· в„Ұ         U              .
                                                     1L
                                               P (1вҲ’ U )(1вҲ’Оәs )                      P 2Г—( L вҲ’1)(1вҲ’Оәs )


Lemma F.20. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.3 hold at iteration
                         (t)
Te1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2 , then ОұpвҶ’vk,1 < 0 and satisfies
                                            !
    (t)                            1                     1                         1
  |ОұpвҶ’vk,m | вүҘ min в„Ұ             вҲ—
                                c1 L
                                             , в„Ұ      U              В· в„Ұ            L вҲҶ            ,
                           P (1вҲ’ U )(1вҲ’Оәs )       P ( L вҲ’1)(1вҲ’Оәs )       P (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U ( 2 вҲ’0.01)

                                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            (t)                                                      (t)
   (t)
                  n                     ОұpвҶ’vk,n                                                     ОұpвҶ’vk,n                                   o
 |ОұpвҶ’v k,m
           | вүӨ max O                         L                        ,O                                   cвҲ— L
                                                                                                                                                   .
                                P   (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U (вҲҶ/2вҲ’0.01)                                    L
                                                                                   2(1вҲ’Оәc )+ U (вҲҶвҲ’0.02)вҲ’(1вҲ’ 1U )(1вҲ’Оәs )
                                                                               P

Proof. Following equation F.1, we have
                                                                                          2
                   (t)            (t)            (t)        (t)                   (t)
                                                                     X
вҲ’ z1 zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ z13 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 +   za2 z1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                                                                                                    aМё=1,n

                    (t)                      (t)                            (t)                              (t)                                       (t)
вүӨ вҲ’z1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 ) zn2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + z12 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ max za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                aМё=1,n
Therefore, by Lemma C.1, we obtain
              h
 (t)                                         (t)
ОұpвҶ’v k,1
         вүӨ  E  1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·

                           (t)           (t)            (t)               (t)                 (t)
             вҲ’z1 (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 ) zn2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + z12 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 вҲ’ max za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a    ]
                                                                                   aМё=1,n
                пЈ®                                                                пЈ№
                                                                               2
                                                 (t)                  (t)
                                                       X
                               c
           + E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,1   вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·      z12 za AttnpвҶ’Pk,a пЈ»
                                                                                      aМё=1,n
                                                         !
                                        1                                      1                                            1
           вүӨ вҲ’ min в„Ұ               cвҲ— L
                                                             ,в„Ұ         U                           В·в„Ұ                          L   вҲҶ
                          P     (1вҲ’ 1U )(1вҲ’Оәs )       P ( L вҲ’1)(1вҲ’Оәs )            P (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U ( 2 вҲ’0.01)
where the second inequality invokes Lemma F.17 and equation F.6b. Moreover,
               h
  (t)                                                         (t)
|ОұpвҶ’v k,1
          | вүІE   1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В·

                                   (t)                (t)                          (t)              (t)
                  z1 zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n + z13 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 ]
                   h                                                                                             i
                                                                       (t)                     (t)           (t)
             = E 1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}z1 zn2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 В· 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n
                   h                                                                                     i
                                                                     (t)                        (t)
             + E 1{kX = k, Ek,1 вҲ© Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}z13 (AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 )2 В· 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1
                                    (t)                                       (t)
                                                                                                        !)
                       n         ОұpвҶ’vk,n                                    ОұpвҶ’vk,n
             вүӨ max O                    L вҲҶ           ,O                                   cвҲ—
                                                                                            1L
                            P (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U ( 2 вҲ’0.01)                      2L вҲҶ
                                                            P 2(1вҲ’Оәc )+ U ( 2 вҲ’0.01)вҲ’(1вҲ’ U )(1вҲ’Оәs )
where the second inequality invokes Lemma F.17.
Lemma F.21. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.3 hold at iteration
Te1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2 for any m > 1 with m Мё= n, the following holds
                                              Оұ(t)          (t)
                                               pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                              (t)
                            |ОұpвҶ’v     | вүӨ O                       .
                                  k,m
                                                     P 1вҲ’Оәs
The proof is similar to Lemma F.5, and thus omitted here.

F.3.3     B OUNDING THE G RADIENT U PDATES OF P OSITIONAL C ORRELATIONS
We then summarize the properties for gradient updates of positional correlations, which utilizes the
identical calculations as in Section F.1.3.
Lemma F.22. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.3 hold at iteration
Te1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2 , then
                                                         (t)                          (t)                          Оұ(t)
                                                                                                                    pвҶ’v                      (t)
                                                                                                                          k,n
        a. if ak,q = n and q Мё= p, ОІk,pвҶ’q вүҘ 0; ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ(                                                           Cn         ) and |ОІn | =
               Оұ(t)      (t)
                pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1

           O           P         .
                                               Оұ(t)         (t)                           |Оұ(t)
                                                   pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1                          pвҶ’vk,1 |

                          (t)
        b. if ak,q = 1, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                        P                     +O          C1            .
                                                                         Оұ(t)        (t)
                                                                            pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                                                   (t)
        c. if ak,q = m and m Мё= 1, n, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                                   P                  .


                                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3.4     E ND OF P HASE II, S TAGE 1

Lemma F.23. Induction Hypothesis F.3 holds for all Te1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2 , and at iteration t = T2 + 1,
we have
            (t)
        a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,n > (1вҲ’Оә
                       L
                          s)
                             log(P );
                   (t)
        b. AttnpвҶ’Pk,n = в„Ұ(1) if M вҲҲ Ek,n .

                                                                                              (t)       (t)         (t)
Proof. By comparing Lemma F.19 and Lemma F.20-F.23, we have ОұpвҶ’vk,n вү« |ОұpвҶ’vk,m |, |ОІk,pвҶ’q |.
                                            Оӣ

Then the existence of T2 = Te1 + O log(P )P     directly follows from Lemma F.19, where
                                                 О·

                                     n    cвҲ— L    U    o
                              Оӣ = max (1 вҲ’ 1 ), 2( вҲ’ 1) В· (1 вҲ’ Оәs ).
                                           U      L
                                                                                        (t)
The second statement can be directly verified by noticing that ОҰpвҶ’vk,n > (1вҲ’Оә
                                                                           L
                                                                             s)
                                                                                log(P ) while all
other attention correlations are sufficiently small.

F.4     P HASE II, S TAGE 2

In this final stage, we establish that these structures indeed represent the solutions toward which the
algorithm converges.
Given any 0 < Пө < 1, for n > 1, define
                           (                                                          12   ! !)
                                                                                   3
                     T2Пө вүң max       t > T2 : ОҰ(t)
                                               pвҶ’vk,n вүӨ log                  c5          вҲ’1 N   .                         (F.7)
                                                                                   Пө

where c5 is some largely enough constant.
We state the following induction hypotheses, which will hold throughout this stage:
Induction Hypothesis F.4. For n > 1, suppose polylog(P ) вү« log( 1Пө ), for each T2 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2Пө ,
q вҲҲ P \ {p}, the following holds:
            (t)                                                        (t)
        a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,n is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вҲҲ [ (1вҲ’Оә
                                                                  L
                                                                    s)
                                                                       log(P ), O(log(P/Пө))];
                                                                     h
             (t)                                       (t)
                                                                       вҲ’ L1 вҲҶ

        b. ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically decreasing and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ                  2 + 0.01 log(P ) вҲ’
                                        i
           o(1), вҲ’ U1 вҲҶ

                      2 вҲ’ 0.01   log(P )  ;
                              ОҰ(t)          (t)
                                  pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        c. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | = O             P 1вҲ’Оәs                for m Мё= 1, n;
                           ОҰ(t)                                                         ОҰ(t)       (t)
                                                                                          pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

            (t)              pвҶ’vk,n                                (t)
        d. ОҘk,pвҶ’q = O         Cn            for ak,q = n, |ОҘk,pвҶ’p | = O                             P           ;
                             |ОҰ(t)                     ОҰ(t)      (t)
                                 pвҶ’vk,1 |               pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        e. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O          C1            +O                 P                  for ak,q = 1.;
                             ОҰ(t)      (t)
                              pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
        f. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O                P                  for ak,q Мё= 1, n.


F.4.1     P ROPERTY OF ATTENTION S CORES
We first single out several properties of attention scores that will be used for the proof of Induction
Hypothesis F.4.
Lemma F.24. if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.4 hold at iteration Tn,2 < t вүӨ
 Пө
Tn,2 , then the following holds


                                                              45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  (t)                                                   (t)
        1. if M вҲҲ Ek,n , AttnpвҶ’Pk,n = в„Ұ(1) and (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n )2 вүҘ O(Пө).
                                                                    (t)
                                (t)
                                                          1вҲ’AttnpвҶ’P
                                                                                                                 (t)
                                                                         k,n
        2. Moreover, AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 = O                                L вҲҶ               ; if M вҲҲ Ek,1 , we have AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 =
                                                        P (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U ( 2 вҲ’0.01)
              1вҲ’Attn(t)
                      pвҶ’Pk,n
           в„Ұ (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U ( вҲҶ +0.01)   ;
              P         L   2

                                                                               1вҲ’Attn(t)
                                                              (t)                               pвҶ’Pk,n
        3. for q вҲҲ M вҲ© (Pk,n вҲӘ Pk,1 ), attnpвҶ’q = O                                              P                  .
Lemma F.25. if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.4 hold at iteration Tn,2 < t вүӨ
 Пө
Tn,2 ,then for m Мё= n, the following holds:
                                                              1вҲ’Attn(t)
                                              (t)                         pвҶ’Pk,n
        1. for any q вҲҲ Pk,m , attnpвҶ’q вүӨ O                                P                  .
                                                1вҲ’Attn(t)
                  (t)                                    pвҶ’Pk,n                                                                            (t)
        2. AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вүӨ O                               N               , and if M                        вҲҲ            Ek,m , AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                    =
               1вҲ’Attn(t)
                     pвҶ’Pk,n
           Оҳ        N         .

F.4.2     B OUNDING THE G RADIENT U PDATES OF FP C ORRELATIONS
Lemma F.26. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.4 hold at iteration
                         (t)
T2 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2Пө , then ОұpвҶ’vk,n вүҘ 0 and satisfies:
                                                         (t)
                                                        ОұpвҶ’v k,n
                                                                 вүҘ в„Ұ(Пө).

Proof. By Lemma C.2, we have
 (t)
ОұpвҶ’v k,n
     пЈ®                                                      пЈ«                                                                                                         пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                          2                                                       2
                                              (t)                                       (t)                                                        (t)
                                                                                                                       X
= E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                          +               2
                                                                                                                              zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                        пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                                       mМё=n
     пЈ®                                                                  пЈ«                                                                                                       пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                                         2                                                  2
                                                        (t)                                              (t)                                                    (t)
                                                                                                                                  X
= E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                                  +           2
                                                                                                                                         zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                       пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                                                  mМё=n
         пЈ®                                                                  пЈ«                                                                                                       пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                                           2                                                    2
                                                            (t)                                              (t)                                                  (t)
                                                                                                                                      X
                   c
   + E пЈ°1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                                   +           2
                                                                                                                                             zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                       пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                                                      mМё=n

вүіP(M вҲҲ Ek,n )В·
 пЈ®                                                  пЈ«                                                                                                           пЈ¶          пЈ№
                                                                                                     2                                                      2
                                        (t)                                     (t)                                                          (t)
                                                                                                               X
E пЈ°1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,n В· пЈӯzn3 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n                                                      +               2
                                                                                                                        zm zn AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                        пЈё Ek,n пЈ»
                                                                                                               mМё=n
                   c
   + O(1) В· P(M вҲҲ Ek,n )
вүі в„Ұ(Пө)
where the last inequality invokes Lemma F.24, Lemma D.6 and the fact that
                                 Пө вүҘ exp(вҲ’ polylog(K)) вү« exp (вҲ’cn,1 Cn ) .


Lemma F.27. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.4 hold at iteration
               Пө         (t)
Tn,3 < t вүӨ Tn,4  , then ОұpвҶ’vk,1 < 0 and satisfies
                                      (t)                                 (t)
     (t)                           ОұpвҶ’vk,n                               ОұpвҶ’vk,n
  |ОұpвҶ’v      | вүӨ max    O               L             , O                           cвҲ—
         k,m                                                                         1L
                             P (1вҲ’Оәc )+ U (вҲҶ/2вҲ’0.01)                  L
                                                          P 2(1вҲ’Оәc )+ U (вҲҶвҲ’0.02)вҲ’(1вҲ’ U )(1вҲ’Оәs )

                                                                    46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                   c
The proof follows the similar arguments Lemma F.20 by noticing that Пө вү« P(M вҲҲ Ek,m     ) for any
m Мё= n.
Lemma F.28. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.4 hold at iteration
T2 < t вүӨ T2Пө , then for any m > 1 with m Мё= n, the following holds
                                                   (t)
                                               ОұpвҶ’vk,n      (t)
                                         вҲ’O(           ) вүӨ ОұpвҶ’v     вүӨ0
                                                P 1вҲ’Оәs          k,m



Proof. We first note that
                                                                                           2
                    (t)     (t)                   (t)        (t)                   (t)
                                                                      X
                                      3
вҲ’ z1 zn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ zm   1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 +   za2 zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,a
                                                                                                                        aМё=1,n

                          (t)                        (t)                             (t)                          (t)            (t)
вүӨ zm        max za2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,a вҲ’ zn2 AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ zm
                                                   2
                                                     AttnpвҶ’Pk,m                                           1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m
          aМё=m,n
                    (t)
вүІ вҲ’в„Ұ(1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n )
                                            (t)                                       (t)
since when M вҲҲ Ek,n , we have AttnpвҶ’Pk,n = в„Ұ(1) вү« AttnpвҶ’Pk,a . Thus, we have
                         h                                                     i
           (t)                                       (t)                  (t)
     0 вүҘ ОұpвҶ’v  k,m
                   вүі вҲ’E 1{kX = k, Ek,n вҲ© p вҲҲ M}AttnpвҶ’Pk,m В· в„Ұ(1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n )
                                  Оұ(t)
                                  pвҶ’vk,n
                        вүҘ вҲ’O                   .
                                  P 1вҲ’Оәs


F.4.3     B OUNDING THE G RADIENT U PDATES OF P OSITIONAL C ORRELATIONS
We then summarize the properties for gradient updates of positional correlations, which utilizes the
identical calculations as in Section F.1.3.
Lemma F.29. For n > 1, if Induction Hypothesis E.1 and Induction Hypothesis F.4 hold at iteration
T2 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ T2Пө , then
                                                           Оұ(t)
                                    (t)         (t)         pвҶ’vk,n         (t)
        a. if ak,q = n and q Мё= p, ОІk,pвҶ’q вүҘ 0; ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ     Cn     and |ОІn | =
               Оұ(t)      (t)
                pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1

           O           P         .
                                            Оұ(t)        (t)                          |Оұ(t)
                                               pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1                             pвҶ’vk,1 |

                          (t)
        b. if ak,q = 1, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                      P                  +O            C1            .
                                                                      Оұ(t)         (t)
                                                                          pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                                               (t)
        c. if ak,q = m and m Мё= 1, n, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                              P                   .

F.4.4     E ND OF P HASE II, S TAGE 2
                                                             1
Lemma F.30. For n > 1, and 0 < Пө < 1, suppose       ) вү« log( Пө ). Then Induction
                                            polylog(P
                                                                           log(P ПөвҲ’1 )
Hypothesis F.4 holds for all T2 < t вүӨ T2Пө = T2 + O                             О·Пө           , and at iteration t = T2Пө + 1, we
have
                    Пө
                              Пө
        1. Lek,p (QT2 +1 ) < 2K ;
                                                     (T Пө +1)
        2. If M вҲҲ Ek,n , we have (1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’P
                                           2
                                              k,n
                                                  )2 вүӨ O(Пө).

                                                               вҲ’1
                         Пө
Proof. The existence of T2,k = T2,k + O( log(PО·ПөПө                   )
                                                                        ) directly follows from Lemma F.26. We further
derive
            Пө
   Lek,p (QT2 +1 ) =


                                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



       пЈ®                             пЈ«                                       пЈ¶пЈ№
    1 пЈ°                                                   2 X              2
      E 1{kX = k, p вҲҲ M вҲ© M вҲҲ Ek,n } пЈӯzn2 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,n +     2

                                                              zm (Attnn,m ) пЈёпЈ»
    2
                                                                                               mМё=n
       1
    вүӨ    В· Оі В· U 2 В· (1 + o(1)) В· O(Пө)
      2K
       Пө
    вүӨ
      2K
where the first inequality is due to direct calculations by the definition of T2Пө , and the second inequality
can be obtained by setting cn,2 in equation F.7 sufficiently large.

G     A NALYSIS FOR L OCAL A REAS WITH N EGATIVE I NFORMATION G AP

In this section, we focus on a specific patch p вҲҲ P with the k-th cluster for k вҲҲ [K], and present the
analysis for the case that Xp is located in the local area for the k-th cluster, i.e. ak,p > 1. Throughout
this section, we denote ak,p = n for simplicity. When вҲҶ вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ(1), we can show that the gap
of attention correlation changing rate for the positive case does not exist anymore, and conversely
  (t)            (t)
ОұpвҶ’vk,n вү« ОұpвҶ’vk,1 from the beginning. We can reuse most of the gradient calculations in the
previous section and only sketch them in this section.

Stage 1:      we define stage 1 as all iterations 0 вүӨ t вүӨ Tneg,1 , where

                                                  (t)       (1 вҲ’ Оәs )
                           Tneg,1 вүң max t : ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вүӨ                 log(P ) .
                                                                L
We state the following induction hypothesis, which will hold throughout this stage:
Induction Hypothesis G.1. For each 0 вүӨ t вүӨ Tneg,1 , q вҲҲ P \ {p}, the following holds:
                                                            h                 i
          (t)                                     (t)
     a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,n is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вҲҲ 0, (1вҲ’ОәL
                                                                    s)
                                                                       log(P )  ;
                                                                                               ОҰ(t)
              (t)                                     (t)                                       pвҶ’vk,n
        b.   ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically decreasing and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ                          вҲ’O      P вҲ’вҲҶ      ,0 ;

                                ОҰ(t)          (t)
                                    pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

               (t)
        c. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | = O               P 1вҲ’Оәs                for m Мё= 1, n;
                             ОҰ(t)                                                     ОҰ(t)       (t)
                                                                                        pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

              (t)              pвҶ’vk,n                                     (t)
        d. ОҘk,pвҶ’q = O           Cn           for ak,q = n, |ОҘk,pвҶ’p | = O                         P              ;
                               |ОҰ(t)                     ОҰ(t)      (t)
                                 pвҶ’vk,1 |                 pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

               (t)
        e. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O            C1            +O                      P         for ak,q = 1;
                               ОҰ(t)      (t)
                                pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

               (t)
        f. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O                  P                  for ak,q Мё= 1, n.

Through similar calculations for phase II, stage 1 in Appendix F.3, we obtain the following lemmas
to control the gradient updates for attention correlations.
Lemma G.1. If Induction Hypothesis E.2 and Induction Hypothesis G.1 hold for 0 вүӨ t вүӨ Tneg,1 ,
then we have
                          (                                       )
                                   1                   1
              (t)
             ОұpвҶ’vk,n вүҘ min в„Ұ (1вҲ’Оә ) , в„Ұ             U               ,                (G.1a)
                                P     s
                                               P 2( L вҲ’1)(1вҲ’Оәs )
                                               Оұ(t)
                          (t)                     pвҶ’vk,n
                     0 вүҘ ОұpвҶ’v     вүҘ вҲ’O                           ,                                                  (G.1b)
                              k,1
                                                  P вҲ’вҲҶ
                                         Оұ(t)        (t)
                                          pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                       (t)
                     |ОұpвҶ’v     |вүӨO              1вҲ’Оә
                                                             for all m Мё= n, 1                                      (G.1c)
                           k,m
                                              P    s


                                                                     48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Оұ(t)
                     (t)            pвҶ’vk,n
                   ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ                for ak,q = n, q Мё= p                                                           (G.1d)
                                      Cn
                                    Оұ(t)             |Оұ(t)
                                                       pвҶ’vk,1 |

                      (t)             pвҶ’vk,n
                   |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O               +O                 for ak,q = 1,                                             (G.1e)
                                        P                C1
                                              Оұ(t)          (t)
                                               pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                      (t)       (t)
                   |ОІk,pвҶ’p |, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                             for all ak,p Мё= n, 1.                               (G.1f)
                                                       P
                             (t)                   (t)
Here вҲҶ < 0 implies |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | вүӘ ОұpвҶ’vk,n . Induction Hypothesis G.1 can be directly proved by
Lemma G.1 and we have
                                    P max{1,2( UL вҲ’1)}В·(1вҲ’Оәs ) log(P )
                       Tneg,1 = O                                        .             (G.2)
                                                    О·

Stage 2:    Given any 0 < Пө < 1, define
                           (                                                              21   !       !)
               Пө                                                                       3
              Tneg,1 вүң max            t > T1 : ОҰ(t)
                                                pвҶ’vk,n вүӨ log                     c6          вҲ’1 P 1вҲ’Оәs
                                                                                                          .                  (G.3)
                                                                                       Пө

where c6 is some largely enough constant. We then state the following induction hypotheses, which
will hold throughout this stage:
Induction Hypothesis G.2. For n > 1, suppose polylog(P ) вү« log( 1Пө ), for q вҲҲ P \ {p}, and each
              Пө
Tneg,1 < t вүӨ Tneg,1 , the following holds:
                                                                                          h                                 i
            (t)                                                            (t)                (1вҲ’Оәs )
     a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,n is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,n вҲҲ                                      L     log(P ), O(log(P/Пө)) ;
                                                                                          "                          #
                                                                                                     ОҰ(t)
            (t)                                     (t)                                               pвҶ’vk,n
     b.    ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically decreasing and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ                                  вҲ’O      P вҲ’вҲҶ         ,0 ;

                                ОҰ(t)          (t)
                                    pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
     c. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | = O                  P 1вҲ’Оәs                  for m Мё= 1, n;
                             ОҰ(t)                                                           ОҰ(t)        (t)
                                                                                               pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

            (t)                pвҶ’vk,n                                  (t)
     d. ОҘk,pвҶ’q = O                 Cn         for ak,q = n, |ОҘk,pвҶ’p | = O                              P                ;
                               |ОҰ(t)                       ОҰ(t)      (t)
                                   pвҶ’vk,1 |                 pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
     e. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O               C1             +O                  P                  for ak,q = 1;
                               ОҰ(t)         (t)
                                   pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ОҰpвҶ’vk,1

             (t)
      f. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O                     P                   for ak,q Мё= 1, n.
                                                                                           Пө
Lemma G.2. If Induction Hypothesis E.2 and Induction Hypothesis G.2 hold for Tneg,1 < t вүӨ Tneg,1 ,
then we have
                    (t)
                   ОұpвҶ’v k,n
                            вүҘ в„Ұ(Пө),                                                                                         (G.4a)
                                       Оұ(t)
                        (t)             pвҶ’vk,n
                   0 вүҘ ОұpвҶ’v     вүҘ вҲ’O       вҲ’вҲҶ
                                                 ,                                                                          (G.4b)
                            k,1
                                        P
                                          Оұ(t)        (t)
                                           pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                     (t)
                   |ОұpвҶ’v     |вүӨO                 1вҲ’Оә
                                                              for all m Мё= n, 1                                             (G.4c)
                         k,m
                                               P    s

                                    (t)
                     (t)          ОұpвҶ’vk,n
                   ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ(             ) for ak,q = n, q Мё= p                                                           (G.4d)
                                      Cn
                                    Оұ(t)              |Оұ(t)
                                                        pвҶ’vk,1 |

                      (t)              pвҶ’vk,n
                   |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                +O                 for ak,q = 1,                                            (G.4e)
                                        P                 C1
                                               Оұ(t)          (t)
                                                pвҶ’vk,n вҲ’ ОұpвҶ’vk,1

                      (t)       (t)
                   |ОІk,pвҶ’p |, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                              for all ak,p Мё= n, 1.                              (G.4f)
                                                                   P

                                                                  49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Induction Hypothesis G.2 can be directly proved by Lemma G.2. Furthermore, at the end of this
stage, we will have:
                                     1
Lemma G.3. Suppose polylog(P )вү«
                                log( Пө ), then Induction Hypothesis G.2 holds for all Tneg,1 <
                            log(P ПөвҲ’1 )

     Пө                                                             Пө
t вүӨ Tneg,1 = Tneg,1 + O         О·Пө         , and at iteration t = Tneg,1 + 1, we have

                  Пө
      1. Lek,p (QTneg,1 +1 ) < 2K
                                Пө
                                  ;
                                         Пө
                                               +1) 2
                                       (Tneg,1

      2. If M вҲҲ Ek,n , we have 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’P  k,n
                                                     вүӨ O(Пө).


H    A NALYSIS FOR THE G LOBAL AREA

When ap,k = 1, i.e. the patch lies in the global area, the analysis is much simpler and does not
depend on the value of вҲҶ. We can reuse most of the gradient calculations in Appendix F and only
sketch them in this section.
                                                                        (0)
For Xp in the global region Pk,1 , since the overall attention AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 to the target feature already

reaches в„Ұ CP1 = в„Ұ P 1вҲ’Оә   1
                             c   due to the large number of unmasked patches featuring vk,1 when

                                                      (0)            1
M вҲҲ Ek,1 , which is significantly larger than AttnpвҶ’Pk,m = Оҳ P 1вҲ’Оә     s   for all other m > 1. This
                  (t)
results in large ОұpвҶ’vk,1 initially, and thus the training directly enters phase II.

Stage 1:   we define stage 1 as all iterations 0 вүӨ t вүӨ Tc,1 , where

                                                        (1 вҲ’ Оәc )
                         Tc,1 вүң max t : ОҰ(t)  pвҶ’vk,1 вүӨ            log(P )  .
                                                             L
We state the following induction hypotheses, which will hold throughout this stage:
Induction Hypothesis H.1. For each 0 вүӨ t вүӨ Tc,1 , q вҲҲ P \ {p}, the following holds:
                                                           h                  i
          (t)                                     (t)
     a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ 0, (1вҲ’ОәL
                                                                    c)
                                                                       log(P )  ;
                                                                    h               i
      b. ОҰpвҶ’vk,m is monotonically decreasing for m > 1 and ОҰpвҶ’vk,m вҲҲ вҲ’ O log(P
                                                                           N
                                                                               )
                                                                                  ,0 ;
                          ОҰ(t)                                           ОҰ(t)
           (t)             pвҶ’vk,1                          (t)            pвҶ’vk,1
      c. ОҘk,pвҶ’q = O          C1          for ak,q = 1, |ОҘk,pвҶ’p | = O          P        ;
                           ОҰ(t)
            (t)              pвҶ’vk,1
      d. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O           P        for ak,q Мё= 1.

Through similar calculations for phase II, stage 1 in Appendix F.3, we obtain the following lemmas
to control the gradient updates for attention correlations.
Lemma H.1. If Induction Hypothesis E.1 (or Induction Hypothesis E.2) and Induction Hypothesis H.1
hold for 0 вүӨ t вүӨ Tc,1 , then we have
                                       (                                           )
                                                  1                     1
                       (t)
                    ОұpвҶ’vk,1 вүҘ min в„Ұ (1вҲ’Оә ) , в„Ұ                       U               ,    (H.1a)
                                              P      c
                                                                P 2( L вҲ’1)(1вҲ’Оәc )
                                         Оұ(t)
                        (t)                pвҶ’vk,1
                    |ОұpвҶ’v       | вүӨ  O                  for all m Мё= 1,                   (H.1b)
                            k,m
                                          P 1вҲ’Оәs
                                      Оұ(t)
                       (t)             pвҶ’vk,1
                    ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ                   , for ak,q = 1, q Мё= p,                  (H.1c)
                                         C1
                                                  Оұ(t)
                        (t)        (t)               pвҶ’vk,1
                    |ОІk,pвҶ’p |, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                      for all ak,q > 1.       (H.1d)
                                                       P

                                                       50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Induction Hypothesis H.1 can be directly proved by Lemma H.1 and we have
                                                U
                                                                       !
                                     P max{1,2( L вҲ’1)}В·(1вҲ’Оәc ) log(P )
                          Tc,1 = O                                      .                                      (H.2)
                                                    О·

Stage 2:   Given any 0 < Пө < 1, define
                        (                                             12    !       !)
                  Пө                                                3
                 Tc,1 вүң max t > Tc,1 : ОҰ(t)
                                        pвҶ’vk,1 вүӨ log c7                  вҲ’ 1 P 1вҲ’Оәc    .                       (H.3)
                                                                   Пө
where c7 is some largely enough constant. We then state the following induction hypotheses, which
will hold throughout this stage:
Induction Hypothesis H.2. For n > 1, suppose polylog(P ) вү« log( 1Пө ), q вҲҲ P \ {p}, for each
                 Пө
Tc,1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ Tc,1 , the following holds:
                                                               h                            i
           (t)                                      (t)
      a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ (1вҲ’Оә  L
                                                                    c)
                                                                       log(P ), O(log(P/Пө)) ;
                                                                     h                 i
       b. ОҰpвҶ’vk,m is monotonically decreasing for n > 1 and ОҰpвҶ’vk,m вҲҲ вҲ’ O log(P
                                                                            N
                                                                                )
                                                                                   , 0  ;
                          ОҰ(t)                                            ОҰ(t)
           (t)              pвҶ’vk,1                          (t)            pвҶ’vk,1
       c. ОҘk,pвҶ’q = O         C1           for ak,q = 1, |ОҘk,pвҶ’p | = O        P          ;
                            ОҰ(t)
            (t)              pвҶ’vk,1
       d. |ОҘk,pвҶ’q | = O          P         for ak,q Мё= 1.

We also have the following lemmas to control the gradient updates for attention correlations.
Lemma H.2. If Induction Hypothesis E.1 (or Induction Hypothesis E.2) and Induction Hypothesis H.1
                             Пө
hold for Tc,1 + 1 вүӨ t вүӨ Tc,1    , then we have
                                                                Оұ(t)
                    (t)                       (t)                pвҶ’vk,1
                  ОұpвҶ’v         вүҘ  в„Ұ  (Пө) , |ОұpвҶ’vk,m     | вүӨ O                  for all m Мё= 1 (H.4a)
                         k,1
                                                                 P 1вҲ’Оәs
                                      Оұ(t)
                    (t)                pвҶ’vk,1
                  ОІk,pвҶ’q = Оҳ                        , for ak,q = 1, q Мё= p                    (H.4b)
                                         C1
                                                     Оұ(t)
                     (t)           (t)                 pвҶ’vk,1
                  |ОІk,pвҶ’p |, |ОІk,pвҶ’q | = O                          for all ak,q > 1.         (H.4c)
                                                          P
Induction Hypothesis H.2 can be directly proved by Lemma H.2. Furthermore, at the end of this
stage, we will have:
                                          1
Lemma H.3. Suppose              ) вү« log( Пө ), then Induction Hypothesis H.2 holds for all Tc,1 <
                       polylog(P
     Пө                  log(P ПөвҲ’1 )                           Пө
t вүӨ Tc,1 = Tc,1 + O         О·Пө        , and at iteration t = Tc,1 + 1, we have
                   Пө
       1. Lek,p (QTc,1 +1 ) < 2K
                               Пө
                                 ;
                                          Пө
                                              +1) 2
                                        (Tc,1

       2. If M вҲҲ Ek,1 , we have 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’P   k,1
                                                    вүӨ O(Пө).

I     P ROOF OF M AIN T HEOREMS FOR MAE
I.1   P ROOF OF I NDUCTION H YPOTHESES

We are now ready to show Induction Hypothesis E.1 (resp. Induction Hypothesis E.2) holds through
the learning process.
Theorem I.1 (Positive Information Gap). For sufficiently large P > 0, О· вүӘ log(P ), в„Ұ(1) вүӨ вҲҶ < 1,
                                                                                 epolylog(P )
Induction Hypothesis E.1 holds for all iterations t = 0, 1, В· В· В· , T = O             О·         .
Theorem I.2 (Negative Information Gap). For sufficiently large P > 0, О· вүӘ log(P
                                                                                ), вҲ’0.5
                                                                                       <вҲҶвүӨ
                                                                                            epolylog(P )
вҲ’в„Ұ(1), Induction Hypothesis E.2 holds for all iterations t = 0, 1, В· В· В· , T = O                 О·         .


                                                        51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Theorem I.1. It is easy to verify Induction Hypothesis E.1 holds at iteration t = 0 due to
the initialization Q(0) = 0dГ—d . At iteration t > 0:
        вҖў Induction Hypothesis E.1a. can be proven by Induction Hypothesis F.1-F.4 a and Induction
          Hypothesis H.1-H.2 a, combining with the fact that log(1/Пө) вүӘ polylog(P ).
        вҖў Induction Hypothesis E.1b. can be obtained by invoking Induction Hypothesis F.1-F.4 b.
        вҖў Induction Hypothesis E.1c. can be obtained by invoking Induction Hypothesis F.1-F.4 c and
          Induction Hypothesis H.1-H.2 b.
                                                                (t)     PK      (t)
        вҖў To prove Induction Hypothesis E.1d., for q Мё= p, ОҘpвҶ’q = k=1 ОҘk,pвҶ’q . By item d-f
          in Induction Hypothesis F.1-F.4 and item c-d in Induction Hypothesis H.1-H.2, we can
          conclude that no matter the relative areas q and p belong to for a specific cluster, for all
          k вҲҲ [K], throughout the entire learning process, the following upper bound always holds:
                                                        (                            )
                                                               1     1    1
                                                                                           e 1 .

            (t)             (t)            (t)
          ОҘk,pвҶ’q вүӨ max(|ОҰpвҶ’vk,n | + |ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 |) max O               ,O       ,O         вүӨO
                     tвҲҲ[T ]                                    C1       Cn        P             Cn
                                                                     (t)
                                                                  e 1 ), which completes
          Moreover, since K = O(polylog(P )), we then have ОҘpвҶ’q = O( Cn
          the proof.
                                                                                               (t)
        вҖў The proof for Induction Hypothesis E.1d. is similar as before, by noticing that ОҘk,pвҶ’p =
          e 1 ) for each k вҲҲ [K], which is due to Induction Hypothesis F.1-F.4 d and Induction
          O( P
          Hypothesis H.1-H.2 c.
The proof of Theorem I.2 mirrors that of Theorem I.1, with the only difference being the substitution
of relevant sections with Induction Hypothesis E.2. For the sake of brevity, this part of the proof is
not reiterated here.

I.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1 AND T HEOREM 4.2 WITH P OSITIVE I NFORMATION G AP

Theorem I.3. Suppose в„Ұ(1) вүӨ вҲҶ вүӨ 1. For any 0 < Пө < 1, suppose polylog(P ) вү« log( 1Пө ). We
apply GD to train the loss function given in equation 2.8 with О· вүӘ poly(P ). Then for each p вҲҲ P,
we have
                                                       max{2( U вҲ’1),1}(1вҲ’Оәs )
                                                                                log(P ПөвҲ’1 )

     1. The loss converges: after T вӢҶ = O log(P )P
                                                              L
                                                            О·                 +     О·Пө        iterations,
                    вӢҶ
          Lp (Q(T ) ) вҲ’ LвҲ—p вүӨ Пө, where LвӢҶp is the global minimum of patch-level construction loss in
          equation 4.2.
       2. Attention score concentrates: given cluster k вҲҲ [K], if Xp is masked, then the one-layer
          transformer nearly вҖңpays all attention" to all unmasked patches in the same area Pk,ak,p ,
                                    2
                          (T вӢҶ )

          i.e., 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,a         вүӨ O(Пө).
                                 k,p


       3. Local area learning feature attention correlation through two-phase: given k вҲҲ [K], if
          ak,p > 1, then we have
                  (t)                                          (t)         (t)
          (a) ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 first quickly decrease with all other ОҰpвҶ’vk,m , ОҘpвҶ’q not changing much;
                                                   (t)                                   (t)
          (b) after some point, the increase of ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p takes dominance. Such ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p will
              keep growing until convergence with all other feature and positional attention correla-
              tions nearly unchanged.
       4. Global area learning feature attention correlation through one-phase: given k вҲҲ [K], if
                                                               (t)                           (t)
          ak,p = 1, throughout the training, the increase of ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 dominates, whereas all A1,m
          with m Мё= 1 and position attention correlations remain close to 0.

Proof. The first statement is obtained by letting T вӢҶ = max{T2Пө , Tc,1
                                                                   Пө
                                                                       } + 1 in Lemma F.30 and
Lemma H.3, combining wth Lemma D.9 and Lemma D.10, which lead to
              вӢҶ                    вӢҶ
      Lp (Q(T ) ) вҲ’ LвҲ—p вүӨ Lp (Q(T ) ) вҲ’ Llow
                                         p


                                                  52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 вӢҶ

                       вүӨ Lep (QT ) + O exp вҲ’ c3 P Оәc + 1 1 МёвҲҲ вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c4 P Оәs


                               Пө
                                   + O exp вҲ’ c3 P Оәc + 1 1 МёвҲҲ вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c4 P Оәs

                       вүӨKВ·
                              2K
                       < Пө.
The second statement follows from Lemma F.30 and Lemma H.3. The third and fourth statements
directly follow from the learning process described in Appendix F and Appendix H when Induction
Hypothesis E.1 holds.

I.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1 AND T HEOREM 4.2 WITH N EGATIVE I NFORMATION G AP

Theorem I.4. Suppose вҲ’0.5 вүӨ вҲҶ вүӨ в„Ұ(1). For any 0 < Пө < 1, suppose polylog(P ) вү« log( 1Пө ). We
apply GD to train the loss function given in equation 2.8 with О· вүӘ poly(P ). Then for each p вҲҲ P,
we have
                                                       max{2( U вҲ’1),1}(1вҲ’Оәs )           вҲ’1

     1. The loss converges: after T вӢҶ = O log(P )P                            + log(PО·ПөПө ) iterations,
                                                              L
                                                            О·
                  вӢҶ
          Lp (Q(T ) ) вҲ’ LвҲ—p вүӨ Пө, where LвӢҶp is the global minimum of patch-level construction loss in
          equation 4.2.
       2. Attention score concentrates: given cluster k вҲҲ [K], if Xp is masked, then the one-layer
          transformer nearly вҖңpays all attention" to all unmasked patches in the same area Pk,ak,p ,
                                    2
                          (T вӢҶ )

          i.e., 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,a         вүӨ O(Пө).
                                 k,p


       3. All areas learning feature attention correlation through one-phase: given k вҲҲ [K], through-
                                              (t)                                (t)
          out the training, the increase of ОҰpвҶ’vk,ak,p dominates, whereas all ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m Мё= 1
                                               (t)
          and position attention correlations ОҘpвҶ’q remain close to 0.

Proof. The first statement is obtained by letting T вӢҶ = max{Tneg,1
                                                             Пө        Пө
                                                                   , Tc,1 } + 1 in Lemma G.3 and
Lemma H.3, combining wth Lemma D.9 and Lemma D.10, which lead to
             вӢҶ                       вӢҶ
      Lp (Q(T ) ) вҲ’ LвҲ—p вүӨ Lp (Q(T ) ) вҲ’ Llow
                                         p
                                  вӢҶ

                        вүӨ Lep (Q ) + O exp вҲ’ c3 P Оәc + 1 1 МёвҲҲ вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c4 P Оәs
                                T


                                Пө
                                    + O exp вҲ’ c3 P Оәc + 1 1 МёвҲҲ вҲӘkвҲҲ[K] {ak,p } c4 P Оәs

                        вүӨKВ·
                               2K
                        < Пө.
The second statement follows from Lemma G.3 and Lemma H.3. The third and fourth statements
directly follow from the learning process described in Appendix G and Appendix H when Induction
Hypothesis E.2 holds.


J     P ROOF OF M AIN T HEOREMS IN C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING
                                                                                          (t)
Notations. Throughout this section, we abbreviate attnpвҶ’q (X; Q(t) ) as attnpвҶ’q (X). We
also write F cl as F and Lcl as L for simplicity. We abbreviate AttncpвҶ’Pk,m (X; Q(t) )
                               (t)            (t)
(attncpвҶ’q (X; Q(t) )) as AttnpвҶ’Pk,m ( attnpвҶ’q ), when the context makes it clear. Furthermore,
we denote
                                  +   ++                                        +   вҲ’,s
                         eSimF (X ,X )/П„                               eSimF (X ,X )/П„
           в„“p (X, B) := P       SimF (X + ,X)/П„
                                                ,        в„“s (X, B) := P       SimF (X + ,X)/П„
                                                                                              .
                         XвҲҲB e                                         XвҲҲB e

Theorem J.1 (Learning with contrastive objective). Suppose the information gap вҲҶ вҲҲ
[вҲ’0.5, вҲ’в„Ұ(1)] вҲӘ [в„Ұ(1), 1]. We train the ViTs in Def. 2.6 by GD to minimize (2.11) with О· вүӘ poly(P ),
Пғ02 = d1 , П„ = O( log1 d ), after T вӢҶ = O( poly(PО·) log P ) iterations, we have


                                                    53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      вӢҶ
                                                 1
1. Objective converges: Lcl (Q(T ) ) вүӨ LвӢҶcl + poly(P            вӢҶ
                                                     ) , where Lcl is the global minimum of the
   contrastive objective in (2.11).
2. Attention concentration on global area : given X вҲҲ Dkcl with k вҲҲ [K], for any p вҲҲ P, with high
                                                  вӢҶ
   probability, we have 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X вҖІ ; Q(T ) ) = o(1) for X вҖІ вҲҲ {X + , X ++ }.
                                                                                                (t)
3. All patches learn global FP correlation: given k вҲҲ [K], for any p вҲҲ P, t вҲҲ [0, T вӢҶ ], ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вү«
    (t)                                             (T вӢҶ )               (T вӢҶ )
   ОҰpвҶ’vk,m with m > 1, and at the convergence, ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 = Оҳ(log P ), ОҰpвҶ’vk,m = o(1).

In the following, we will sketch the proof of the above theorem. Indeed, the roadmap of the analysis
is similar to the masked reconstruction loss by using the induction argument, where the key difference
is the properties for the gradient of the contrastive objective.

J.1   P RELIMINARIES

In the following, we denote the contrastive loss without regularization as
                                                                   +     ++
                                       "                                              !#
                                                      eSimF cl (X ,X )/П„
                  L(Q) вүң EX + ,X ++ ,N вҲ’П„ log P                Sim F cl (X + ,X вҖІ )/П„
                                                                                         .
                                                      X вҖІ вҲҲB e
                                                                                               (t)
Lemma J.2 (feature gradient of contrastive loss). Given k вҲҲ [K], for p вҲҲ P, let Оұ
                                                                                epвҶ’vk,m :=
1  (t+1)      (t)
О· ОҰpвҶ’vk,m вҲ’ ОҰpвҶ’vk,m for m вҲҲ [Nk ], then

                                          вҲӮL (t)
                      Оұ (t)
                      epвҶ’v      = eвҠӨ
                                   p вҲ’
                                                          (t)
                                             (Q ) vk,m = ОұpвҶ’v     вҲ’ О»ОҰ(t)
                                                                      pвҶ’vk,m ,
                            k,m
                                          вҲӮQ                  k,m


where
               вҲӮL (t)
 (t)
ОұpвҶ’v     = eвҠӨ
            p вҲ’   (Q ) vk,m
     k,m
               вҲӮQ
                                                                 +   вҖІ
                                                       eSimF (X ,X )/П„
     X
 1            (t)     +  +вҠӨ

                                   ++    (t)
                                              X
                                                                                  вҖІ    (t)

= E       attnpвҶ’q (X )Xq      F (X ; Q ) вҲ’          P                  + вҖІ
                                                              SimF (X ,X )/П„
                                                                             F (X   ; Q    )
 P                                                   X вҖІ вҲҲB e
      qвҲҲP                                    X вҖІ вҲҲB
    h      X                    iвҠӨ
   В· Xq+ вҲ’     attn(t)   +
                   pвҶ’r (X )Xr
                              +
                                   vk,m .
                  r


Proof. Notice that
                                              вҲӮL    вҲӮL
                                          вҲ’      =вҲ’    + О»Q.
                                              вҲӮQ    вҲӮQ
           вҲӮL
Then for вҲ’ вҲӮQ , we begin with the chain rule and obtain
 вҲӮL
вҲ’
 вҲӮQ

     вҲӮ             +    ++
                                        X
                                                SimF (X + ,X вҖІ )/П„

=E       SimF (X , X ) вҲ’ П„ log                e
    вҲӮQ
                                       X вҖІ вҲҲB
                                                         +    вҖІ
    вҲӮF (X + ; Q)                               eSimF (X ,X )/П„
                                   X
                                                                               вҖІ
=E                 F (X ++ ; Q) вҲ’         P           SimF (X + ,X вҖІ )/П„
                                                                         F  (X   ; Q)
        вҲӮQ                                   X вҖІ вҲҲB e
                                  X вҖІ вҲҲB
                                                                                   +  вҖІ
              вҲӮattnpвҶ’q (X + ) + вҠӨ                                        eSimF (X ,X )/П„
       X
 1                                           ++
                                                           X
                                                                                                      вҖІ
= E                            Xq      F (X ; Q) вҲ’                 P           SimF (X + ,X вҖІ )/П„
                                                                                                  F (X ; Q) .
 P                   вҲӮQ                                               X вҖІ вҲҲB e
      p,qвҲҲP                                               X вҖІ вҲҲB
                                                                                                       (J.1)
We focus on the gradient for each attention score:
                                         +
            вҲӮattnpвҶ’q (X + ) X exp eвҠӨ           +

                                   p Q(Xb + Xq )      +    + вҠӨ
                           =                     ep (Xq вҲ’ Xr )
                 вҲӮQ                      вҠӨ QX ) 2
                                P
                             r     exp(e     rr       p


                                                     54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                              X
                                 = attnpвҶ’q         attnpвҶ’r ep (Xq+ вҲ’ Xr+ )вҠӨ
                                               r
                                                         "                               #вҠӨ
                                                                X
                                 = attnpвҶ’q (X + )ep В· Xq+ вҲ’          attnpвҶ’r (X + )Xr+        .
                                                                 r

Substituting the above equation into equation J.1, we have
                                                                               +   вҖІ
                                                                     eSimF (X ,X )/П„
                X
  вҲӮL      1                        +   +вҠӨ

                                                  ++
                                                            X
                                                                                                вҖІ

вҲ’      = E             attnpвҶ’q (X )Xq        F (X ; Q) вҲ’          P                  + вҖІ
                                                                            SimF (X ,X )/П„
                                                                                           F (X   ; Q)
  вҲӮQ      P                                                        X вҖІ вҲҲB e
                 p,qвҲҲP                                     X вҖІ вҲҲB
                    h     X                       iвҠӨ
               В· ep Xq+ вҲ’     attnpвҶ’r (X + )Xr+       .
                            r

Therefore,
               вҲӮL
 (t)
ОұpвҶ’v     = eвҠӨ
            p (вҲ’  )vk,m
     k,m
               вҲӮQ
                                                                       +   вҖІ
                                                             eSimF (X ,X )/П„
              X
           1                 +    +вҠӨ

                                            ++
                                                    X
                                                                                        вҖІ

          = E      attnpвҶ’q (X )Xq      F (X ; Q) вҲ’        P                  + вҖІ
                                                                    SimF (X ,X )/П„
                                                                                   F (X   ; Q)
           P                                               X вҖІ вҲҲB e
               qвҲҲP                                 X вҖІ вҲҲB
               h      X                    iвҠӨ
              В· Xq+ вҲ’    attnpвҶ’r (X + )Xr+ vk,m .
                             r


We then present a high-probability event ensuring that the number of common unmasked patches in
each area between positive augmented data pairs is proportional to the total number of patches in that
area.
                                                                                         Оәs
Lemma J.3 (masking overlap). Given a sample X вҲј Dcl , with propbability 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’Оҳ(P ) over the
                                                  +     ++
randomness of masking augmentation to obtain X , X , supposing X belongs to the k-th cluster,
it holds that
                   X
                         1 Xp+ Мё= 0 1 Xp++ Мё= 0 = Оҳ(Ck,m ), вҲҖm вҲҲ [Nk ]


                  pвҲҲPk,m

We denote the event that the above inequalities hold as A1,com . Similarly, we have the following
event for X + and X ++ hols with high probability:
                                X
                                           +
                     A1,+ :=            1 Xp Мё= 0 = Оҳ(Ck,m ), вҲҖm вҲҲ [Nk ]
                                    pвҲҲPk,m
                                  X
                                           1 Xp++ Мё= 0 = Оҳ(Ck,m ), вҲҖm вҲҲ [Nk ] .

                   A1,++ :=
                                  pвҲҲPk,m


Proof. The proof is similar to the analysis of Lemma D.6 by using the concentration property of
hypergeometric distribution.

J.2   I NITIAL S TAGE : G LOBAL C ORRELATIONS E MERGE

For the training process at the initial stage, we define the stage transition time T1 to be the iteration
        (t)
when ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оәc ) log(P ) for all p вҲҲ P and k вҲҲ [K].
We state the following induction hypothesis, which will hold throughout this stage:
                                                                        3вҲ’2Оәc
Induction Hypothesis J.1. For each 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 = O( log(P )P
                                                          О·                     ), k вҲҲ [K], letting О» =
       2
P 3вҲ’sОәc  log(P ) the following holds:
                                                           h                    i
          (t)                                      (t)
      a. ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 is monotonically increasing, and ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ 0, (1 вҲ’ Оәc ) log(P ) ;


                                                    55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (t)                                        (t)
      b. |ОҰpвҶ’vk,m | вүӨ O max{P Оәs вҲ’1 , P 2(Оәs вҲ’Оәc ) В· ОҰpвҶ’vk,1 } for m > 1.


Lemma J.4 (bounding the noise correlation). Let us define a noiseless version of the attention score
and the network output as
                                                вҠӨ
                                              eep Q(Xq вҲ’Оҫq )
                      [ pвҶ’q (X) := P
                      attn                            eвҠӨ
                                                                        ,     for p, q вҲҲ P.            (J.2)
                                                       p Q(Xr вҲ’Оҫr )
                                              rвҲҲP e
                                          1    X
                              Fb(X; Q) :=             [ pвҶ’q (X) В· Xq
                                                      attn                                   вҲҲ Rd .    (J.3)
                                          P
                                              p,qвҲҲP

                                   +    ++                                          +    вҲ’,s
                         eSimFb (X ,X )/П„                                 eSimFb (X ,X )/П„
          в„“bp (X, B) := P        SimFb (X + ,X)/П„
                                                  ,        в„“bs (X, B) := P        SimFb (X + ,X)/П„
                                                                                                   .
                         XвҲҲB e                                            XвҲҲB e

Then supposing Induction Hypothesis J.1 holds for t вүӨ T1 , with high probability over the randomness
of X + , X ++ , N, then for X вҲҲ B, any p, q вҲҲ P, s вҲҲ [Nc ], it holds that
                                               (t)                      1
                                        [ pвҶ’q (X) вҲ’ attn(t)
                                        attn            pвҶ’q (X) вүӨ            ;
                                                                     poly(d)
                                                                        1
                                       Fb(t) (X; Q) вҲ’ F (t) (X; Q) вүӨ         ;
                                                                     poly(d)
                                                                        1
                 в„“(t)        b(t)          (t)         b(t)
                  p (X, B) вҲ’ в„“p (X, B) , в„“s (X, B) вҲ’ в„“s (X, B) вүӨ             .
                                                                     poly(d)
We denote the event that the above inequalities hold as A2 .

Proof. The result follows directly from the concentration of Gaussian random variables, the bound-
edness of the feature vectors and the boundedness of вҲҘep QвҲҘ2 вүӨ ОҰkвҶ’vk,m due to the Induction
Hypothesis J.1 .


Lemma J.5 (attention score). Suppose the Induction Hypothesis J.1 holds for t вүӨ T1 , given
{X + , X ++ , N}, assuming X вҲҲ Dkcl with k вҲҲ [K], then for m вҲҲ [Nk ], p вҲҲ P, we have

      1. for a вҲҲ {+, ++}, if X a вҲҲ A2,a , then
                        (t)                                     (t)      1
          (a) 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X a ) вүҘ в„Ұ(1) and AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X a ) вүҘ в„Ұ( P 1вҲ’Оә c ) ;
                                                                      (t)
                                  (t)                      1вҲ’AttnpвҶ’P               (X a )
          (b) for m > 1, AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X a ) = Оҳ(                   P 1вҲ’Оәs
                                                                             k,1
                                                                                            );

      2. for X вҖІ вҲҲ N, we have
                        (t)                                    (t)
                  ^pвҶ’P (X вҖІ ) вүҘ в„Ұ(1) and Attn
          (a) 1 вҲ’ Attn                   ^pвҶ’P (X вҖІ ) вүҘ в„Ұ( 1вҲ’Оә
                                                           1
                                                              c );
                       k,1                    k,1        P
                                                                     (t)
                                  (t)                        ^
                                                           1вҲ’Attn pвҶ’P          (X вҖІ )
                         ^pвҶ’P (X вҖІ ) = Оҳ(
          (b) for m > 1, Attn                                          k,1
                                                                                        ).
                              k,m                                P 1вҲ’Оәs

The intuition behind this lemma is that, due to the zero initialization of Q, the attention scores are
nearly uniform. As a result, the area attention score AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X+) is proportional to the number
of unmasked patches in this area. If Induction Hypothesis J.1 holds, we can easily conclude that only
the area attention score for the global area will increase, while the relative relationships among the
local area attention scores will be preserved.
Lemma J.6 (logit score). Suppose the Induction Hypothesis J.1 holds for t вүӨ T1 , given
{X + , X ++ , N}, suppose X вҲҲ Dkcl , we have
                                                                            1
                 1 вҲ’ в„“(t)
                      q (X, B) вүҘ в„Ұ(1),         в„“(t)
                                                q (X, B) вүҘ в„Ұ(                  ),       q вҲҲ B вҲ© Dkcl
                                                                            Ns
                                                       1
                                  в„“(t)
                                   q (X, B) вүӨ O(          ),      else.
                                                       Ns

                                                      56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma J.7 (feature gradient near initialization). Suppose the Induction Hypothesis J.1 holds for
t вүӨ T0 , then for t вүӨ T1 , given k вҲҲ [K], m вҲҲ [Nk ], for p вҲҲ P,

         вҖў For the global feature m = 1,
                                                                                       !
                     (t)           1
                   ОұpвҶ’v      =Оҳ      E z1 (1 вҲ’ в„“p )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X + )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X ++ )
                         k,1
                                   P

         вҖў For the local feature m > 1
                                                                              !
            (t)              1                             +              ++
           ОұpвҶ’vk,m = Оҳ         E zm (1 вҲ’ в„“p )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X )
                             P
                                                                                             !
                              1                             +             +              ++
                      +O        E zm (1 вҲ’ в„“p )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X )
                              P

Proof.
                   X                                               Nc
               1                         вҠӨ
                                                                  X
 (t)
ОұpвҶ’v     =       E      attnpвҶ’q (X + )Xq+ (1 вҲ’ в„“p )F (X ++ ; Q) вҲ’     в„“s F (X вҲ’,s ; Q)
     k,m
               P                                                  s=1
                    qвҲҲP
                    h      X                   iвҠӨ
                   В· Xq+ вҲ’    attnpвҶ’r (X + )Xr+ vk,m (1A1 + 1Ac1 )
                                 r
                  X                                                 Nc
           (a) 1

                       [ pвҶ’q (X + )Xq+ вҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )Fb(X ++ ; Q) вҲ’
                                                                   X
           = E         attn                                            в„“bs Fb(X вҲ’,s ; Q)
               P                                                   s=1
                   qвҲҲP
                  h      X                  iвҠӨ
                 В· Xq+ вҲ’    [ pвҶ’r (X + )Xr+ vk,m (1A1 + 1Ac ) + Оһp,k,m,1
                            attn                                 1
                                 r
               Nk
               X                                                                         Nc
            1                 X                                                          X
           = E                          [ pвҶ’q (X + )(zi vk,i )вҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )Fb(X ++ ; Q) вҲ’
                                        attn                                                в„“bs Fb(X вҲ’,s ; Q)
            P  i=1                                                                          s=1
                          qвҲҲPk,i вҲ©U +

                    h            Nk
                                 X        X                                 iвҠӨ
                   В· zi vk,i вҲ’                     [ pвҶ’r (X + )zj vk,j
                                                   attn                          vk,m                (J1 )
                                 j=1 rвҲҲPk,j вҲ©U +
               Nk
               X                                                                         Nc
            1                 X                                                          X
           + E                          [ pвҶ’q (X + )(zi vk,i )вҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )Fb(X ++ ; Q) вҲ’
                                        attn                                                в„“bs Fb(X вҲ’,s ; Q)
            P  i=1                                                                          s=1
                          qвҲҲPk,i вҲ©U +
                      h         X                           iвҠӨ
                   В· Оҫq вҲ’               [ pвҶ’r (X + )Оҫr
                                        attn                     vk,m                                (J2 )
                              rвҲҲPвҲ©U +
                                                                    Nc
            1             X
                                          + вҠӨ
                                                                    X
           + E                  [                   b   b   ++
                                attnpвҶ’q (X )Оҫq (1 вҲ’ в„“p )F (X ; Q) вҲ’    в„“bs Fb(X вҲ’,s ; Q)
            P                                                                      s=1
                      qвҲҲPвҲ©U +
                      h          Nk
                                 X        X                                 iвҠӨ
                   В· zi vk,i вҲ’                     [ pвҶ’r (X + )zj vk,j
                                                   attn                          vk,m                (J3 )
                                 j=1 rвҲҲPk,j вҲ©U +
                                                                         Nc
               1          X                                              X
           +     E              [ pвҶ’q (X + )ОҫqвҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )Fb(X ++ ; Q) вҲ’
                                attn                                        в„“bs Fb(X вҲ’,s ; Q)
               P                                                                   s=1
                      qвҲҲPвҲ©U +
                      h         X                           iвҠӨ
                   В· Оҫq вҲ’               [ pвҶ’r (X + )Оҫr
                                        attn                     vk,m                                (J4 )
                              rвҲҲPвҲ©U +
           + Оһp,k,m,1


                                                       57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        1
where (a) is bounded by Lemma J.4 with error up to Оһp,k,m,1 вүӨ poly(d)       , U + is the set of masked
              +
patches for X . We first look at the term J1 , notice that Оҫq is the random Gaussian noise with zero
mean, and is independent of attn
                            [ and в„“,   b we then have

      1         X                                      X          X
J4 = 2 E                [ pвҶ’q (X + )ОҫqвҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )
                        attn                                              [ pвҖІ вҶ’r (X ++ )zm vk,m
                                                                          attn
     P
            qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +                                pвҖІ вҲҲP rвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U ++

              h        X                        i вҠӨ
                                          +
             В· Оҫq вҲ’          attnpвҶ’r (X )Оҫr vk,m
                             [
                      rвҲҲPвҲ©U +

       1           X                                        X X
     + 2E                        [ pвҶ’q (X + )ОҫqвҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )
                                 attn                           [ pвҖІ вҶ’r (X ++ )Оҫr
                                                                attn
      P
               qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +                                       pвҖІ вҲҲP rвҲҲU ++
              h           X                          iвҠӨ
             В· Оҫq вҲ’                [ pвҶ’r (X + )Оҫr
                                   attn                   vk,m
                      rвҲҲPвҲ©U +
                                                                                                           i
        1          X
                                       +
                                                    X         X
                                                                                   ++
                                                                                       h
                                                                                                         +
      = 2 E zm              attnpвҶ’q (X ) (1 вҲ’ в„“p )
                            [                    b                     attnp вҶ’r (X ) 1 вҲ’ attnpвҶ’q (X )
                                                                       [    вҖІ                [
       P
                qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +                         pвҖІ вҲҲP rвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U ++
              h
        1                                X                        i           X
      = 2 E zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X + ) вҲ’                attn2pвҶ’q (X + ) (1 вҲ’ в„“p )       AttnpвҖІ вҶ’Pk,m (X ++ ) + Оһp,k,m,2
       P
                                      qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +                           pвҖІ вҲҲP
                                                                    !
           1
      =Оҳ     E zm (1 вҲ’ в„“p )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X + )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ++ )
          P
                                                                              1
where (a) is bounded by invoking Lemma J.4 with error up to Оһp,k,m,2 вүӨ poly(d)  , and the last
equality is due to Lemma J.5.
             hX Nk
       1              X
J2 = E E                       [ pвҶ’q (X + )(zi vk,i )вҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )Fb(X ++ ; Q)
                               attn
      P        i=1 qвҲҲPk,i вҲ©U +
             h       X                    iвҠӨ          i
                                     +
           В· Оҫq вҲ’          attn
                            [ pвҶ’r (X )Оҫr vk,m Оҫ
                   rвҲҲPвҲ©U +
          Nk
         hX
     1                    X                                                         X
   = 2E E                           [ pвҶ’q (X + )(zi vk,i )вҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )
                                    attn                                                       [ pвҖІ вҶ’r (X ++ )Оҫr
                                                                                               attn
    P     i=1       qвҲҲPk,i вҲ©U +                                               pвҖІ вҲҲP,rвҲҲPвҲ©U ++
           h          X                           iвҠӨ            i
          В· Оҫq вҲ’              [ pвҶ’r (X + )Оҫr
                              attn                     vk,m Оҫ
                   rвҲҲPвҲ©U +
         h
     1              X                                                               X
   = 2E E                        [ pвҶ’q (X + )(zm vk,m )вҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )
                                 attn                                                         [ pвҖІ вҶ’r (X ++ )Оҫr
                                                                                              attn
    P
                qвҲҲPk,m    вҲ©U +                                            pвҖІ вҲҲP,rвҲҲPвҲ©U ++
           h          X                           iвҠӨ            i
          В· Оҫq вҲ’              [ pвҶ’r (X + )Оҫr
                              attn                     vk,m Оҫ
                   rвҲҲPвҲ©U +

     1              X
   = 2 E zm                      [ pвҶ’q (X + )(1 вҲ’ в„“bp )
                                 attn
    P
                qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +
                                                X
       [ pвҶ’q (X + )1qвҲҲU ++ вҲ’                                   [ pвҖІ вҶ’r (X ++ )attn
                                                                              [ pвҶ’r (X + )

     В· attn                                                    attn
                                         pвҖІ вҲҲP,rвҲҲPвҲ©U ++ вҲ©U +

     1              X
   = 2 E zm                      attnpвҶ’q (X + )(1 вҲ’ в„“p )
    P
                qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +
                                                X
                      +                                                            ++              +

     В· attnpвҶ’q (X )1       qвҲҲU ++    вҲ’                         attn   pвҖІ вҶ’r   (X        )attnpвҶ’r (X ) + Оһp,k,m,3
                                         pвҖІ вҲҲP,rвҲҲPвҲ©U ++ вҲ©U +


                                                       58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus, by invoking Lemma J.5, we have
           1            X

|J2 | вүӨ O     E zm               attnpвҶ’q (X + )(1 вҲ’ в„“p ) В·      max        attnpвҶ’r (X + )    + Оһp,k,m,3
            P                  +
                                                             rвҲҲPвҲ©U ++ вҲ©U +
                     qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U

                1                                  +                      ++
      вүӨO             E zm (1 вҲ’ в„“p )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) В· AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X )
            P В· Ck,1

                                                                   n
       1           X                                               X
J3 =     E                [ pвҶ’q (X + )ОҫqвҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )Fb(X ++ ; Q) вҲ’
                          attn                                       в„“bs Fb(X вҲ’,s ; Q)
       P                                                                             s=1
              qвҲҲPвҲ©U +
              h          Nk
                         X              X                                   iвҠӨ
             В· zi vk,i вҲ’                         [ pвҶ’r (X + )zj vk,j
                                                 attn                            vk,m
                            j=1 rвҲҲPk,j вҲ©U +
            h
       1                X
   =     E E                        [ pвҶ’q (X + )ОҫqвҠӨ (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )Fb(X ++ ; Q)
                                    attn
       P
                   qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +
                 h             X                       i i
                                                     +
             В· zm 1 вҲ’                      attnpвҶ’r (X ) Оҫ
                                           [
                          rвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +

     1                       X
   = 2 E zm                                   [ pвҶ’q (X + )(1 вҲ’ в„“bp )
                                              attn
    P
                     qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U + вҲ©U ++
             X                      h                  X                      i
         В·           [ pвҖІ вҶ’q (X ++ ) 1 вҲ’
                     attn                                                   +
                                                                  attnpвҶ’r (X )
                                                                  [
             pвҖІ вҲҲP                                 rвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U +

     1                       X
   = 2 E zm                                   attnpвҶ’q (X + )(1 вҲ’ в„“p )
    P
                     qвҲҲPk,m вҲ©U + вҲ©U ++
             X                                 h                   i
                                         ++                      +
         В·           attn   pвҖІ вҶ’q   (X        ) 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) + Оһp,k,m,4
             pвҖІ вҲҲP

     1                   +

                                             +
                                                            X      1                     ++

  вүӨO 2 E zm AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) (1 вҲ’ в„“p ) В·   O(      ) В· AttnpвҖІ вҶ’Pk,m (X )
    P                                                       вҖІ
                                                                 Ck,m
                                                                                                p вҲҲP
         J4
   вүӨ O(      ).
        Ck,m
where the last inequality is due to Lemma J.5.
            XNk
       1            X
J1 = 2 E                      [ pвҶ’q (X + )(zi vk,i )вҠӨ
                             attn
     P       i=1           +
                      qвҲҲPk,i вҲ©U

                           Nk
                          XX                    X
             В· (1 вҲ’ в„“bp )                                   [ pвҖІ вҶ’qвҖІ (X +,+ )zj vk,j
                                                            attn
                             pвҖІ вҲҲP j=1    qвҖІ вҲҲPk,j вҲ©U ++

                      X                 Nk
                                       XX  X
             вҲ’                   в„“bs                        [ pвҖІ вҶ’qвҖІ (X вҲ’,s )zs,j vk,j
                                                            attn
                            cl
                  X вҲ’,s вҲҲNвҲ©Dk          pвҖІ вҲҲP j=1 qвҖІ вҲҲPk,j

              h             Nk
                            X           X                            iвҠӨ
             В· zi vk,i вҲ’                         attn
                                                 [ pвҶ’r zj vk,j            vk,m
                            j=1 rвҲҲPk,j вҲ©U +
           Nk
           X
      1                 X
  =      E                          attnpвҶ’q (X + )(zi vk,i )вҠӨ
      P2   i=1       qвҲҲPk,i вҲ©U +



                                                                59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Nk
                          XX              X
          В· (1 вҲ’ в„“p )                                      attnpвҖІ вҶ’qвҖІ (X +,+ )zj vk,j
                        pвҖІ вҲҲP j=1    qвҖІ вҲҲP   k,j   вҲ©U ++

                  X                Nk
                                  XX               X
          вҲ’                  в„“s                            attnpвҖІ вҶ’qвҖІ (X вҲ’,s )zs,j vk,j
                        cl
              X вҲ’,s вҲҲNвҲ©Dk         pвҖІ вҲҲP j=1 qвҖІ вҲҲPk,j

           h          Nk
                      X            X                                iвҠӨ
          В· zi vk,i вҲ’                        attnpвҶ’r zj vk,j             vk,m + Оһp,k,m,5
                        j=1 rвҲҲPk,j вҲ©U +
                                                                                    вҠӨ
     1                +   2                  +
                                                       X
                                                                            +
   = 2 E AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) zm 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) vk,m вҲ’   zm zi AttnpвҶ’Pk,i (X )vk,i
    P
                                                                                           iМё=m
                            Nk
                          X X                X
          В· (1 вҲ’ в„“p )                                      attnpвҖІ вҶ’qвҖІ (X +,+ )zj vk,j
                        pвҖІ вҲҲP j=1    qвҖІ вҲҲPk,j вҲ©U ++

                  X                Nk
                                  XX  X
          вҲ’                  в„“s                            attnpвҖІ вҶ’qвҖІ (X вҲ’,s )zs,j vk,j         + Оһp,k,m,5
                        cl
              X вҲ’,s вҲҲNвҲ©Dk         pвҖІ вҲҲP j=1 qвҖІ вҲҲPk,j
                                                                                    вҠӨ
     1                +   2                  +
                                                       X
                                                                            +
   = 2 E AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) zm 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) vk,m вҲ’   zm zi AttnpвҶ’Pk,i (X )vk,i
    P
                                                                                           iМё=m
                            Nk
                          X X                                                        X                 Nk
                                                                                                     X X
          В· (1 вҲ’ в„“p )                AttnpвҖІ вҶ’Pk,j (X           ++
                                                                    )zj vk,j вҲ’                  в„“s               ^pвҖІ вҶ’Pk,j (X вҲ’,s )zs,j vk,j
                                                                                                                 Attn
                        pвҖІ вҲҲP j=1                                                          cl
                                                                                 X вҲ’,s вҲҲNвҲ©Dk         pвҖІ вҲҲP j=1

        + Оһp,k,m,5

     1
   = 2 E AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X + ) zm  2
                                 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X + )
    P
            X
                                                    X
        В·        (1 вҲ’ в„“p )zm AttnpвҖІ вҶ’Pk,m (X ++ ) вҲ’                                              ^pвҖІ вҶ’Pk,m (X вҲ’,s )
                                                                                         zs,m в„“s Attn
               pвҖІ вҲҲP                                                                cl
                                                                          X вҲ’,s вҲҲNвҲ©Dk
                                                                                                                       (J1,1 )
                               X
       1
     вҲ’ 2 E AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X + )        zm zi AttnpвҶ’Pk,i (X + )
      P
                               iМё=m
             X
                                                      X
         В·      (1 вҲ’ в„“p )zi AttnpвҖІ вҶ’Pk,i (X ++ ) вҲ’                                              ^pвҖІ вҶ’Pk,i (X вҲ’,s )
                                                                                        zs,i в„“s Attn
               pвҖІ вҲҲP                                                               cl
                                                                         X вҲ’,s вҲҲNвҲ©Dk
                                                                                                                       (J1,2 )
          + Оһp,k,m,5

Notice that J1,1 = Оҳ(J4 ). Furthermore, when m = 1, J1,2 is negligible compared to J1 , else
              1
|J1,2 | вүӨ O      E AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) zm z1 AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X + )
                                   +
             P2
                   X
                                                  ++
                                                              X
                                                                                              вҲ’,s

               В·       (1 вҲ’ в„“p )z1 AttnpвҖІ вҶ’Pk,1 (X ) вҲ’                 zs,1 в„“s AttnpвҖІ вҶ’Pk,1 (X )
                                                                               ^
                  pвҖІ вҲҲP                                                               cl
                                                                            X вҲ’,s вҲҲNвҲ©Dk
                                                                       !
        1                            +              +              ++
     вүӨO   E zm (1 вҲ’ в„“p )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X )
        P
Putting all the terms together, and noticed that
                                                                             !
              1                                 +         +              ++
        O       E zm (1 вҲ’ в„“p )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X )
             P


                                                               60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 1                               +                 ++
          вүҘO          E zm (1 вҲ’ в„“p )AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X ) В· AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X ) ,
             P В· Ck,1
then we complete the proof.

Proof of Induction Hypothesis J.1. By Lemma J.7 and Lemma J.6, at the initial stage of the learning
process, we have

           (0)       1                    +                 ++
         ОұpвҶ’v      вҲқ   E Attn   pвҶ’Pk,1 (X   )Attn pвҶ’Pk,1 (X    )
               k,1
                     P

           (0)       1                           +                    ++
         ОұpвҶ’v      вүІ   max    E  Attn  pвҶ’Pk,m (X   )Attn  pвҶ’Pk,m   (X    ) ,
               k,1
                     P

                        E AttnpвҶ’Pk,m (X + )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X + )AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X ++ )

Then by the relations of attention score in Lemma J.5, focusing on the high-propbability event A1,+
and A1,++ we have
             (t)
                      | вүӨ O max{P Оәs вҲ’1 , P 2(Оәs вҲ’Оәc ) В· ОҰ(t)
                                                                    (t)
          |ОұpвҶ’v   k,m                                     pвҶ’vk,1 } |ОұpвҶ’vk,1 | for m > 1        (J.4)

                                                   (t)
                                                    1                       (t)
By Lemma J.7 and Lemma J.5, we have ОұpвҶ’Pk,1 вүҘ в„Ұ( P 3вҲ’2Оә c ) вүҘ О»ОҰpвҶ’Pk,1 , which implies the
                                                                                  (t)
regularization in this stage is not violated for the dominated FP correlation ОҰpвҶ’Pk,1 . Hence, we
                                         (t)                  (t)
could focus on the relation between ОұpвҶ’Pk,m and ОұpвҶ’Pk,1 for m > 1.
Therefore, the existence of T1 can be directly obtained by the gradient estimation in Lemma J.7 and
the lower bound for the area attention of the global area in Lemma J.5. The induction argument
follows directly from J.4.



The key takeaway from the first stage is that the growth of feature-position attention correlation for
                                            (t)           (t)
the global area is dominant, specifically, ОұpвҶ’vk,1 вү« |ОұpвҶ’vk,m |. After this initial stage, ОҰpвҶ’vk,1
reaches в„Ұ(log(P )), AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 has reached в„Ұ(1) and 1 вҲ’ в„“p still keeps at a constant level. The
dominance of global FP correlation will be preserved in the following and the learning process will
enter the convergence stage.

J.3   C ONVERGENCE

At this stage, we are going to prove that as long as the ViTs have already learned the global FP
correlations, they will indeed converge to these global solutions, which leads to the collapsed global
representation. We present the statement of our convergence theorem below.
                                                                           4
Theorem J.8 (Convergence guarantees). Letting T2                    =   в„Ұ( P log
                                                                             О·
                                                                                 P
                                                                                   ), for any T     вҲҲ
[T2 , O(( poly(PО·) log P ))], letting О» = Оҳ( P log
                                                1
                                                   P ) we have
                                        T
                                    1 X                     1
                                        L(Q(t) ) вүӨ LвӢҶcl +        .
                                    T                     poly P
                                       t=T2

where LвӢҶcl is the global minimum of the regularized contrastive objective.

We have the following hypothesis for the end of the learning process.
                                               4
Induction Hypothesis J.2. For t вҲҲ [в„Ұ( P log
                                        О·
                                            P
                                              ), O(( poly(PО·) log P ))], we have the following resutls:

       вҖў For any k вҲҲ [K], p вҲҲ P, and m вҲҲ [Nk ]

                               ОҰ(t)        вҲ—    вҲ—
                                pвҶ’vk,1 вҲҲ [C1 , C2 ] log P|ОҰ(t)          e 1
                                                           pвҶ’vk,m | вүӨ O( ОҙвҲ— ).
                                                                          P
         where C1вҲ— , C2вҲ— > 0 are some constants and ОҙвҲ— вҲҲ (0, 1) is some small constant.


                                                         61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                      (t)1
       вҖў Attention score from the global area: given X вҲҲ Dk , 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X a ) вүӨ poly(P ) for
                                            (t)
                              ^pвҶ’P (X n,s ) вүӨ    1
          a вҲҲ {+, ++} and 1 вҲ’ Attn k,1        poly(P ) for s вҲҲ [Nc ] with high probability.

       вҖў Bounded gradient for the loss:
                                                                           1
                                            вҲҘвҲҮQ L(Q(t) )вҲҘ2F вүӨ O(
                                                              e                 ).
                                                                         poly P

We can reuse most of the calculations in the proof of Induction Hypothesis J.1 to prove the hypothesis
and here we only discuss how to bound the gradient of the objective. If the regularization is not
                 (t)        ОҰ(t)
                             pвҶ’v                       (t)
                                    k,m
violated, i.e., ОұpвҶ’vk,m вүҘ       О»         , we have ОҰpвҶ’vk,m вүӨ O(log(P )). For t вүҘ T1 , denote the first
                 (t)     ОҰ(t)  pвҶ’vk,m                                             (t)
time when ОұpвҶ’vk,m вҲ’              О»    вүӨ O( P14 ) as Te1 , by Lemma J.7, we have Оұ
                                                                                epвҶ’vk,m вүҘ в„Ұ( P14 ) for
                      (Te1 )                                                               P 4 log P
t вҲҲ [T1 , Te1 ], and ОҰpвҶ’v    k,m = C log P for some constant C > 0. Then we have T1 вүӨ O(
                                    e                           e                     e              ).   О·
Thus, for t вүҘ Te1 ,
                                      K X
                                      X                            (t)
                                                                  ОҰpвҶ’vk,m 2                    1
             вҲҘвҲҮQ L(Q(t) )вҲҘ2F вүӨ O                      (t)
                                                    (ОұpвҶ’v     вҲ’          )           вүӨ O(            ).
                                                          k,1
                                                                    О»                       poly(P )
                                          k=1 pвҲҲP


Proof of convergence. We first define a learning network that we deem as the вҖңoptimalвҖқ network
with the global feature-position attention pattern. Specifically, we define QвӢҶ as a matrix satisfied
                                 вҲҘQМ„вҲҘF
eвҠӨ   вӢҶ                  2                       вҠӨ вӢҶ
 p Q vk,1 = ПғвӢҶ with ПғвӢҶ = P (PK Nk ) and ep Q vk,m = 0 for p вҲҲ P and k вҲҲ [K], m вҲҲ [Nk ].
                                  k=1
                                                                                       вҠҘ
Furthermore, w1вҠӨ QвӢҶ w2 = 0, where w1 , w2 вҲҲ Span {ep }pвҲҲP вҲ© {vk,m }kвҲҲ[K,mвҲҲ[Nk ]] . Here we
suppose LвӢҶcl is achieved at the matrix Q = QМ„.
Moreover, We consider the following pseudo losses and objective: define the linearized learner
Fe(t) (Q, X) = F (Q(t) , X) + вҲҮQ F (Q(t) , X)(Q вҲ’ Q(t) ),
                                "                 e(t) (Q,X + ),F (Q(t) ;X ++ )вҹ©/П„
                                                                                          !#
                                                 вҹЁF
                                              e
                    Let (Q) := E вҲ’П„ log P                 e(t) (Q,X + ),F (Q(t) ;X вҖІ )вҹ©/П„
                                                                                             ,
                                                         вҹЁF
                                              X вҖІ вҲҲB e

                 g (Q) := Let (Q) + О» вҲҘQвҲҘ2 ,
                Obj   t                       2
                                       2
and
                                "                                                      !#
                                                вҹЁF (Q,X + ),F (Q(t) ;X ++ )вҹ©/П„
                                              e
                   Lbt (Q) := E вҲ’П„ log P                вҹЁF (Q,X + ),F (Q(t) ;X вҖІ )вҹ©/П„
                                                                                           .
                                             X вҖІ вҲҲB e


Then we discuss the values of different losses at Q = QвӢҶ . We have the following properties:
                                                               1
                                    L(QвӢҶ ) вүӨ LвӢҶcl + O(              ),                                        (J.5)
                                                            poly(d)
                                      b вӢҶ ) вҲ’ Lt (QвӢҶ )| вүӨ O( 1 ),
                                    |L(Q                                                                      (J.6)
                                                                poly(d)
                                                                 1
                                    |Let (QвӢҶ ) вҲ’ Lbt (QвӢҶ )| вүӨ        .                                        (J.7)
                                                              poly d
For the first property, we only need to consider the contrastive loss at the global minimum. Notice that
for our data distribution, the global minimum of the contrastive loss is achieved when the network can
perfectly distinguish the samples from different clusters. Thus, we have LвӢҶcl = Оҳ(log NKc ). Notice
                                                                                         Оәs
that on the event A1,com , supposing X вҲҲ Dkcl , which happens with prob вүҘ 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’P we have
                                                             1              X
      вҹЁF (QвӢҶ , X + ), F (QвӢҶ ; X ++ )вҹ© = вҹЁvk,1 , vk,1 вҹ© +            2
                                                                                      вҲҘОҫp вҲҘ22 Вұ o(1)
                                                         |Оҳ(Ck,1 )|            +   ++
                                                                           pвҲҲPk,1 вҲ©U вҲ©U



                                                        62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         вҹЁF (QвӢҶ , X + ), F (QвӢҶ ; X вҖІ )вҹ© = вҹЁvk,1 , vk,1 вҹ© Вұ o(1) for X вҖІ вҲҲ N вҲ© Dkcl
                                                                          1
Furthermore, by BernsteinвҖҷs inequality, we have with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ poly(d) , we have вҲҘОҫp вҲҘ22 =
            1                  1
Пғ 2 d Вұ O(
 0
        e       ) = 1 Вұ O(
            poly(d)
                         e         ), we denote such an event as A3 . Suppose we consider the
                                  poly(d)
temperature П„ = O( log1 d ), then conditioned on A1,com вҲ© A3 , we have вҹЁF (QвӢҶ , X + ), F (Q(t) ; X вҖІ )вҹ© =
Пү(log d) Вұ o(1) for X вҖІ вҲҲ B вҲ© Dkcl , which could minimize the loss to the level of Оҳ(log NKc ) up to
                   1
the error of O( poly(d) ). Then we have

                                 1           Nc           1                     1
             L(QвӢҶ ) вүӨ (1 вҲ’            )Оҳ(log    ) + O(
                                                    e          ) вүӨ L(Q) + O(         ).
                              poly(d)        K         poly(d)               poly(d)

The second property follows from the observation that
        |Lbt (QвӢҶ ) вҲ’ L(QвӢҶ )| вүӨ O(вҲҘвҲҮQ L(QвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 )вҲҘF (QвӢҶ , X ++ ) вҲ’ F (Q(t) , X ++ )вҲҘ2

                                                            (t)
                                                                                           1
                             вүӨ O вҲҘвҲҮQ L(QвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 В· 1 вҲ’ AttnpвҶ’Pk,1 (X ++ ) вүӨ O(      e               ).
                                                                                        poly(P )
Similarly, the third property follows from the fact that
                                                                                              1
     |Let (QвӢҶ ) вҲ’ Lbcl  вӢҶ           e вӢҶ         e(t) (QвӢҶ , X + ) вҲ’ F (QвӢҶ , X + )вҲҘ2 вүӨ O(
                    t (Q )| вүӨ O(вҲҘвҲҮQ Lt (Q )вҲҘ2 )вҲҘF
                                                                                     e              ).
                                                                                           poly(P )

Now we will use the tools from online learning to obtain a loss guarantee:
                       О·вҹЁвҲҮQ L(Q(t) ), Q(t) вҲ’ QвӢҶ вҹ©
                        1                     1               1
                      = О· 2 вҲҘвҲҮQ L(Q(t) )вҲҘ2F вҲ’ вҲҘQ(t) вҲ’ QвӢҶ вҲҘ2F + вҲҘQ(t+1) вҲ’ QвӢҶ вҲҘ2F
                        2                     2               2
                        О·2     1        1 (t)            1
                      =    В·          вҲ’ вҲҘQ вҲ’ QвӢҶ вҲҘ2F + вҲҘQ(t+1) вҲ’ QвӢҶ вҲҘ2F .
                        2 poly(P ) 2                     2

Notice that Obj                                   g (Q(t) ) = L(Q(t) ), thus
            g (Q) is a convex function over Q and Obj
               t                                     t

          вҹЁвҲҮQ L(Q(t) ), Q(t) вҲ’ QвӢҶ вҹ© = вҹЁвҲҮQ Obj
                                          g (Q(t) ), Q(t) вҲ’ QвӢҶ вҹ©
                                             t
                                       g (Q(t) ) вҲ’ Obj
                                    вүҘ Obj          g (QвӢҶ )                                (by convexity)
                                                  t            t

                                           g (Q(t) ) вҲ’ L(QвӢҶ ) вҲ’ O(         1
                                         вүҘ Objt
                                                                e              )        (by J.6 and J.7)
                                                                      poly(P )
                                           g (Q(t) ) вҲ’ LвӢҶ вҲ’ O(         1
                                         вүҘ Objt             cl
                                                                 e           )                   (by J.5)
                                                                   poly(P )
                                                                   1
                                         = L(Q(t) ) вҲ’ LвӢҶcl вҲ’ O(
                                                              e          )       (by definition of Obj)
                                                                                                   g
                                                                poly(P )
Thus by a telescoping summation, we have
                                            T
                                   1    X
                                          L(Q(t) ) вҲ’ LвӢҶcl
                                 T вҲ’ T2
                                           t=T2
                                 T
                                 X                                          1
                             вүӨ          вҹЁвҲҮQ L(Q(t) ), Q(t) вҲ’ QвӢҶ вҹ© + O(            )
                                                                         poly(P )
                                 t=T2

                                    вҲҘQ(T ) вҲ’ Q(вӢҶ) вҲҘ22           1
                             вүӨ O(                     ) вүӨ O(          )
                                           TО·                poly(P )
which completes the proof.


                                                      63
