Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE : S TANDING ON THE
S HOULDERS OF G IANT F OUNDATION M ODELS
 Cong Lu1,2                            Shengran Hu1,2                      Jeff Clune1,2,3
 conglu@cs.ubc.ca                      srhu@cs.ubc.ca                      jclune@gmail.com
 1
   University of British Columbia
 2
   Vector Institute
 3
   Canada CIFAR AI Chair



                                           A BSTRACT

         Go-Explore is a powerful family of algorithms designed to solve hard-exploration
         problems built on the principle of archiving discovered states, and iteratively re-
         turning to and exploring from the most promising states. This approach has led
         to superhuman performance across a wide variety of challenging problems in-
         cluding Atari games and robotic control, but requires manually designing heuris-
         tics to guide exploration (i.e., determine which states to save and explore from,
         and what actions to consider next), which is time-consuming and infeasible in
         general. To resolve this, we propose I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE (IGE) which
         greatly extends the scope of the original Go-Explore by replacing these hand-
         crafted heuristics with the intelligence and internalized human notions of inter-
         estingness captured by giant pretrained foundation models (FMs). This provides
         IGE with a human-like ability to instinctively identify how interesting or promis-
         ing any new state is (e.g., discovering new objects, locations, or behaviors), even
         in complex environments where heuristics are hard to define. Moreover, IGE of-
         fers the exciting opportunity to recognize and capitalize on serendipitous discov-
         eries—states encountered during exploration that are valuable in terms of explo-
         ration, yet where what makes them interesting was not anticipated by the human
         user. We evaluate our algorithm on a diverse range of language and vision-based
         tasks that require search and exploration. Across these tasks, IGE strongly ex-
         ceeds classic reinforcement learning and graph search baselines, and also suc-
         ceeds where prior state-of-the-art FM agents like Reflexion completely fail. Over-
         all, I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE combines the tremendous strengths of FMs and
         the powerful Go-Explore algorithm, opening up a new frontier of research into
         creating more generally capable agents with impressive exploration capabilities.
         All our code is open-sourced at: https://github.com/conglu1997/
         intelligent-go-explore.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Foundation models (FMs, Bommasani et al. (2021); OpenAI (2024); Brown et al. (2020); Team
(2024); Touvron et al. (2023)) trained on giant internet-scale datasets have demonstrated strong gen-
eral capabilities in reasoning (Wei et al., 2022) and understanding (Chang et al., 2024). As such,
these models have been increasingly employed as autonomous agents (Liu et al., 2023; Yao et al.,
2023b; Wang et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2023a; Shinn et al., 2023; Besta et al., 2024b) in decision-
making tasks, showcasing the ability to adapt in-context (Dong et al., 2022; Olsson et al., 2022) to
unseen tasks. Foundation models have also begun to see success in challenging reinforcement learn-
ing environments like Doom (de Wynter, 2024), real-world robotic control (Brohan et al., 2022;
2023) and 3D video games (Raad et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023). However, a significant challenge
remains: foundation model agents often struggle in environments that require deep exploration over
extended time horizons (Liu et al., 2023). Overcoming this limitation would enable us to realize
their potential as autonomous assistants in more open-ended domains like scientific discovery and
innovation (Jiang et al., 2023). This paper introduces I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE (IGE), a novel


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Which state should I explore                                         Is this state interestingly new
             next from the archive?              What action should                     vs. the archive?
                                                  I take next from:
                                 …                                                                      …

                                                                                                                      Intelligent
                        Foundation Model:                   Foundation Model:               Foundation Model:
                                                                                                                      Go-Explore
                                                                                             This is interesting!
                         This one:                              Go forward
                                                                                            Add it to the archive.


          State Score                     Prob                                                              Archive

                  3                       2%                 Randomly sample
                                                                next action
                                                                                                                       Classic
                          Heuristics                                                       Heuristics
                  50                      24%                                                                         Go-Explore

              …                            …                                                                  …


                  Return to state                          Explore                         Update
                   from archive                          from state                        archive


Figure 1: I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE (IGE) integrates the intelligence and internalized human notions of
interestingness from giant pretrained FMs into all stages of the Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021a;b) algorithm,
enabling FM agents to robustly explore in complex environments. Bottom: Classic Go-Explore solved hard
exploration problems by archiving novel discovered states, resetting to promising ones via domain-specific
heuristics, and then performing random exploration. Top: Our approach, I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE, en-
ables Go-Explore to tackle virtually any type of problem that is representable in the context of a large language
or multimodal model. Instead of manually defining heuristics, we query the foundation model at all stages,
enabling our approach to automatically catch and return to serendipitous discoveries, and harness the power of
FM agents to explore. The environment shown is the BabyAI game used in Section 4.2.

approach that combines the intelligence of foundation models with the powerful Go-Explore (Ecof-
fet et al., 2021a;b) framework to substantially increase the exploration capabilities of FM and rein-
forcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto (2018)) agents.
Go-Explore is a popular family of algorithms in deep RL based on maintaining an archive of “in-
terestingly new” discovered states and then iteratively returning to and exploring from the most
promising states (see Figure 1 for an overview of the three stages). This framework has led to super-
human performance in a range of hard-exploration problems, including long-horizon Atari games
and robotic control. However, the algorithm’s success largely relies on carefully hand-designed
heuristics at all three stages to guide exploration (Lu et al., 2024; Madotto et al., 2020). For exam-
ple, in Montezuma’s Revenge (Bellemare et al., 2013), an Atari game that was the previous grand
challenge of exploration in deep RL, (1) saved states in the archive were returned to with probability
proportional to factors like the number of times a state has been sampled before, (2) exploration was
purely via random action sampling, and (3) the criteria for which states were considered interest-
ingly new enough to be added to the archive depended on domain-specific factors like whether the
agent visited a new location, or did so with more keys. Without this pre-specified knowledge, the
quality of discovered trajectories is typically significantly worse (Ecoffet et al., 2021b).
These rigid, domain-specific choices are in stark contrast to human-like exploration of a new game,
where players can often intuitively judge the value or interestingness of any particular state (Cooper,
2014). More importantly, it is often impossible to know what is interesting or possible ahead of time
in complex domains. In the words of Isaac Asimov—The most exciting phrase to hear in science,
the one that heralds new discoveries, is not “Eureka!” but “That’s funny.”. With this motivation,
IGE stands on the shoulders of giant foundation models and uses their intelligence to (1) act as a
judge to identify the most promising states to return to and explore from, (2) select the best actions
to take from a selected state, and (3) recognize and capitalize on serendipitous discoveries—states
encountered during exploration that are valuable in terms of exploration, yet where what makes them
interesting was not anticipated by the human user. By leveraging the foundation model’s internalized
notions of interestingness (Zhang et al., 2024), IGE can decide whether a new state is interestingly
new enough to be added to the archive as a stepping stone for future exploration (Figure 1, top).
We demonstrate IGE’s ability to reliably improve the exploration capabilities of FM agents on a
diverse range of language and vision-based tasks that require search and exploration. These settings
include tasks that require commonsense reasoning, long-term planning and memory, and handling


                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


partial observability. IGE integrates well with various agent strategies, including few-shot and
chain-of-thought-based prompting, demonstrates consistent improvements over baselines across di-
verse foundation models, and will likely only get better as the capabilities of FMs continue to im-
prove. While IGE performs strongly all-around, some highlights from our evaluation include: IGE
reaches 100% success rate on Game of 24 (Yao et al., 2023a), a standard mathematical reasoning
and search problem, 70.8% faster than classic graph search. On the BabyAI domain, IGE en-
ables standard foundation models to succeed with visual observations zero-shot. Moreover, on the
TextWorld (Côté et al., 2018) Coin Collector domain, IGE is the only algorithm that succeeds in
discovering long-horizon optimal solution paths, where prior state-of-the-art FM agent frameworks
like Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) fail.
I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE simultaneously empowers foundation model agents to reliably ex-
plore, and reimagines the scope of Go-Explore to tackle virtually any type of problem, without
being limited to hand-designed heuristics. These abilities will substantially improve our ability to
develop more generally capable agents, and increase the range of tasks they can learn how to solve.

2   BACKGROUND
Go-Explore for Hard-Exploration Problems. Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021b;a) is a family of
algorithms designed to solve hard-exploration (Ladosz et al., 2022) problems based on the principle
of remembering and returning reliably to promising states. The classic setting builds an “archive”
of novel states it discovers in an environment, where similar states are grouped in a single “cell”.
These cells are defined by heuristics like having the same visual observation when downsampled to
low resolution. In the beginning, the archive only contains the initial state. We describe the overall
structure of the algorithm in the same order as Figure 1 (bottom): At each iteration, (1) promis-
ing states are selected from the archive through domain-specific heuristics, e.g., probabilistically
sampling states proportional to their progress through the environment or potential to lead to new
states. The agent returns to that state by resetting using the simulator or via a goal-conditioned
policy, and (2) a sequence of random actions is taken to explore from that state. (3) All discovered
states deemed interestingly new by the cell representation heuristics are added to the archive, and
the process repeats. The strength of Go-Explore is due to addressing two critical impediments to
exploration: forgetting how to reach previously visited states (detachment) and failing to first return
to a state before exploring from it (derailment) (Ecoffet et al., 2021a).
This approach leads to a collection of high-return trajectories being discovered, which may then be
fed into an imitation learning (Hussein et al., 2017) algorithm to produce a policy that generalizes
and is robust to stochasticity. We adopt similar assumptions as the original setting, by assuming an
agent can return to a previously discovered state by restoring in the simulator (e.g., a reset function
in an RL environment). This assumption may readily be relaxed by training a policy to return to a
given state, or in the foundation model case, by simply prompting the model with a past trajectory.
Large Language and Multimodal Foundation Models. The combination of model scaling and
training over internet-scale data has resulted in a wide variety of foundation models (Bommasani
et al., 2021) that exhibit generalist capabilities. In this paper, we consider autoregressive large lan-
guage models (LLMs, Brown et al. (2020); OpenAI (2024); Touvron et al. (2023)) which learn to
generate text completions by modeling the conditional probability of a new token given the pre-
ceding tokens, p(xt |x<t ; θ). This framework enables LLMs to not only generate coherent text but
crucially also exhibit human-like abilities, including on commonsense knowledge questions (Talmor
et al., 2019) and complex reasoning tasks (Wei et al., 2022). These models may also be extended to
other input modalities such as images by tokenizing these inputs into the same space as the text (Zhu
et al., 2023a). When prompting an FM with an instruction, the user may decide to do so with no
related examples (zero-shot), with a few successful examples in related problems (few-shot, Brown
et al. (2020)), or ask for a chain of reasoning (chain-of-thought, Wei et al. (2022)) before responding.

3   D RIVING E XPLORATION WITH G IANT F OUNDATION M ODELS
In this section, we propose I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE (IGE) which reimagines the classic Go-
Explore algorithm as described in Section 2 with the intelligence of giant pretrained foundation
models. Specifically, we introduce FM intelligence for selecting which archived state to return to and


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


explore from, which action to take from each state, and deciding whether a state is interestingly new
and should be archived. IGE’s use of foundation models is closely related to FM-as-a-judge (Zheng
et al., 2023b), but instead uses foundation models as proxies of human judgment of exploration
choices in an environment rather than the output of generative models. We illustrate our resultant
algorithm at the top of Figure 1 and provide full pseudocode in Algorithm 1.
Wherever we query the foundation model, we introduce the overall strategy of Go-Explore along-
side a brief description of the current environment in the “system message” (high-level directive)
displayed below. The brief descriptions for each environment we evaluate on in Section 4 are listed
in Appendix B. In the following sections, we detail our prompting techniques at each stage of IGE.
The previous prompt history is visible to the agent, which enables each component of IGE to com-
municate with each other. We provide precise details on how we parse responses in Appendix D.1.

   System Prompt.
   [Brief Description Of Environment]
   You will be prompted to perform systematic exploration in the style of Go-Explore. An archive will be
   maintained of interesting states found. You will be prompted to:
   - Select a state from the archive that is the most promising, i.e., likely to lead to a solution or more novel
   states.
   - Explore from states intelligently, by picking new actions.
   - For each new state, determine if the state is interestingly new and should be added to the archive.



3.1   S ELECT S TATE F ROM A RCHIVE

The power to easily store and return to promising discovered states is crucial to Go-Explore’s ability
to reliably solve long-horizon exploration problems. IGE leverages the foundation model’s inter-
nalized notions of interestingness (Zhang et al., 2024) to select the most promising state to return to
from the archive (Figure 1, left). This is far more flexible than classic Go-Explore, which relied on
hardcoded hand-crafted heuristics to determine cell sampling probabilities. An example prompt is
shown below.
Examples of the discovered states are given in Table 1. We                     State Selection Prompt.
assign indices to these states in a list and ask the FM to se-                 Current state archive:
lect a numerical index. We define a budget of Nstate “state-                   [Discovered states]
expansions”. Each state expansion is followed by a sequence
of exploratory actions, which we describe in the next section.                 Select the most promising state.



3.2   E XPLORE F ROM S TATE

In order to effectively explore from a state selected in the previous section, we leverage the power
of foundation model agents (Liu et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022) to choose how to act in an envi-
ronment. This vastly improves on the original Go-Explore’s use of random action sampling. One
of the key strengths of IGE is that it is complementary to various FM agent reasoning strategies,
including zero-shot, few-shot, or even chain-of-thought-based prompting (Yao et al., 2023b). We
demonstrate this flexibility in Section 4.
One point of departure from the classic Go-Explore is that         Action Selection Prompt.
we additionally maintain a state-conditional action history for
each archived state, so that IGE can avoid repeating previously    [Agent-Specific Prompt]
tested options. While this information may already be avail-       Current state:
able in the entire history, this helps avoid any recency bias that [Current State]
can occur with longer contexts (Zhao et al., 2021). The action     Previously tried actions:
history can be easily reiterated in the prompt, or the prompt      [Previous Action History]
could display the remaining untested actions. We define a bud-     Output the next action.
get of exploratory actions per state expansion Naction , which is
typically far shorter than the full horizon of the environment
and represents a small number of trial actions. An example prompt is shown here.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: We show that I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE can efficiently explore over a diverse set of environments
with increasing difficulty. We showcase IGE on environments with both language and vision-based obser-
vations. For each environment, we provide an example observation, samples from the action space, and the
horizon of the task in the environment.

                        Game of 24                           BabyAI (Text and Visual)                                  TextWorld
               mathematical reasoning and     partially observable gridworld with language instructions   partial observability, long-term plan-
Problem Type   search                                                                                     ning and memory, and common sense
               “Current state: (2 8 8 14)”    “Goal: unlock the red                                       “You arrive in a pantry... You see a
Observation                                   door. You see a wall 4                                      shelf. The shelf is wooden. On the shelf
                                              steps forward, You see a                                    you can see flour...”
                                              yellow box 2 steps left.”
                                              (Text-based)                     (Vision-based)
               - 2 + 8 = 10 Next: (8 10 14)                                                               - go east
                                              - turn left        - pick up
               - 8 / 2 = 4 Next: (4 8 14)                                                                 - cook potato with oven
Next Actions                                  - turn right       - open door
               - 14 + 2 = 16 Next: (8 8 16)                                                               - unlock door with key
                                              - go forward        - drop
               ...                                                                                        ...
Task Horizon                 3                                       64 or 128                                         25, 40 or 80


3.3    U PDATE A RCHIVE

IGE stores discovered states in an archive, allowing the algorithm to return and explore from those
points. To encourage better exploration, the stored states should be interesting—either promis-
ing states relevant to the task that could lead to further stepping stones or novel states that differ
significantly from existing ones. As in other stages of IGE, we leverage the foundation model’s
internalized notions of interestingness (Zhang et al., 2024) to evaluate the interestingness of each
state.
While the original Go-Explore required extensive domain knowledge to determine interestingness,
IGE avoids this requirement and manual labor, critically gaining the ability to recognize and capi-
talize on serendipitous discoveries that could not have been predicted ahead of time. In practice, we
propose two options to filter discovered states after a sequence of exploratory actions. The first is to
iterate through every new state and ask whether each one is interestingly new and should be added
to the archive. The second is to first add all states and then ask the foundation model to remove
the uninteresting states. We discuss this choice later in Section 4.3; the second form is preferable
in larger environments where there is more need to explicitly deprecate earlier discoveries that have
become irrelevant so as not to overload the archive. An example prompt for the first option is shown
below.
By default, IGE implements the foundation model at                                   Archive Filtering Prompt.
all three stages of Go-Explore, but we rigorously ana-
lyze the relative importance of each component in Sec-                               Current state archive: [State Archive]
tion 5. Our focus is on the discovery of solutions to                                New state: [Current State]
hard-exploration problems. These solutions could po-                                 Is this state interestingly new (a novel
tentially be used for downstream reinforcement learn-                                state that is relevant to the task or could
ing or even improve the foundation model in subse-                                   lead to further stepping stones), such that
quent tasks through in-context learning, representing                                it should be added to the archive?
exciting avenues for future research.


4     E MPIRICAL E VALUATION

In this section, we evaluate I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE across a diverse set of text environments
that require search and exploration. We demonstrate IGE’s ability to handle partially observable
and complex observation spaces (including both text and visual inputs), discover solutions involving
long chains of actions, and effectively improve the ability of FM agents to explore. For all our
experiments, we use GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024), one of the current SOTA LLMs, as our foundation
model. We compare IGE to random action sampling, a naı̈ve LLM baseline, and two SOTA FM
agents, ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023). All methods receive the same
environment descriptions, observations, and use the same number of environment steps, ensuring a
fair comparison. Naı̈ve LLM simply queries the LLM for an action conditional on the interaction
history. ReAct prompts the agent to output its reasoning before making a decision. Based on ReAct,
Reflexion further conditions the agent on the previous attempted episode, asking the agent to learn


                                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from its mistakes. We provide an overview of our environments in Table 1. Full hyperparameters
are detailed in Appendix E.

4.1   G AME O F 24

We first demonstrate the effectiveness of IGE in a mathematical reasoning task, Game of 24 (Yao
et al., 2023a). The goal is to perform basic arithmetic operations (+, −, ×, /) starting from
4 numbers to obtain 24. For example, given input (4, 9, 10, 13), a possible solution could be
(10 − 4) × (13 − 9) = 24. We formulate the problem as an MDP (Sutton & Barto, 2018), where
actions represent a reduction of two numbers by an arithmetic operation—i.e., the above solution
                                                                          10−4=6            13−9=4
would be represented as the sequence of state transitions (4, 9, 10, 13) −−−−−→ (6, 9, 13) −−−−−→
        6×4=24
(6, 4) −−−−−→ (24). Therefore, IGE uses the FM to iteratively expand possible solution paths
and archive promising ones to return to. The action space is the range of possible next operations,
displayed in the same manner as in Yao et al. (2023a).
                                                                                                   Game Of 24
We evaluate IGE across 100 hard test problems in Fig-                          1.0
ure 2, and additionally include the standard (unweighted)
                                                                               0.8
graph search algorithms depth-first search (DFS) and


                                                                Success Rate
breadth-first search (BFS) as reference. Since the     com-                    0.6
binatorial complexity of the problem is at most 42 · 32 ·

                                                                               0.4
43 = 1152, graph search is guaranteed to find a solu-
tion within that many actions. The system prompts for                          0.2
both IGE and the LLM baselines contain few-shot exam-                          0.0
ples with correct calculations on different starting num-                            0          200       400             600
bers. IGE rapidly reaches 100% success rate, on average                                       Operations Performed
70.8% faster than the next best baseline, depth-first search                             Random Actions     ReAct
(DFS)— this improvement is statistically significant (χ2                                 DFS                Reflexion
                                                                                         BFS                Intelligent Go-Explore
test, p < 0.05) at 150 operations, where IGE has solved                                  Naive LLM
all problems. This success may be attributed to the fact
that language models have internalized mathematical in-           Figure 2: IGE explores the Game of 24
tuition and are likely to be able to identify promising pairs     with the intelligence of FMs and reaches
like (6, 4) that could easily be multiplied together for a        100% success rate on average 70.8% faster
solution.                                                         than DFS, the next best baseline. IGE com-
                                                                  pletes all problems within 150 environment
All LLM agent baselines (naı̈ve LLM, ReAct, Reflexion)            operations. Our use of archiving and intel-
eventually plateau and even get beaten by the unintelli-          ligent action selection allows us to greatly
gent DFS. This highlights the need for diverse action se-         outperform prior LLM agents with an equal
lection, which IGE enables. A final point of comparison           number of operations performed. The suc-
                                                                  cess rate is computed over 100 test prob-
we make is to Tree of Thoughts (ToT, Yao et al. (2023a))
                                                                  lems.
which achieved 74% on Game of 24 within their evalu-
ation budget. We emphasize that our evaluation setting is very different as IGE selects from the
list of valid options rather than doing the math in context. However, we note the key difference to
our method is that ToT evaluates and expands multiple reasoning paths following a tree structure,
whereas IGE can easily jump around the search space—this is a crucial advantage in more complex
environments (like those in the following sections), where it takes many coordinated actions to get
from one state to another interesting state.

4.2   BABYAI T EXT AND V ISUAL D OMAINS

Next, we show that IGE readily operates across multiple modalities in the BabyAI domains from
Carta et al. (2023). The original domain is a procedurally-generated, partially-observable 2D grid-
world with text-based observations. The agent is given a textual goal instruction which could corre-
spond to one or more instructions in a sequence, e.g., “pick up X and then go to Y”. As we can see
from the observations in Table 1, the task is challenging even for humans to complete and requires
forming a model of the world from partial observations. This kind of state observation would make
it hard to define heuristics to determine how good any particular state is, as in classic Go-Explore.
We additionally extend this to a visual domain by replacing text observations with partially ob-
servable image observations. IGE can naturally handle these by simply replacing text observations
with images passed to the multimodal GPT-4o. The optimal path to a solution may include moving


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                 GoTo                          PickUp                   PickUpThenGoTo                         OpenDoor                          PutNextTo
                    1.0                          1.0                             1.0                               1.0                                1.0


     Success Rate
                    0.8                          0.8                             0.8                               0.8                                0.8
                    0.6                          0.6                             0.6                               0.6                                0.6
                    0.4                          0.4                             0.4                               0.4                                0.4
                    0.2                          0.2                             0.2                               0.2                                0.2
                    0.0                          0.0                             0.0                               0.0                                0.0
                          98% 72% 96% 96% 100%          97% 42% 84% 92% 92%            20% 50% 80% 84% 92%               1% 2% 36% 64% 64%                  4% 6% 12% 48% 84%

                                         GLAM                Random Actions              Naive LLM                 ReAct               Intelligent Go-Explore
                                                                                 (a) BabyAI-Text
                                 GoTo                          PickUp                PickUpThenGoTo                            OpenDoor                          PutNextTo
                    1.0                          1.0                             1.0                              1.0                             1.0
   Success Rate


                    0.8                          0.8                             0.8                              0.8                             0.8
                    0.6                          0.6                             0.6                              0.6                             0.6
                    0.4                          0.4                             0.4                              0.4                             0.4
                    0.2                          0.2                             0.2                              0.2                             0.2
                    0.0                          0.0                             0.0                              0.0                             0.0
                          72% 68% 84% 96%               42% 24% 12% 60%                50% 12%      4%    60%            2%     0%    0%    8%              6%    8%     8%   52%

                                                 Random Actions                 Naive LLM                ReAct                Intelligent Go-Explore
                                                                                (b) BabyAI-Visual
Figure 3: IGE can enable GPT-4o to efficiently find solutions to challenging tasks in the BabyAI text and
visual environments. In the text domain, IGE does so with orders of magnitude fewer online steps than prior
RL-trained baselines (GLAM, Carta et al. (2023)). Task types are in order of difficulty. As tasks become more
difficult, the performance gap of IGE vs. the LLM baselines grows. We show the mean and 95% bootstrap
confidence interval (Zoubir & Iskandler, 2007) over 25 seeds per environment type. Here, and elsewhere,
confidence intervals are obtained by bootstrapped resampling 10,000 times.

blocking objects as well as finding keys to open doors. We consider 5 different task families of
increasing difficulty: “go to”, “pick up”, “pick up then go to”, “open door”, and “put next to”, which
are described fully in Appendix B.2.
We omit the Reflexion baseline in this environment due to the high cost of querying GPT-4 with
128-step episodes in the context. Due to the complexity of this environment, we use chain-of-
thought prompting in all three components of IGE. This allows the FM to deliberate on the state
of the game before making decisions. IGE can find solutions to these problems with only a tiny
budget of 250 environment steps per task (divided into rollouts of 10 exploratory actions each)
and visualize the final performance in Figure 3 (top). In the text variant, IGE and ReAct vastly
outperform the prior RL-trained language model approach, GLAM (Carta et al., 2023), with orders
of magnitude fewer samples (GLAM used 1.5M online steps) and requiring no training whatsoever.
IGE achieves the best or close to the best performance in every task. The gap between IGE and
the second-best method grows with task difficulty, with a statistically significant 36% improvement
(χ2 test, p < 0.05) on “put next to”. In the visual variant, IGE also strongly beats the visual
agent baselines and displays strong performance across the board, enabling GPT-4o to successfully
find solutions in a majority of cases. The results provide strong evidence that IGE extends to any
modality representable by a multimodal foundation model.

4.3                 T EXT W ORLD

Finally, we show IGE’s ability to tackle tasks requiring long-horizon memory and planning, explo-
ration, and commonsense in TextWorld (Côté et al., 2018), a classic text-based agent benchmark.

                                   Treasure Hunter                                     The Cooking Game                                          Coin Collector
                    1.0                                                 1.0                                                     1.0
  Success Rate


                    0.8                                                 0.8                                                     0.8
                    0.6                                                 0.6                                                     0.6
                    0.4                                                 0.4                                                     0.4
                    0.2                                                 0.2                                                     0.2
                    0.0                                                 0.0                                                     0.0
                            0%     64%    84%          80%    96%             0%        40%       56%     52%       92%                0%        0%         0%      0%        88%

                                   Random Actions                   Naive LLM             ReAct                  Reflexion              Intelligent Go-Explore
Figure 4: IGE outperforms state-of-the-art FM agents in three challenging text games in TextWorld. These
results illustrate the powerful capabilities of planning, commonsense reasoning, and exploration of IGE (Sec-
tion 4.3). Notably, in the Coin Collector game where hard exploration is required, we observe BFS-like search
behavior emerge in IGE, enabling it to find the most efficient solution where all other approaches exhaust the
environment horizon. We show the mean and 95% bootstrap confidence interval over 25 seeds for each game.

                                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: We rigorously ablate the design choices in IGE and analyze the importance of incorporating FMs at
each stage of the algorithm. Additionally, we compare IGE to Classic Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021b), which
relies on manually defined heuristics at each stage. Game of 24 performance is taken at 150 environment steps,
over 100 evaluation seeds. BabyAI-Text performance is taken at 250 environment steps, over 25 evaluation
seeds. TextWorld performance is taken at 240 environment steps, over 25 evaluation seeds. ‘Standard’ is
mirrored from Section 4. We show the mean and 95% bootstrap confidence interval for the success rate.
                                                                     Success Rate (%)
                Ablation Variants
                                                  Game of 24         BabyAI (PN)         TextWorld (CG)
    IGE                                            100 ±   0.0          84 ± 14              92 ± 10
    ✗ Intelligent action selection                  68 ±   9.0          24 ± 16               0± 0
    ✗ Intelligent state selection                   96 ±   3.5          48 ± 20              76 ± 16
    ✗ Intelligent archive filtering                 93 ±   5.0          64 ± 20              64 ± 20
    ✗ All 3 above                                   61 ±   9.5           4± 6                 0± 0
    ✗ State-conditional action history              33 ±   9.0          72 ± 16              72 ± 16
    Classic Go-Explore (Visitation Frequency)       38 ± 22.0            4± 6                  0± 0


We consider three challenging games in TextWorld: Treasure Hunter, The Cooking Game, and Coin
Collector. In each game, the agent needs to complete the task while navigating a maze of different
rooms, while only seeing the current room’s description in text. The agent interacts with the world
using free-form natural language commands, such as “go east” or “cook potato with oven.” We set
each game to hard difficulty; details on game customizations are provided in Appendix B.3. As in
the previous section, we use chain-of-thought prompting in all three components of IGE. Because
the state archive in this environment grows significantly, we implement rejection-based archive fil-
tering, which we describe in Appendix D.2.
We present success rates achieved on the three games using IGE and the baselines in Figure 4. We
observe that IGE outperforms all other baselines, with a statistically significant (χ2 test, p < 0.05)
gap between IGE and the second-best method in the harder Cooking Game and Coin Collector. In
The Cooking Game, IGE outperforms the next-best agent, ReAct, by a large margin of 36%, demon-
strating IGE’s advantage in hard-exploration problems. In Coin Collector, IGE is the only method
that can find the solution in the maze, with all other methods completely failing. Interestingly, we
observe that IGE exhibits BFS-like behavior, intelligently selecting rooms with unexplored direc-
tions and iteratively removing rooms with exhausted directions. This results in IGE almost always
finding the shortest path to the target, while other methods fail to navigate the maze.
We highlight that Reflexion does not improve over ReAct in all the games we tested. Although
Reflexion should in theory be an improvement over ReAct with the experience from previous at-
tempts, it tends to decrease performance. We hypothesize that in long-horizon environments, the
history becomes too long after the initial episode and prevents Reflexion from effectively utilizing
knowledge from the previous episode. In contrast, IGE uses the FM to iteratively filter interesting
states in the archive, which ends up controlling the context length. This helps IGE truly make use
of the cumulative knowledge gained through exploration.

5    A NALYSIS

In this section, we analyze (1) the importance of FM intelligence for each of the three key compo-
nents of Go-Explore, and (2) how IGE’s performance improves as the FM’s capabilities increase.
We take a representative sample of environments from the previous section of Game of 24, Put Next
To (PN) from BabyAI-Text, and The Cooking Game (CG) from TextWorld. Hyperparameters are
listed in Appendix E.
How Important is Foundation Model Intelligence at Each Step? First, we analyze the impact
of FM intelligence on each component of I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE. We ablate replacing state
and action selection with uniform random sampling, archive filtering with saving everything to the
archive, and not maintaining a state-conditional action history. We use these unintelligent choices,
as it would be very time-consuming to attempt to design the right heuristics based on the rich text
observations in Table 1. In Table 2, we observe that where the intelligence of FMs is more valuable
varies by environment. Since the environment horizon is only 3 in the Game of 24, the most impor-
tant factor is ensuring that the actions tried are diverse and intelligently selected. This hypothesis
is confirmed: the largest performance drops occur when removing either FM action selection or the


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


action history. Different IGE components are most helpful in both of the longer-horizon BabyAI-
Text and TextWorld environments: intelligent state selection and archive filtering make a big impact,
showcasing the strength of enabling IGE to return to promising discovered states. There are smaller
performance drops when removing the action history; likely because in larger environments, many
more unique states are discovered, so there is less gain from preventing taking the same actions
from frequently returned to states. In both environments, we also observe a drastic decrease when
switching to random actions, as in classic Go-Explore. This underscores the substantial benefits
IGE provides in harnessing FMs for action selection.
Next, we elucidate the need for intelligent archive filtering across all our environments. Not only
does archive filtering improve performance, but it also drastically reduces the number of uninterest-
ing states in the archive. For instance, in BabyAI-Text, we observe the archive becoming around 8×
larger without filtering. These metrics demonstrate IGE’s innate ability to capture promising discov-
eries as they occur and focus attention on them, without the need for any manual heuristics. Detailed
analysis and results are provided in Appendix C.1. Furthermore, we compare IGE with classic Go-
Explore (GE, Ecoffet et al. (2021b)), which adopts fixed pre-defined, hand-designed, open-loop
heuristics like resetting to states with probability inversely proportional to the state-visitation count.
Across all 3 domains, IGE significantly outperforms classic GE, which shows that adopting FMs
instead of manually designed heuristics not only saves the effort required for domain-specific de-
sign but also enhances the algorithm’s exploration by leveraging the human notion of interestingness
captured by FMs (Table 2, bottom). We particularly emphasize that the intelligence of FMs enables
IGE to rapidly solve environments like BabyAI that have challenged the RL community in an ex-
ceptionally short number of 250 timesteps. This is in contrast to the classic GE paradigm, which
used millions or even billions of environment steps (Ecoffet et al., 2021b).
What is the Effect of Foundation Model Choice? We further analyze the dependence of IGE
on the capabilities of the underlying foundation model. We evaluated IGE using other foundation
models, including Claude Sonnet 3.5 (Anthropic, 2024) and the open-source Llama-3 400B (Llama
Team, 2024), on the Game of 24. The results, presented in Table 3, show that IGE maintains superior
performance over the baselines across different foundation models, consistently achieving higher
success rates. For instance, even when using the weaker Llama-3 400B, IGE achieves a success rate
of 98%, significantly outperforming the best Llama-based baseline. Notably, the performance gains
of IGE are statistically significant (for all baselines with Llama-3 400B and for all except Reflexion
on Claude Sonnet 3.5, p < 0.05). This demonstrates that IGE is not dependent on a specific model
and can be expected to perform well with other, possibly future, foundation models with higher
capabilities. Additional experiments on prompt robustness are provided in Appendix C.2.
Table 3: IGE consistently outperforms other LLM agent baselines with a diverse range of foundation models
on the Game of 24. We use the same evaluation setting as Table 2 and show the mean and 95% bootstrap
confidence interval for the success rate (%).
     Model                      Naı̈ve LLM              ReAct           Reflexion            IGE
     GPT-4                        70 ± 12               82 ± 11          83 ± 10           100 ± 0
     Llama-3 400B                 44 ± 14               68 ± 13          54 ± 14            98 ± 3
     Claude Sonnet 3.5            24 ± 12               58 ± 14          80 ± 11            86 ± 9

6    R ELATED W ORK
Due to space constraints, extra related work discussions are in Appendix F.
FM Agents. One of the key strengths of IGE is that it is agnostic to the precise agent formulation
and thus strictly additive on top of a wide variety of strategies. A common strategy is chain-of-
thought-based methods (Yao et al., 2023b; Hu & Clune, 2024), which prompts the FM to output a
set of reasoning steps before the answer. We integrate this into the FM guidance in our experiments
in Sections 4.2 and 4.3. Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) enables an agent to improve over multiple
episodes by asking it to reflect on the previous attempted episode and learn from its mistakes. How-
ever, we show this can break down in tasks with long horizons, while IGE proposes a more efficient
way to filter out the vast majority of uninteresting interactions. Another set of agent frameworks that
are related to the idea of exploring diverse solution paths via state-connectivity is Tree of Thoughts
(ToT, Yao et al. (2023a)) and Graph of Thoughts (GoT, Besta et al. (2024a)). The primary difference
between methods like ToT and IGE is that ToT builds up a tree of abstract thoughts generated by the


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


language model and could be hallucinated, whereas IGE’s archive is grounded in real states directly
copied from an RL environment. Although ToT’s thoughts are suitable for the types of problems it
investigates, these abstract plans could easily break down in RL environments with long horizons.
In contrast, IGE scales gracefully with long horizons by archiving real states and returning to the
state for exploration. Additionally, ToT is based on DFS and BFS over the tree and is thus limited
to these search strategies over the problem. On the other hand, IGE can intelligently select hybrid
strategies, for example, going broad at the start (more BFS-like) and then honing down on a promis-
ing path (more DFS-like) later on. This is particularly important for long-horizon tasks with larger
state spaces, as we show in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
Closely related to exploration, FM agents have also begun to see use in search-based tasks. Stream of
Search (Gandhi et al., 2024) considers a similar mathematical reasoning task to the Game of 24 and
seeks to initially clone the actions of graph search algorithms, then use RL to self-improve. In con-
trast, IGE already greatly outperforms classic graph search, and an exciting future direction could
be to first clone the exploratory behavior of IGE and then use that as a basis for self-improvement.
Lehnert et al. (2024) analogously train a language model to mimic the A∗ algorithm. Finally, Kr-
ishnamurthy et al. (2024) also consider bootstrapping exploration with an externally summarized
action-history in bandit problems; our focus is more on the detection of interesting states.
Go-Explore. The original Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021a;b) framework enabled superhuman per-
formance in a variety of hard-exploration problems, including applications as diverse as automated
game testing (Lu et al., 2024). Gallouédec & Dellandréa (2023) propose Latent Go-Explore which
similarly aims to address the difficulty of designing exploration heuristics by automatically learning
a latent representation and sampling states with a low latent density. However, this requires periodic
retraining and could easily miss out on rare discoveries. HuGE (Torne Villasevil et al., 2023) guides
Go-Explore with humans in the loop by asking for pair-wise feedback on which goal to select. On
the other hand, we replace humans with intelligent FM guidance at all components of Go-Explore.


7   C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS

In this paper, we demonstrate a new approach to robust exploration in complex environments, I N -
TELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE , reimagining Go-Explore in the era of giant foundation models. We
show that IGE can drive exploration for a diverse set of FM agents, including few-shot and chain-of-
thought prompting, across a variety of modalities including challenging text and vision-based games.
Extending IGE to even more modalities could unlock applications as wide as scientific discovery in
synthetic biology (designing novel drugs or proteins) or material science. Recent advancements in
multimodal foundation models, such as RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023) and RFM-1 (Covariant AI, 2024),
have shown the potential of FMs to handle various modalities, including text, images, videos, and
(continuous) numerical sensor readings. Since these models have already tokenized the state-action
spaces of general environments and shown the ability of the model to generate actions for any state,
it should be possible to then ask the FM to judge the interestingness of any given state compared
to prior states observed, which is the only additional requirement of IGE. A further interesting do-
main is the (hitherto unsolved by intelligent agents) vast dungeon crawler, NetHack (Küttler et al.,
2020). Küttler et al. (2020) noted that classic Go-Explore’s heuristics “will likely not work for large
symbolic and procedurally generated environments.” IGE represents a sharp departure from these
limitations by replacing hard-coded and inflexible exploration heuristics with the dynamic intelli-
gence of giant foundation models.
There remain exciting opportunities to improve IGE’s capabilities to explore vast state spaces. For
example, we currently recall and compare against the entire archive whenever we discover a new
state. This could be made much more efficient by using techniques like retrieval augmented gen-
eration (Lewis et al., 2020) and only comparing to the closest previously discovered states. As we
consider IGE for real-world settings, we should take steps to ensure the responsible deployment of
FMs (Bommasani et al., 2021). Our approach opens up the road to safe and interpretable explo-
ration: through careful prompt engineering or techniques like constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022), we
could steer the agent away from unsafe behaviors. Furthermore, if we ask or train the FM to explain
its choices in each part of IGE, we could gain insight into its rationale for exploring particular paths
through an environment (Wei et al., 2022; Hu & Clune, 2024); improving safety, interpretability,
and perhaps one day even our own understanding of how best to explore.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Vector Institute, the Canada CIFAR AI Chairs program, grants
from Schmidt Futures and Open Philanthropy, an NSERC Discovery Grant, and a generous donation
from Rafael Cosman. We thank Aaron Dharna, Ben Norman, and Jenny Zhang from our lab at the
University of British Columbia for insightful discussions and feedback on early drafts of this work.

R EFERENCES
Anthropic. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku, 2024. URL https://www-cdn.
  anthropic.com/de8ba9b01c9ab7cbabf5c33b80b7bbc618857627/Model_
  Card_Claude_3.pdf.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai:
  Harmlessness from ai feedback, 2022.
M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An eval-
 uation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279, June
 2013. ISSN 1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/jair.3912. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1613/
 jair.3912.
Yoshua Bengio, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Edward J. Hu, Mo Tiwari, and Emmanuel Bengio.
  Gflownet foundations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.09266.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gi-
 aninazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten
 Hoefler. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. Pro-
 ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(16):17682–17690, March 2024a.
 ISSN 2159-5399. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i16.29720. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/
 aaai.v38i16.29720.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gian-
 inazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al. Graph of
 thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024b.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  and Michael S. Bernstein et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. ArXiv, 2021.
  URL https://crfm.stanford.edu/assets/report.pdf.
Herbie Bradley, Andrew Dai, Hannah Teufel, Jenny Zhang, Koen Oostermeijer, Marco Bellagente,
  Jeff Clune, Kenneth Stanley, Grégory Schott, and Joel Lehman. Quality-diversity through ai
  feedback, 2023.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian
  Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-
  nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deek-
  sha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez,
  Karl Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi,
  Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke, Austin Stone, Clayton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent
  Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and
  Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choro-
  manski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Chuyuan Fu,
  Montse Gonzalez Arenas, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alexan-
  der Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-
  nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu,
  Henryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch, Karl Pertsch, Kanishka Rao, Krista Reymann, Michael
  Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Jaspiar Singh, Anikait Singh, Radu
  Soricut, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan Welker, Paul
  Wohlhart, Jialin Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich.
  Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
  Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforce-
  ment learning. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
  Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3676–3713.
  PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/carta23a.
  html.
Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan
  Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al. A survey on evaluation of large language models. ACM
  Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 15(3):1–45, 2024.
Seth Cooper. A framework for scientific discovery through video games. Morgan & Claypool, 2014.

Marc-Alexandre Côté, Ákos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine,
 James Moore, Ruo Yu Tao, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada, Wendy
 Tay, and Adam Trischler. Textworld: A learning environment for text-based games. CoRR,
 abs/1806.11532, 2018.
Covariant  AI.        Rfm-1:     A    world  model  that  understands
  physics,     2024.         URL    https://covariant.ai/insights/
  rfm-1-a-world-model-that-understands-physics/.
Adrian de Wynter. Will gpt-4 run doom? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05468, 2024.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  and Zhifang Sui. A survey on in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then
  explore. Nature, 590:580–586, 02 2021a. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-03157-9.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Go-explore: a
  new approach for hard-exploration problems, 2021b.
Quentin Gallouédec and Emmanuel Dellandréa. Cell-free latent go-explore, 2023.
Kanishk Gandhi, Denise Lee, Gabriel Grand, Muxin Liu, Winson Cheng, Archit Sharma, and
  Noah D. Goodman. Stream of search (sos): Learning to search in language, 2024.
Shengran Hu and Jeff Clune. Thought Cloning: Learning to think while acting by imitating human
  thinking. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents, 2022.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning:
  A survey of learning methods. ACM Comput. Surv., 50(2), apr 2017. ISSN 0360-0300. doi:
  10.1145/3054912. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3054912.
Minqi Jiang, Tim Rocktäschel, and Edward Grefenstette. General intelligence requires rethinking
 exploration. Royal Society Open Science, 10(6):230539, 2023.
Martin Klissarov, Pierluca D’Oro, Shagun Sodhani, Roberta Raileanu, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Pascal
 Vincent, Amy Zhang, and Mikael Henaff. Motif: Intrinsic motivation from artificial intelligence
 feedback, 2023.
Akshay Krishnamurthy, Keegan Harris, Dylan J. Foster, Cyril Zhang, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Can
  large language models explore in-context?, 2024.
Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The nethack learning environment. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:7671–7684, 2020.
Pawel Ladosz, Lilian Weng, Minwoo Kim, and Hyondong Oh. Exploration in deep reinforcement
  learning: A survey. Information Fusion, 85:1–22, 2022.
Jon M. Laurent, Joseph D. Janizek, Michael Ruzo, Michaela M. Hinks, Michael J. Hammerling,
  Siddharth Narayanan, Manvitha Ponnapati, Andrew D. White, and Samuel G. Rodriques. Lab-
  bench: Measuring capabilities of language models for biology research, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2407.10362.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Ren Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Johan Ferret,
  Colton Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. RLAIF: Scaling reinforcement
  learning from human feedback with AI feedback, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=AAxIs3D2ZZ.
Lucas Lehnert, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, DiJia Su, Qinqing Zheng, Paul Mcvay, Michael Rabbat, and
  Yuandong Tian. Beyond a*: Better planning with transformers via search dynamics bootstrap-
  ping, 2024.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
  Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
  and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 9459–9474. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Paper.pdf.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui
  Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang.
  Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents, 2023.
Llama Team. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
  21783.
Cong Lu, Raluca Georgescu, and Johan Verwey. Go-explore complex 3-d game environments for
  automated reachability testing. IEEE Transactions on Games, 16(1):235–240, 2024. doi: 10.
  1109/TG.2022.3228401.
Andrea Madotto, Mahdi Namazifar, Joost Huizinga, Piero Molino, Adrien Ecoffet, Huaixiu Zheng,
  Alexandros Papangelis, Dian Yu, Chandra Khatri, and Gokhan Tur. Exploration based language
  learning for text-based games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08868, 2020.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction
  heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155.
Maria Abi Raad, Arun Ahuja, Catarina Barros, Frederic Besse, Andrew Bolt, Adrian Bolton,
 Bethanie Brownfield, Gavin Buttimore, Max Cant, Sarah Chakera, et al. Scaling instructable
 agents across many simulated worlds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10179, 2024.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
  Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.
  html.
Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA: A ques-
  tion answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
  and Short Papers), pp. 4149–4158, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1421. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  N19-1421.
Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models, 2024.
Marcel Torne Villasevil, Max Balsells I Pamies, Zihan Wang, Samedh Desai, Tao
 Chen, Pulkit Agrawal, and Abhishek Gupta.         Breadcrumbs to the goal: Goal-
 conditioned exploration from human-in-the-loop feedback.   In A. Oh, T. Neumann,
 A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
 formation Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 63222–63258. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
 file/c7c7cf10082e454b9662a686ce6f1b6f-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Trieu H Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V Le, He He, and Thang Luong. Solving olympiad geometry
  without human demonstrations. Nature, 625(7995):476–482, 2024.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models,
  2023.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):1–26, 2024.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models, 2023a.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=WE_vluYUL-X.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jenny Zhang, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeff Clune. OMNI: Open-endedness via mod-
  els of human notions of interestingness. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AgM3MzT99c.
Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving
  few-shot performance of language models. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  12697–12706. PMLR, 2021.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Sto-
  ica. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In A. Oh, T. Naumann,
  A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 46595–46623. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023a.
  URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  91f18a1287b398d378ef22505bf41832-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.
  pdf.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023b.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023a.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, Yu Qiao, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and Jifeng Dai. Ghost in the minecraft:
  Generally capable agents for open-world environments via large language models with text-based
  knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17144, 2023b.
Abdefihak M Zoubir and D Robert Iskandler. Bootstrap methods and applications. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 24(4):10–19, 2007.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL

TABLE OF C ONTENTS

A Algorithm Pseudocode                                                                           17

B Further Details on Environments                                                                17
   B.1 Game of 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
   B.2 BabyAI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18
   B.3 TextWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19

C Additional Experiments and Analysis                                                            21
   C.1 Archive Size Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
   C.2 Prompt Robustness Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22

D Further Prompt Discussion                                                                      22
   D.1 Extracting Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22
   D.2 Rejection-based Archive Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23
   D.3 Implementation of State-Conditional Action History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23
   D.4 Handling Hallucinations during Trajectory Creation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23

E Hyperparameters                                                                                24
   E.1 Cost of Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24

F More Related Work and Future Work                                                              25


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A LGORITHM P SEUDOCODE

We provide full pseudocode for I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE in Algorithm 1. This complements
the discussion in Section 3.

Algorithm 1 I NTELLIGENT G O -E XPLORE
 1: Hyperparameters: no. state expansions Nstate , no. exploratory actions Naction , foundation model M
 2: Initialize: archive of states Sarchive = ∅, state-conditional action history A(·) = ∅
 3: Sarchive ← Sarchive ∪ {s0 }                                                       ▷ Add initial state to archive
 4: for i = 1, . . . , Nstate do
 5:     Query M for the next state si,1 from Sarchive                                            ▷ See Section 3.1
 6:     for j = 1, . . . , Naction do
 7:          Query M for the next action ai,j from si,j conditional on A(si,j )                  ▷ See Section 3.2
 8:          si,j+1 ∼ P (si,j , ai,j ), A(si,j ) ← A(si,j ) ∪ {ai,j }             ▷ Take action and update history
 9:          if M determines that si,j+1 is interesting w.r.t. Sarchive then                     ▷ See Section 3.3
10:              Sarchive ← Sarchive ∪ {si,j+1 }
11:          end if
12:     end for
13: end for
14: Return best discovered trajectory



B     F URTHER D ETAILS ON E NVIRONMENTS

We provide further details for each of the environments used in the empirical evaluation in Section 4,
and the environment-specific descriptions appended to the system prompts. Each environment de-
scription may include high-level information about the task and a description of the action space.

B.1    G AME OF 24

We use the environment and set of evaluation tasks from https://github.com/
princeton-nlp/tree-of-thought-llm which is released under the MIT License. We
include the environment-specific prompt that is appended to the system prompt in Section 3 below.
The system prompt contains examples of correct reasoning paths on different problems (few-shot
prompting).
    Environment Description.
    You are given 4 numbers and must use basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to obtain 24. At each step,
    you are only allowed to choose two of the remaining numbers to obtain a new number. A correct answer
    is one that uses each input exactly once and no other numbers. Reaching 24 before the last step does
    not count as a correct answer. Follow the convention that division is integer division, and never by zero.
    Some examples of correct reasoning traces are as follows:
    Initial state: (4 4 6 8)
    Steps:
    4 + 8 = 12. Next: (4 6 12)
    6 - 4 = 2. Next: (2 12)
    2 * 12 = 24. Next: (24)
    Answer: (6 - 4) * (4 + 8) = 24
    Initial state: (2 9 10 12)
    Steps:
    12 * 2 = 24. Next: (9 10 24)
    10 - 9 = 1. Next: (1 24)
    24 * 1 = 24. Next: (24)
    Answer: (12 * 2) * (10 - 9) = 24
    Initial state: (4 9 10 13)
    Steps:
    13 - 10 = 3. Next: (3 4 9)
    9 - 3 = 6. Next: (4 6)
    4 * 6 = 24. Next: (24)



                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Answer: 4 * (9 - (13 - 10)) = 24


The action space at each step is all the valid arithmetic operations, presented in an analogous way as
the ‘propose’ step in Yao et al. (2023a).

B.2     BABYAI

The BabyAI (Carta et al., 2023) environment comes with five task types, which we list here and
visualize in order in Figure 5:

         • Go to <object>, a simple navigation task that requires reasoning abilities to choose the
           right plan given the object’s position;
         • Pick up <object>, a reasoning task that combines navigation tasks;
         • Pick up <object A> then go to <object B> and Go to <object B> after pickup <object
           A>, both serving to test reasoning abilities on temporal sequences;
         • Unlock <door>, a task that includes inferring that a key is needed to unlock the door,
           finding the right key (i.e., the one colored as the door), and eventually using the toggle
           action with the key on the door;
         • Put <object A> next to <object B>, which requires first reaching <object A>, picking it
           up, reaching <object B> and finally dropping <object A> next to <object B>.

                                                      pick up a yellow box, then                       put the red key next
      go to the yellow box   pick up the yellow box       go to a yellow box       open the red door     to a yellow box


Figure 5: We visualize the 5 types of tasks that BabyAI consists of for our evaluation in Section 4.2. IGE
receives only partial text-based observations corresponding to the view in the figure.

We use the codebase from https://github.com/flowersteam/Grounding_LLMs_
with_online_RL which is released under the MIT License. The action space is discrete and
composed of 6 possible actions: turn left, turn right, go forward, pick up, drop, and toggle. The
‘go to’ and ‘pick up’ tasks have a shorter environment horizon of H = 64, whereas the rest have a
horizon of H = 128. We include the environment-specific prompt that is appended to the system
prompt in Section 3 below.
   Environment Description (Text).
   You are an agent in an 8x8 partially-observable 2D text-based environment. You see the 6x6 grid in front
   of you, and can face north, south, east, or west. The possible actions are turn left, turn right, go forward,
   pick up, drop, and toggle. At each turn, you will receive a history of the last observations and actions.
   Your aim is to complete the task described in the goal. Each tile in the grid can only contain at most one
   object. Objects cannot be crossed, and may need to be bypassed or moved. You can only move onto
   an empty tile or on a tile containing an open door. You can only hold one object at a time, using pick
   up when they are one step in front. Objects are dropped one tile in front and cannot be dropped when
   there is another object in front. Doors are unlocked with keys of the same color using the toggle action.
   Actions are deterministic, do not repeat actions if they have no effect. You have H steps to complete the
   task.

   Environment Description (Visual).
   You are an agent in an 8x8 partially-observable 2D image-based environment. You see the 6x6 grid
   in front of you, and can face north, south, east, or west. The possible actions are turn left, turn right,
   go forward, pick up, drop, and toggle. At each turn, you will receive a history of the last observations



                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   and actions. The observations will be presented as a sequence of images. Your aim is to complete the
   task described in the goal. Each tile in the grid can only contain at most one object. Objects cannot
   be crossed, and may need to be bypassed or moved. You can only move onto an empty tile or on a tile
   containing an open door. You can only hold one object at a time, using pick up when they are one step in
   front. Objects are dropped one tile in front and cannot be dropped when there is another object in front.
   Doors are unlocked with keys of the same color using the toggle action. Actions are deterministic, do
   not repeat actions if they have no effect. You have H steps to complete the task.


B.3     T EXT W ORLD

We evaluate IGE on ‘Treasure Hunter’, ‘The Cooking Game’, and ‘Coin Collector’ from the
TextWorld (Côté et al., 2018) domain. We use the environment code from https://github.
com/microsoft/TextWorld which is released under the MIT License.

B.3.1    T REASURE H UNTER
For Treasure Hunter, we set the ‘level’ option to the maximum value of 30, resulting in a maze with
20 rooms. Locked doors and containers are added, which may need to be unlocked and opened to
find the target object. To further increase the difficulty, we remove the solution description from the
original game and filter out tasks that can be completed with 20 steps in the optimal solution. We
include the environment-specific prompt that is appended to the system prompt in Section 3 below.
   Environment Description for Treasure Hunter.
   You are an agent playing TextWorld, a text-based adventure game where you are in a randomly generated
   maze and must find a specific object. You need to explore different rooms to find the target object.
   Here are the available commands: look: describe the current room. goal: print the goal of this game
   inventory: print the player’s inventory go <dir>: move the player north, east, south, or west. You can
   only go in the direction indicated with an exit or a door. open ...: open a door or a container. You need to
   open a closed door before you want to go through it. drop ...: drop an object on the floor take ...: take an
   object that is visible. Make sure the object is visible to take. put ... on ...: place an object on a supporter
   take ... from ...: take an object from a container or a supporter insert ... into ...: place an object into a
   container unlock ... with ...: unlock a door or a container with a key. You need to unlock a locked door
   with a matched key in your inventory before you want to open it.
   - The target object might be located in a closed or locked container. - The adjective is useful for de-
   termining whether the key is matched with the lock (e.g., non-euclidean keycard is matched with non-
   euclidean safe). Make sure it is matched to unlock! - The key required to unlock the door may be in
   another room or locked inside a container. - Take the key whenever you can. - After unlocking a locked
   door or container, it will remain closed. You will then need to open it.
   You have 40 steps to complete the task. Restarting is forbidden.


B.3.2    T HE C OOKING G AME
In The Cooking Game, we set the number of ingredients to a maximum of 5 and the number of
rooms to 13. We enable all challenging additional options: doors need to be opened, food must be
processed (e.g., cut, diced, chopped with a knife), and cooked (e.g., grilled with a BBQ, fried on
a stove, roasted in an oven). We include the environment-specific prompt that is appended to the
system prompt in Section 3 below.
   Environment Description for The Cooking Game.
   You are an agent playing TextWorld, a text-based adventure game where you navigate through different
   rooms, interact with objects, and solve puzzles. Your goal is to first find the recipe, find and prepare
   food according to the recipe, and finally prepare and eat the meal.
   Here are the available commands: look: describe the current room goal: print the goal of this game
   inventory: print player’s inventory go <dir>: move the player north, east, south or west. You can only
   go to directions indicated with an exit or a door. examine ...: examine something more closely eat ...:
   eat edible food open ...: open a door or a container. You need to open a closed door before you can go
   through it. drop ...: drop an object onto the floor take ...: take an object that is visible put ... on ...: place
   an object on a supporter take ... from ...: take an object from a container or a supporter insert ... into ...:



                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   place an object into a container lock ... with ...: lock a door or a container with a key unlock ... with ...:
   unlock a door or a container with a key cook ... with ...: cook cookable food with something providing
   heat slice ... with ...: slice cuttable food with something sharp chop ... with ...: chop cuttable food
   with something sharp dice ... with ...: dice cuttable food with something sharp prepare meal: combine
   ingredients from inventory into a meal. You can only prepare meals in the Kitchen.
   - You can examine the cookbook to see the recipe when it is visible. - The BBQ is for grilling things,
   the stove is for frying things, the oven is for roasting things. Cooking ingredients in the wrong way
   will lead to a failure of the game. - Once you have got processed ingredients and the appropriate
   cooking tool ready, cook all of them according to the recipe. - There are two conditions to correctly
   cook something (grill/fry/roast): a) the ingredient you want to cook is in your inventory and b) there
   is a suitable cooking tool in the room, and then use ‘cook ... with ...’ command. - When you need
   to chop/slice/dice ingredients, you need to take the knife and the ingredient in your inventory and then
   ‘slice/chop/dice ... with knife’ - Make sure to first process the food (chop/slice/dice) before you try to
   cook them. - When you have all the ingredients (that got processed or cooked according to the menu),
   you can ‘prepare meal’ in the kitchen and then ‘eat meal’ to win the game. - The ingredients should
   EXACTLY match the color in the recipe, but if the recipe doesn’t specify color, any color would be
   fine. When you ‘take ... with ...’, use the EXACT name you see. - You don’t need to examine the
   container/supporter (e.g., toolbox) when it says something like ”there isn’t a thing on it”/”has nothing
   on it”
   You have 80 steps to complete the task. Restarting is forbidden.

We show a successful example trajectory found by IGE below, from our evaluation in Section 4.3.

   Example trajectory found by IGE in The Cooking Game.
   You are hungry! Let’s cook a delicious meal. Check the cookbook in the kitchen for the recipe. Once
   done, enjoy your meal!
   -= Backyard =- You find yourself in a backyard. A normal kind of place. You can see a patio table. But
   oh no! there’s nothing on this piece of garbage. This always happens! You make out a patio chair. But
   oh no! there’s nothing on this piece of trash. You can make out a BBQ, so there’s that. There is a closed
   barn door leading north. There is a closed sliding patio door leading west. There is an exit to the east.
   Don’t worry, there is no door.
   > open sliding patio door
   You open sliding patio door.
   > go west
   -= Kitchen =- You find yourself in a kitchen. An ordinary kind of place. The room is well lit. You can
   make out a fridge. You hear a noise behind you and spin around, but you can’t see anything other than
   an oven. Were you looking for a table? Because look over there, it’s a table. On the table you see a
   cookbook. You can’t wait to tell the folks at home about this! Look out! It’s a- oh, never mind, it’s
   just a counter. Now why would someone leave that there? You see a red apple, a raw purple potato, a
   red onion, a yellow apple and a knife on the counter. You can see a stove. You shudder, but continue
   examining the stove. Unfortunately, there isn’t a thing on it. Hm. Oh well There is an open sliding patio
   door leading east. There is a closed plain door leading north. You don’t like doors? Why not try going
   west, that entranceway is not blocked by one.
   > examine cookbook
   You open the copy of ”Cooking: A Modern Approach (3rd Ed.)” and start reading:
   Recipe #1 ——— Gather all following ingredients and follow the directions to prepare this tasty meal.
   Ingredients: block of cheese carrot orange bell pepper red apple tomato Directions: chop the block of
   cheese fry the block of cheese dice the carrot grill the carrot chop the orange bell pepper fry the orange
   bell pepper chop the red apple grill the red apple slice the tomato grill the tomato prepare meal
   > take red apple
   You take the red apple from the counter.
   Your score has just gone up by one point.
   > open fridge
   You open the fridge, revealing a block of cheese, a carrot, a white onion and a yellow bell pepper.
   > take block of cheese
   You take the block of cheese from the fridge.
   Your score has just gone up by one point.
   > take carrot
   You take the carrot from the fridge.
   Your score has just gone up by one point.
   > examine counter
   The counter is solid.



                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    On the counter are a raw purple potato, a red onion, a yellow apple and a knife.
    > go west
    -= Livingroom =- You arrive in a livingroom...
    ... (skip 30 steps)
    > cook tomato with BBQ
    You grilled the tomato.
    Your score has just gone up by one point.
    > go west
    -= Kitchen =- You find yourself in a kitchen...
    > prepare meal
    Adding the meal to your inventory.
    Your score has just gone up by one point.
    > eat meal
    You eat the meal. Not bad.
    Your score has just gone up by one point.
    *** The End ***
    You scored 17 out of a possible 17, in 44 turns.



B.3.3     C OIN C OLLECTOR

In Coin Collector, we set the number of rooms to 40 and allow distractor rooms to be added along
the way. Similar to Treasure Hunter, we remove the solution description from the original game,
and the optimal path from the agent’s starting point to the target is set to 20 steps. We include the
environment-specific prompt that is appended to the system prompt in Section 3 below.

    Environment Description for Coin Collector.
    You are an agent playing TextWorld, a text-based adventure game where you are in a randomly generated
    maze and must find the coin. You need to explore different rooms to find the target object.
    Here are the available commands: goal: print the goal of this game go <dir>: move the player north,
    east, south, or west. You can only go in the direction indicated with something like an exit or a door.
    take coin: win the game by ‘take coin’ if you see the coin in the room
    The only action you can do is ‘go <dir>’ to explore the maze and ‘take coin’ when you see the coin in
    the room.
    You have 25 steps to complete the task. Restarting is forbidden.



C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS

C.1     A RCHIVE S IZE A NALYSIS

We provide the detailed analysis of the impact of intelligent archive filtering on the size of the archive
across different environments. As shown in Table 4, intelligent filtering in IGE can drastically
reduce the size of the archive and help the algorithm focus on the most interesting states. Without
intelligent filtering in BabyAI-Text and TextWorld, the archive becomes over 5× larger.

Table 4: We show that intelligent filtering in IGE can drastically reduce the size of the archive, and help the
algorithm focus on the most interesting states. We use the same evaluation setting as Table 2 and show the
mean and 95% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                             Number of States
        Archive Filtering
                                     Game of 24              BabyAI (PN)               TextWorld (CG)
        No Filter                     18.5 ± 3.2              203.5 ± 56.7               22.4 ± 15.3
        With Filter                   15.6 ± 2.3               25.5 ± 5.2                 4.4 ± 2.8


These results highlight that, across all evaluated environments, intelligent archive filtering not only
enhances performance but also maintains a manageable archive size, which is crucial for scalability.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2     P ROMPT ROBUSTNESS E XPERIMENTS

We investigated the sensitivity of IGE to prompt variations to assess its robustness to prompt en-
gineering. Specifically, we conducted experiments where we removed any hints or domain-specific
instructions on how to solve the tasks, keeping the prompts purely factually descriptive about the
environment. For example, in:

        • Game of 24
             – We removed all few-shot prompting, so that the agent has no examples. I.e., all text
               from “Some examples of correct reasoning traces are as follows:”
        • BabyAI
             – We removed “do not repeat actions if they have no effect”
        • TextWorld (Cooking Game)
             – We removed “The ingredients should EXACTLY match the color in the recipe, but if
               the recipe doesn’t specify color, any color would be fine. When you ‘take ... with ...’,
               use the EXACT name you see.”
             – We removed “You don’t need to examine the container/supporter (e.g., toolbox) when
               it says something like “there isn’t a thing on it”/“has nothing on it” ”

We refer to these as domain-general prompts, as they contain only basic information about the
environment without any guidance on how to approach the tasks.
The evaluation settings remained identical to those in our main experiments (see Section 4), en-
suring a fair comparison. The results, shown in Table 5, indicate that even with minimal prompts,
IGE maintains a significant performance advantage over the baselines across all environments. For
instance, in the Game of 24, IGE achieves a success rate of 96% with domain-general prompts,
compared to 100% with the original prompts, and still significantly outperforms the baselines. Sim-
ilar trends are observed in the BabyAI “Put Next To” task and the TextWorld “Cooking Game”. The
performance drop of IGE when using domain-general prompts is modest compared to the baselines,
demonstrating that IGE is robust to prompt variations and does not rely heavily on domain-specific
prompt engineering.
These findings suggest that IGE can be applied effectively without extensive prompt tuning, mak-
ing it flexible and generalizable to new domains. The foundation model’s internalized notions of
interestingness and problem-solving abilities enable IGE to guide exploration even with minimal
guidance, highlighting its potential for widespread applicability.

Table 5: IGE Performance with Domain-General Prompts. We use the same evaluation setting as Table 2 and
show the mean and 95% bootstrap confidence interval for the success rate.
    Environment                Model                   Naı̈ve LLM     ReAct     Reflexion     IGE
                               Original (GPT-4)          70 ± 14      82 ± 12    83 ± 11    100 ± 0
    Game of 24
                               Domain-General Prompt     35 ± 13      71 ± 13    71 ± 13     96 ± 4
                               Original (GPT-4)          12 ± 12      48 ± 12      N/A      84 ± 8
    BabyAI “Put Next To”
                               Domain-General Prompt      8 ± 12      24 ± 12      N/A      68 ± 12
                               Original (GPT-4)          40 ± 16      56 ± 16    52 ± 16     92 ± 8
    TextWorld “Cooking Game”
                               Domain-General Prompt     44 ± 16      48 ± 16    48 ± 16    72 ± 16



D      F URTHER P ROMPT D ISCUSSION

D.1     E XTRACTING C HOICES

By default, in Section 4.1, we prompt the FM to return a JSON object containing just the numerical
index of the choice. We choose this because of the ease of parsing the response and validating it lies
within the correct bounds. An example prompt is displayed below.



                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   JSON Choice Prompt.
   Reply concisely and exactly with the following JSON format:
   {“choice”: X}
   where X is the index of the desired choice.

When using chain-of-thought as in Section 4.2, we use the following prompt:
   JSON Choice Prompt (Chain of Thought).
   First, briefly reason about your plan.
   Reply concisely and exactly with the following JSON format:
   {“thought”: X, “choice”: Y}
   where X is your reasoning and Y is the index of the desired choice. Make sure Y is a parsable integer.

For the TextWorld environment in Section 4.3, since the action space is much larger, we ask the FM
to directly output a text action that we automatically parse.
   Decision Making Prompt.
   Please briefly reason about your plan and then output the command in the format ‘> command’. Ensure
   only one command is included.

We use the regex “> (.*?)(?:—$)”˙    (in Perl notation) to parse the command. We note that the failure
rate for both of these options is very low, less than 0.1% across our evaluation. Despite this, we
include a failsafe that returns a random choice in case of an invalid output.

D.2   R EJECTION - BASED A RCHIVE F ILTERING

The ‘acceptance-based’ archive filter in Section 3.3 iterates through every new state and asks whether
each one is interestingly new and should be added to the archive. This approach can break down in
larger environments where it becomes necessary to explicitly deprecate earlier discoveries that have
become irrelevant, in order not to overload the archive (e.g., in Section 4.3). In this environment, we
use an alternate version of the prompt which first adds all states, and then asks the foundation model
to remove the uninteresting states. An example prompt is shown below.
   Rejection-based Archive Filtering Prompt.
   Current state archive:
   [State Archive]
   Remove outdated states that are no longer relevant to the task, have had all interesting explorations
   attempted, or have similar states in the archive that show more progress.


D.3   I MPLEMENTATION OF S TATE -C ONDITIONAL ACTION H ISTORY

The state-conditional action history in IGE stores the set of actions previously attempted from each
archived state. For each state in the archive, we maintain a list of actions that have been tried from
that state, which helps prevent the foundation model from repeating the same actions and encourages
exploration of new actions. This history is provided in the context when prompting the foundation
model for the next action. Since our state archive is kept at a manageable size (see Table 4), this
additional memory requirement is minimal.

D.4   H ANDLING H ALLUCINATIONS DURING T RAJECTORY C REATION .

Foundation models are known to sometimes produce hallucinations or invalid outputs. In IGE, the
foundation model does not create entire trajectories; instead, it is queried for state/action choices
from actual options, and the resulting states are saved into an archive, as in the original Go-Explore.
Therefore, IGE provides robust scaffolding for foundation model agents that explicitly prevent the
hallucination of impossible states. There is a concern that the LLM could pick impossible actions,
but we observe that malformed inputs only consist of less than 0.1% of total actions. As discussed


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in Appendix D, in these rare cases, we can simply take the simple choice of randomly sampling
an action from the environment. Further work could explore additional safeguards and validation
mechanisms to handle hallucinations more effectively.


E     H YPERPARAMETERS

In this section, we provide the hyperparameters for our empirical evaluation in Section 4. We list
the hyperparameters for IGE in Table 6. We choose the values for exploratory rollout length based
on the average number of steps needed to make ‘reasonable progress’ in the environment.

Table 6: IGE Sampling Parameters. TH, TCG, and CC are abbreviations for Treasure Hunter, The
Cooking Game, and Coin Collector in TextWorld.

                                                               Value(s)
          Hyperparameter
                                         Game of 24        BabyAI     TH          TCG        CC
       No. state expansions, Nstate          50              25           24       48        125
    No. exploratory actions, Naction          3              10            5        5         1

We list the sampling parameters for GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024) passed via the OpenAI API in Table 7.

                                Table 7: GPT-4 Sampling Parameters

                                                             Value
      Hyperparameter
                                   Game of 24                 BabyAI               TextWorld
         Temperature                    0.7                     0.7                    0.3
      Max new tokens                   1000                    1000                   1000
      Response format              JSON Object             JSON Object                Text
              Version            Turbo-2024-04-09          o-2024-05-13           o-2024-05-13

We used GPT-4-Turbo for Game of 24 and GPT-4o for BabyAI and TextWorld. This was purely
done to select the version of GPT-4 that was available and the cheapest at the time of running the
experiments. The version of GPT-4 is consistent per environment. We use a reduced temperature for
the TextWorld domain to reduce the possibility of generating malformed responses, as actions are
output in free-form natural language. In our ablations in Section 5, we use the ‘turbo-0125’ variant
of GPT-3.5.

E.1    C OST OF E XPERIMENTS

We provide the average cost per task for our algorithm per environment (the number of seeds is
specified in Section 4):

                  Table 8: Per task API cost for IGE using GPT-4 listed in USD.

                 Environment                                      API Cost (USD)
                    Game of 24                                          1.04
                       BabyAI                                           2.01
                     TextWorld                                          1.28

We note that the price per token of the ‘o-2024-05-13’ option is half that of ‘Turbo-2024-04-09’, so
we could expect to achieve the same level of results on the Game of 24 with half the price. The total
cost of API access required to perform the final experiments in this paper was under 2,000 USD.
During development, we iterated on IGE with a smaller number of seeds, which represents a small
fraction of this cost added on top.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    M ORE R ELATED W ORK AND F UTURE W ORK

FM-as-judge. We employ FM guidance at all stages of IGE to drive exploration. FMs as
judges (Zheng et al., 2023a; Bradley et al., 2023) have already seen use in decision-making tasks:
OMNI (Zhang et al., 2024) considers FM guidance in multi-task settings to select the most promis-
ing next task to train on. However, focusing on the broader task could miss out on interesting
behavior that happens at a more granular level, and thus IGE greatly expands on the integration of
FM intelligence into decision-making. RL from AI Feedback (Bai et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2024;
Klissarov et al., 2023) considers training RL agents using reward functions derived from FM prefer-
ences. This similarly guides agents towards preferred states but without the intelligence of FMs for
action selection.
Extension to Stochastic Environments. Our current experiments focus on deterministic environ-
ments to clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of IGE. However, IGE can be extended to stochastic
environments, similar to how the original Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021b) was extended. In the
2021 Go-Explore work, a robust goal-conditioned policy is trained via imitation learning on the tra-
jectories found during exploration, enabling generalization to stochasticity. In the context of IGE,
we can similarly collect successful trajectories and provide them in-context to the foundation model,
leveraging its ability to generalize and handle stochastic outcomes. By incorporating past trajecto-
ries into the FM’s context, IGE can learn to navigate stochastic transitions and maintain robust
exploration strategies. This represents an exciting direction for future research.
Relationship with Hierarchical Search and MCTS. The Go-Explore framework, and by exten-
sion IGE, shares similarities with hierarchical search and Best-First Search (BFS), as it prioritizes
exploration from the most promising states. However, IGE builds on this approach by leveraging
the foundation model’s intelligence to dynamically assess the interestingness and potential of states,
rather than relying on fixed heuristics. This allows IGE to adaptively explore the search space in
a more informed manner. In extremely hard combinatorial problems like chess and Go, integrating
an effective interestingness function is crucial. If we could train or obtain such a function, com-
bined with a solid value function similar to those used in Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), IGE
could potentially discover novel and interesting strategies. Exploring this integration with MCTS
and developing advanced interestingness functions through FMs are promising avenues for future
work.
Comparison to GFlowNets. GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2023) aim to sample compositional struc-
tures proportionally to a specified reward function, which differs from IGE’s goal of exploring
and discovering interesting states without predefined rewards. While both involve generating states
through sequential decisions, IGE focuses on leveraging the foundation model’s notions of inter-
estingness rather than sampling according to a reward distribution. Moreover, GFlowNets are not
directly intended for hard-exploration or sparse-reward problems. IGE should therefore be much
better in hard exploration tasks where there is little to no reward signal to guide search. We believe
a detailed comparison with GFlowNets is an interesting direction for future research.
Comparison with Exploration Methods in Games like Minecraft. Recent works in Minecraft,
such as Voyager (Wang et al., 2023) and Ghost in the Minecraft (Zhu et al., 2023b), have employed
agents that act in the environment via collections of high-level code or algorithmic policies tailored
to Minecraft. In contrast, IGE provides a generic method to operate in any state and action space,
given a minimal description of the environment, by leveraging the intelligence of foundation models
at test time. The code policies used in these Minecraft agents are indeed interesting and could
potentially be integrated into an IGE-like framework, representing a promising direction for future
research into more efficient exploration agents. By combining the strengths of both approaches, we
could enhance the exploration capabilities of agents in complex environments.
Potential Real-life Applications. IGE’s framework is very general, and we envision that it could be
extended to many real-life problems involving exploration in complex spaces. For example, in syn-
thetic biology, IGE could aid in discovering novel proteins or designing new drugs. In mathematics,
it could assist in exploring mathematical conjectures or finding novel proofs. Recent work has begun
to explore applications of LLM agents across science, such as in biology research (Laurent et al.,
2024) and solving olympiad-level math problems (Trinh et al., 2024). On the practical side, LLMs
have been adapted for various web-browsing and computer-based tasks (Liu et al., 2023) as useful
personal assistants, many of which require exploration across long horizons (e.g., building an app


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from scratch). By leveraging IGE, these agents could improve in planning and exploration in such
complex tasks.
Accelerating Open-endedness Research. Open-endedness is often formulated as an unsupervised
exploration problem, aiming to develop algorithms that can continually generate novel and diverse
behaviors or solutions without predefined objectives. IGE provides a general mechanism to explore
and discover a diverse set of interesting states or solutions in arbitrary environments, much like
human scientific exploration. By leveraging FMs’ internalized notions of interestingness, IGE can
identify and pursue novel directions that may not be specified explicitly. This capability could
accelerate research in open-endedness by providing a powerful tool for unsupervised exploration in
complex domains.
Robustness and Potential Biases. Foundation models are known to have biases stemming from
their training data, which could affect their performance and decision-making in certain environ-
ments. Although representation in pre-training is hard to measure even for open-weight models, we
have strong evidence that IGE’s success is relatively independent of the base LLM performance.
For instance, in our new results in Table 3, with Claude Sonnet 3.5 on Game of 24, the naive action
selection performance is low (24%), but IGE raises it significantly to 86%. The general question of
bias is significant; for example, if a foundation model was biased to think that nothing “purple” is
interesting, we wouldn’t explore states that are “purple”. We do not observe such issues in our cur-
rent evaluation (indeed, we would expect them to manifest less in games and RL/control problems
rather than human-centric problems), but this raises an interesting point tied to the wider literature
of reducing bias in foundation models in general. Future work could investigate methods to detect
and mitigate potential biases in IGE to ensure fair and unbiased exploration.
Potential for Fine-tuning or RL Training. Fine-tuning or additional RL training could potentially
enhance foundation models’ performance in specific tasks. In the context of IGE, one could en-
vision fine-tuning the foundation model on the trajectories discovered during exploration, further
improving its decision-making and ability to generalize. Our current approach shows that signifi-
cant gains can already be achieved without additional training, which is advantageous for efficiency.
Additionally, the trajectories discovered by IGE could be used to train traditional RL or imitation
learning algorithms, providing valuable data for further improvements. Exploring these possibilities
could lead to more powerful agents capable of solving even more complex tasks.
Investigating LLMs’ Notions of Interestingness. Understanding and formalizing the foundation
model’s notions of interestingness is an intriguing direction for future research. Similar to how
reward models are collected on human preferences and used to fine-tune LLMs (Ouyang et al.,
2022), we could consider extracting interestingness preferences and fine-tuning an LLM to select
more interesting states or actions. This could then lead to more efficient versions of IGE or even
improvements to FMs themselves. Developing methods to quantify and interpret the interestingness
judgments made by FMs could also enhance our understanding of their decision-making processes.
Alternate Action Selection Strategies. Random action selection and FM action selection repre-
sent two extremes in action selection strategies. Our framework is flexible, and we could consider
substituting the action selection policy in IGE with any RL policy. This would enable us to keep
the foundation model IGE scaffolding that prevents detachment and derailment and allow us to use
more computationally efficient options to roll out trajectories. For example, integrating exploration
strategies based on intrinsic motivation or curiosity-driven policies could enhance scalability. Ex-
ploring such combinations could provide a balance between performance and computational cost,
extending the applicability of IGE to larger and more complex environments.


                                                 26
