Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E(n) E QUIVARIANT T OPOLOGICAL N EURAL N ETWORKS

  Claudio Battiloro∗,1,† , Ege Karaismailoğlu∗,1,2 , Mauricio Tec∗,1 , George Dasoulas∗,1 ,
  Michelle Audirac1 , Francesca Dominici1
  1
    Harvard University, 2 ETH Zurich



                                              A BSTRACT
          Graph neural networks excel at modeling pairwise interactions, but they cannot
          flexibly accommodate higher-order interactions and features. Topological deep
          learning (TDL) has emerged recently as a promising tool for addressing this
          issue. TDL enables the principled modeling of arbitrary multi-way, hierarchical
          higher-order interactions by operating on combinatorial topological spaces, such as
          simplicial or cell complexes, instead of graphs. However, little is known about how
          to leverage geometric features such as positions and velocities for TDL. This paper
          introduces E(n)-Equivariant Topological Neural Networks (ETNNs), which are
          E(n)-equivariant message-passing networks operating on combinatorial complexes,
          formal objects unifying graphs, hypergraphs, simplicial, path, and cell complexes.
          ETNNs incorporate geometric node features while respecting rotation, reflection,
          and translation equivariance. Moreover, being TDL models, ETNNs are natively
          ready for settings with heterogeneous interactions. We provide a theoretical analysis
          to show the improved expressiveness of ETNNs over architectures for geometric
          graphs. We also show how E(n)-equivariant variants of TDL models can be directly
          derived from our framework. The broad applicability of ETNNs is demonstrated
          through two tasks of vastly different scales: i) molecular property prediction on
          the QM9 benchmark and ii) land-use regression for hyper-local estimation of air
          pollution with multi-resolution irregular geospatial data. The results indicate that
          ETNNs are an effective tool for learning from diverse types of richly structured data,
          as they match or surpass SotA equivariant TDL models with a significantly smaller
          computational burden, thus highlighting the benefits of a principled geometric
          inductive bias. Our implementation of ETNNs can be found here.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are employed across various fields, including computational chem-
istry (Gilmer et al., 2017a), physics simulations (Shlomi et al., 2020), and social networks (Xia et al.,
2021), to highlight a few. Their effectiveness stems from merging neural network adaptability with
insights about data relationships through the graph topology. Research on GNNs covers a broad
range of categories, mainly divided into spectral (Bruna et al., 2014) and non-spectral (Gori et al.,
2005). In both cases, GNNs aim to learn representations for node (and/or) edge attributes through
local aggregation driven by the graph topology, essentially defining message passing networks (MPN)
(Gilmer et al., 2017c). Utilizing this capability, GNNs have delivered significant achievements in
tasks like node and graph classification (Kipf & Welling, 2017), link prediction (Zhang & Chen,
2018), and specific challenges such as protein folding (Jumper et al., 2021).
However, GNNs usually struggle to model higher-order and multi-way interactions that the intrin-
sically pairwise structure of graphs cannot capture. Consequently, the field of Topological Deep
Learning (TDL) (Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020; Hajij et al., 2022b; Papamarkou et al., 2024) started
to gain significant interest as it seeks to address these limitations. Although the general scope of TDL
is designing models for data defined over a variety of topological spaces, the main focus is usually on
combinatorial topological spaces (CTS), i.e., topological spaces that can be described combinatorially,
such as cell complexes (Grady & Polimeni, 2010; Bodnar, 2023; Battiloro, 2024). Leveraging this
   ∗
     Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by a random number generator. † Corresponding author.
{cbattiloro,ekaraismailoglu,mauriciogtec,maudirac}@hsph.harvard.edu,
georgios_dasoulas@hms.harvard.edu


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Overview of the E(n)-Equivariant Topological Neural Networks framework. An input
geometric graph/point cloud with (possibly) non-geometric features is provided. A combinatorial
complex, whose elements are called cells, is constructed from the input geometric graph/point cloud to
encode higher-order hierarchical interactions, based on topological or domain-specific considerations.
If available, higher-order cell features can be injected. Geometric invariants for the cells (e.g. pairwise
distances, Hausdorff distances, volumes, ...) are computed. Finally, E(n) Equivariant Topological
Neural Networks update both geometric and non-geometric features to improve a downstream task
while respecting rotation, reflection, and translation equivariance.


combinatorial structure, it is possible to design more sophisticated adjacency schemes among cells,
i.e., single nodes or groups of nodes, than the usual adjacency in graphs. Message passing networks
over CTS have been proven to be more expressive (Bodnar et al., 2021b; Battiloro et al., 2023c;
Bodnar et al., 2021a; Truong & Chin, 2024; Jogl et al., 2023) (using the Weisfeiler-Lehman test
criterion (Xu et al., 2019)), more suitable to handle long-range interactions (Giusti et al., 2023b;a),
and more effective to handle heterophilic data settings (Bodnar et al., 2022; Hansen & Gebhart, 2020)
than classical GNNs. Cell complexes are powerful objects to model certain classes of higher-order
interactions along with a hierarchical structure among them, while general combinatorial objects like
hypergraphs are useful to model arbitrary higher-order interactions, but without any hierarchy. Hajij
et al. (2022b) introduced the notion of Combinatorial Complex (CC) to provide a formal, flexible,
yet simple structure that pseudo-generalizes simplicial/path/cell complexes and hypergraphs, thus
enabling the design of arbitrary higher-order interactions along with a hierarchical structure. They
also introduced message passing networks over combinatorial complexes.
Little is known about how to integrate and leverage geometric information of the data in such TDL
models. In this context, nodes are embedded in a manifold or, in general, in a metric space, and
have geometric features, such as positions or velocities. In the case of geometric graphs, a common
practice is designing message passing networks able to respect some suitable symmetry, i.e., being
equivariant w.r.t. the action of some symmetry group. Here we focus on E(n)-equivariant neural
networks, i.e., networks being equivariant w.r.t. rotations, reflections, and translations. The E(n)-
Equivariant Graph Neural Network (EGNN) from Satorras et al. (2021) is one of the simplest yet
powerful equivariant models for graph-structured data. Eijkelboom et al. (2023) generalized the
approach from Satorras et al. (2021) to simplicial complexes (a particular instance of cell complexes),
introducing E(n)-Equivariant Message Passing Simplicial Networks (EMPSNs), able to handle graph
or simplicial-structured data. However, as we will show in the paper, both graphs and simplicial
complexes are combinatorial objects often not flexible enough to model arbitrary higher-order
interactions, and a general framework for designing equivariant neural networks over CTS is missing.
Appendix B presents a review of related works.
Contribution. We generalize the approaches from Satorras et al. (2021) and Eijkelboom et al.
(2023) to design E(n)-Equivariant Topological Neural Networks (ETNNs), i.e., E(n)-Equivariant
Message Passing Networks over Combinatorial Complexes. CCs represent a pseudo-generalization
of graphs, simplicial complexes, path complexes, cell complexes, and hypergraphs, therefore ETNNs
represent a legitimate framework for designing arbitrary E(n)-Equivariant Message Passing Networks
over combinatorial topological spaces or, more in general, over combinatorial objects used to model
interactions among entities, such as hierarchical graphs. An ETNN layer is made of a message passing
round over the CC comprising scalar invariants of the geometric features and a learnable update
of the geometric features added up in the current directions. As such, ETNNs are a scalarization


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


method (Han et al., 2022; 2024). We study the improved expressiveness of ETNNs by evaluating
their ability to distinguish k-distinct geometric graphs (Joshi et al., 2023), showing that they are at
least as expressive as other well-known scalarization-based E(n) equivariant graph neural networks.
Furthermore, we empirically show that ETNNs are also able to distinguish most of the counterexample
structures from (Pozdnyakov et al., 2020; Joshi et al., 2023) that are indistinguishable using k-body
scalarization. Generalizing (Hajij et al., 2022b) to the geometric setting, we show how several E(n)-
equivariant variants of TDL models can be directly derived from our framework. As an additional
contribution, we test ETNNs in applications where domain knowledge induces combinatorial complex
structures that are more natural and parsimonious than the graphs or higher-order structures that
are usually employed to model the same phenomena. Specifically, we show the efficacy of ETNNs
on i) molecular properties prediction on the QM9 benchmark, and on ii) land-use regression for
hyper-local estimation of air pollution with multi-resolution irregular geospatial data, representing
also a completely new challenging benchmark for TDL models. Crucially, thanks to the flexible
and principled inductive bias induced by the underlying combinatorial complexes, ETNNs match
or surpass the results of EMPSNs with less than half of the memory usage and almost half of the
runtime per epoch. The obtained results jointly validate ETNNs, our CC-based approach, and, in
general, the injection of geometric information in TDL models.

2    C OMBINATORIAL C OMPLEXES AND E QUIVARIANCE
We review the fundamentals of combinatorial complexes (CCs), fairly general objects providing an
effective and flexible way to represent higher-order multi-way interactions. Such structures generalize
graphs, simplicial complexes, path complexes, cell complexes, and hypergraphs. We first define
our domain of interest -CCs-, the relations among its elements -neighborhood functions-, the data
defined on it -topological signals-, and a class of deep networks operating on it -CC message passing
networks (CCMPNs)-(Hajij et al., 2022b). We finally introduce the formal notion of equivariance,
showing some properties of CCMPNs.
Combinatorial Complex. A combinatorial complex (CC) is a triple (S, X , rk) consisting of a set S,
a subset X of P(S)\{∅}, and a function rk : X → Z≥0 with the following properties:

1. for all s ∈ S, {s} ∈ X ;
2. the function rk is order-preserving, i.e., if x, y ∈ X satisfy x ⊆ y, then rk(x) ≤ rk(y).

The elements of S and X are nodes and cells, respectively, and rk(·) is the rank function. X simplifies
notation for (S, X , rk). The rank function flexibly organizes the cells hierarchically. Therefore, CCs
can model both hierarchical (as in simplicial and cell complexes) and set-type (as in hypergraphs)
relations. For each singleton cell {s} in a CC, we set rk({s}) = 0, aligning CCs with simplicial
and cell complexes. The rank of a cell x ∈ X is k := rk(x), and we call it a k-cell. The dimension
dim(X ) of a CC is the maximal rank among its cells.
Neighbhorhood functions. Combinatorial Complexes can be equipped with a notion of neighborhood
among cells. In particular, we can define a “neighborhood" function N : X → P(X ) on X as a
function that assigns to each cell x in X a collection of “neighbor cells" N (x) ⊂ X . Usually, two
main types of neighborhood functions are considered (Hajij et al., 2022b): adjacencies, in which all
of the elements of N (x) have the same rank as x, and incidences, in which its elements are from a
higher or lower rank. A generally applicable choice for these functions is as follows. First, up/down
incidences NI,↑ and NI,↓ are defined by the containment criterion
NI,↑ (x) = {y ∈ X |rk(y) = rk(x) + 1, x ⊂ y},         NI,↓ (x) = {y ∈ X |rk(y) = rk(x) − 1, y ⊂ x}.
                                                                                                     (1)
Therefore, a k + 1-cell y is a neighbor of a k-cell x w.r.t. to NI,↑ if x is contained in y; analogously,
a k − 1-cell y is a neighbor of a k-cell x w.r.t. to NI,↓ if y is contained in x. The incidences induce
up/down adjacencies NA,↑ and NA,↓ by the common neighbor criterion
       NA,↑ (x) = {y ∈ X |rk(y) = rk(x), ∃z ∈ X : rk(z) = rk(x) − 1, z ⊂ y, and z ⊂ x},
       NA,↓ (x) = {y ∈ X |rk(y) = rk(x), ∃z ∈ X : rk(z) = rk(x) + 1, y ⊂ z, and x ⊂ z}.                (2)
Therefore, a k-cell y is a neighbor of a k-cell x w.r.t. to NA,↑ if they are both contained in a k + 1-cell
z; analogously, a k-cell y is a neighbor of a k-cell x w.r.t. to NA,↓ if they both contain a k − 1-cell z.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While this choice of neighborhood functions applies to any CC, other neighborhood functions are
more natural in specific applications. This scenario will be illustrated in Section 4.
Topological signals. A topological signal (or feature) over X is a mapping f : X → R from the set
of cells X to real numbers. Therefore, the feature vectors hx ∈ RF and hy ∈ RF of cells x and y
are a collection of F CC signals, i.e., hx = [f1 (x), . . . , fF (x)] and hy = [f1 (y), . . . , fF (y)].
Message passing networks over CCs. Let X and CN be a CC and collection , i.e., a set, of
neighborhood functions on it. The l-th layer of a CC Message Passing Network (CCMPN) updates
the embedding hlx of cell x as
                                                                         
                                         O M
                       hl+1  = β hlx ,              ψN ,rk(x) hlx , hly  ,

                         x                                                               (3)
                                          N ∈CN y∈N (x)

        h0x := hx are the initial features,
                                              L
where N                                          is an intra-neighborhood permutation invariant aggre-
gator,     is an inter-neighborhood (possibly) permutation invariant aggregator, and the rank- and
neighborhood-dependent message functions ψN ,rk(x) and the update function β are learnable func-
tions. In other words, the embedding of a cell is updated in a learnable fashion through aggregated
messages with its neighboring cells over a set of neighborhoods, generalizing what has been done
with Graph MPN (Gilmer et al., 2017c). Interestingly. the message functions can be customized to
incorporate additional information, such as the orientation of the cells (Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020;
Sardellitti et al., 2021) (if available), or the embeddings of "common" cells (if present) like x ∪ y
or x ∩ y. Finally, please notice that CCMPN as in (3) are inherently able to model heterogeneous
settings, as two cells can be neighbors in multiple neighborhoods, but messages among them will
be dependent on the neighborhood itself. Thus, this property allows us to model different relation
types through different (overlapping) neighborhoods. In Appendix C, we show how to model graphs,
simplicial complexes, cell complexes, and hypergraphs through the CC framework, deriving the
corresponding message passing architectures from the CCMPN in (3).
Equivariances of CCMPNs. Symmetries are framed as groups (Bronstein et al., 2021). Let G be
a group with an action a : G × Y → Y on a set Y. Given a function e : Y → Y, it is said to be
equivariant w.r.t. the action of G if, for all x ∈ X and g ∈ G, it holds
                                       e(a(g, x)) = a(g, e(x)).                                      (4)
If e(a(g, x)) = e(x), e is said to be invariant w.r.t. the action of G. As Graph MPNs (Gilmer et al.,
2017c), CCMPNs are permutation equivariant too (Hajij et al., 2022b), i.e., they are equivariant w.r.t.
the action of the symmetric group Sym(X ) on X . In other words, CCMPNs are equivariant to the
relabeling of cells in the complex.

3    E( N ) E QUIVARIANT T OPOLOGICAL N EURAL N ETWORKS
Let us now introduce the setting in which nodes (0-cells) are embedded in some Euclidean space,
i.e., they come with both non-geometric and geometric features, such as positions or velocities. In
the following, we assume to have only positions for the sake of exposition, but velocities can be
directly injected into our model as explained in Appendix D. We denote the non-geometric features
with hx ∈ RF for cell x ∈ X and the position with xz ∈ Rn for cell z ∈ S. Since many problems
exhibit n-dimensional rotation, reflection, and translation symmetries, it is desirable to design models
that are equivariant w.r.t. the action of E(n) (Satorras et al., 2021; Eijkelboom et al., 2023; Han
et al., 2022). An element of the E(n) group is a tuple (O, b) consisting of an orthogonal matrix
O ∈ Rn×n (the rotation/reflection) and a vector b ∈ Rn (the translation). The action a of E(n) on a
vector x ∈ Rn is given by
                                       a((O, b), x) = Ox + b.                                        (5)
As has been done for graphs (Satorras et al., 2021) and simplicial complexes (Eijkelboom et al., 2023),
we represent equivariance by scalarization (Han et al., 2024). Therefore, geometric features undergo
an initial transformation into invariant scalars. Subsequently, they are processed in a learnable way
(e.g., MLPs) before being combined along the original directions to achieve equivariance.
E(n) Equivariant Topological Neural Networks. Let X and CN be a CC and collection of
neighborhood functions on it. The l-th layer of an E(n) Equivariant Topological Neural Network


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(ETNN) updates the embeddings hlx of every cell x ∈ X and the position xlz of every node z ∈ S as
                                                                          
          l O             M
  hl+1                           ψN ,rk(x) hlx , hly , Inv {xlz }z∈x , {xlz }z∈y 
                                                                                  
   x   =β
         hx ,                                                                      , for all x ∈ X (6)
                   N ∈CN y∈N (x)
                                 |                       {z                      }
                                                             mN
                                                              x,y
                    X         X
  xl+1 = xlz + C                         xlz − xt ξ mN
                                                   l

   z                                                 z,t , for all z ∈ S,                          (7)
                   N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)

where h0x = hx , x0z = xz , and ξ is a scalar learnable function. Inv takes as input the positions of
the nodes forming the involved cells, and it is an invariant function w.r.t. the action of E(n), i.e.,
Inv({Oxlz + b}z∈x , {Oxlz + b}z∈y ) = Inv({xlz }z∈x , {xlz }z∈y ). We refer to a specific Inv as a
geometric invariant. The update in (7) again naturally allows for neighborhood heterogeneities: two
nodes can be neighbors via more than a single neighborhood function, carrying different messages.
This is common in many applications, as illustrated in Section 4.
The following theorem demonstrates the equivariance property of ETNNs.
                                                                    l+1        l+1
         l        l
                          as in (6)-(7), synthetically denoted as {hx }x∈X , {xz }z∈S =
Theorem 1 . An ETNN layer
ETNN {hx }x∈X , {xz }z∈x , is E(n) equivariant, that is

            {hl+1           l+1
                                + b}z∈x = ETNN {hlx }x∈X , {Oxlz + b}z∈x ,

              x }x∈X , {Oxz                                                          (8)
for all (O, b) ∈ E(n).

Proof. See Appendix E.

When only (6) is applied but the update step in (7) is not performed, then ETNNs are E(n)-invariant.
At this point, it is important to discuss geometric invariants. As has been shown in (Satorras et al.,
2021; Eijkelboom et al., 2023), geometric invariants should make use of the underlying topological
structure. For instance, the pairwise distance of connected nodes has been used in EGNN (Satorras
et al., 2021), while the simplex volume has been used in EMPSN (Eijkelboom et al., 2023). However,
both EGNN and EMPSN operate on rigid domains, such as simplicial complexes, while CCs can have
a much more arbitrary set of relations. In the following, we present a series of geometric invariants
that can be used in ETNNs, without assuming any specific structure for the CC. We consider two
cells x and y, along their corresponding node positions {xz }z∈x and {xz }z∈y .
Permutation invariant functions of pairwise distances. Any function of the form
                                     M
                                           τ (∥xz − xt ∥)                                          (9)
                                         z∈x,t∈y
                               L
                                    P a permutation invariant aggregator, and τ a (possibly) learnable
is a geometric invariant, with L being
function. A basic instance is    =     and τ = Id, i.e., the sum of pairwise distances.
Distances of permutation invariant functions. Any function of the form
                                                         !
                                       M        M
                                  τ        xz −     xt                                            (10)
                                            z∈x              t∈y
                               L
is a geometric invariant, with    beingLa linear permutation invariant aggregator, and τ a (possibly)
                                               1
                                                  P
learnable function. A basic instance is     = |·|   and τ = Id, i.e., the distance between centroids.
Hausdorff distance. The Hausdorff distance, defined as

                      max max min ∥xz − xt ∥, max min ∥xt − xz ∥                                  (11)
                                z∈x t∈y                      t∈y z∈x

is a geometric invariant. The Hausdorff distance measures the mutual proximity of two sets whose
elements live in a metric space. It does so by computing the maximal distance between any point
of one set to the other set. Moreover, the two max min terms inside the outer max, usually referred
to as directed Hausdorff distances, can be used as geometric invariants themselves. This geometric


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


invariant has been used in various machine learning applications, especially in the area of computer
vision (Aydin et al., 2021; van Kreveld et al., 2022).
Volume of the convex hull. Any function of the volumes of the convex hulls of {xz }z∈x and
{xz }z∈y is a geometric invariant. Computing the volume of a convex hull is quite an expensive
procedure, thus it is not always suitable to be performed at each training step. However, it can still be
used if the cells have small cardinality, or if ETNNs are used in an invariant fashion, i.e., without
the update in (7), because the volume needs to be computed only once before training. Finally, the
volume of convex hulls reduces to the volume of simplices in case the considered CC is a (geometric)
simplicial complex, generalizing what has been done in (Eijkelboom et al., 2023).
Remark 1 . It is noteworthy that if higher rank cells, not only nodes, come with attached geometric
features, they can be seamlessly integrated into ETNNs. In that case, there would be geometric
invariants of node geometric features, geometric invariants of higher-rank geometric features, and,
possibly, geometric invariants of both nodes and higher rank cells. The equivariant update in (7)
would be straightforwardly modified to include all the cells with geometric features in the sum.
Expressiveness of ETNN. The expressive power of neural networks over CTS is proportional to their
ability to distinguish non-isomorphic CTSs. As the renowned Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test for GNNs
(Xu et al., 2019), several generalized WL tests have been developed for CTSs (e.g. simplicial (Bodnar
et al., 2021b), cell (Bodnar et al., 2021a), or path (Truong & Chin, 2024) complexes) and have been
shown to be upper bounds on the expressiveness of the corresponding TDL models. These tools also
demonstrated that TDL models are usually more expressive than vanilla GNNs when it comes to
distinguishing isomorphic graphs. For geometric graphs, the Geometric-WL (GWL) test (Joshi et al.,
2023) has been recently introduced as an upper bound on the expressiveness of invariant/equivariant
geometric GNNs. In Appendix F, we introduce the notion of Geometric Augmented Hasse Graph and
we combine it with the GWL to show that ETNNs are, in general, more expressive than scalarization-
based graph methods. We also perform experiments to validate our claim, including testing ETNN on
the counterexample structures from (Pozdnyakov et al., 2020; Joshi et al., 2023). Next, we present
the statements of our results. Proofs are in Appendix F.
Proposition 2 . (Informal) An ETNN is at least as powerful as an EGNN (Satorras et al., 2021) in
distinguishing k-hop distinct graphs. In most of the cases, an ETNN is strictly more powerful than an
EGNN. The quantitative gap between ETNNs and EGNNs depends on how the graphs are lifted into
a CC, i.e., how the set of cells X and the collection of neighborhood functions CN are defined.
Proposition 3 . There exist a pair of CCs whose nodes come with geometric features, and a collection
of neighborhoods such that the CCs are undistinguishable by ETNN.
Proofs . See Appendix F.
Computational complexity of ETNN. In Appendix G, we present an analysis of the computational
complexity and runtime of ETNNs. In particular, we show that, if the connectivity of the CC is
sufficiently sparse, which is usually the case, then the overall complexity is linear in the number of
cells. In the worst case, all the cells all connected among them, resulting in a quadratic cost in the
number of cells. In the same Appendix G, we also empirically validate these results by comparing
the runtimes of ETNN with EGNN (Satorras et al., 2021) and EMPSN (Eijkelboom et al., 2023).
4       R EAL -W ORLD C OMBINATORIAL C OMPLEXES
Designing equivariant models for CCs tailored for specific applications is an exciting direction since
CCs can accommodate hierarchical higher-order features that the literature’s most used CTSs cannot
readily incorporate, including graphs, simplicial complexes, path complexes, cell complexes, and
hypergraphs1 . This section presents two vastly different applications. The first application considers
molecular data. While this data has been investigated under the lens of CTS, our approach allows us to
naturally integrate their higher-order structures such as rings and functional groups. Next, we present
a novel TDL framework for geospatial data. We show that the interactions between geographical
objects in geospatial data such as polylines and polygons can be modeled via CCs. In the next section,
we will use instances of these CCs in experiments evaluating the ETNN architecture.
Molecular combinatorial complexes. We introduce the notion of Molecular Combinatorial Com-
plexes, showing that they can jointly retain all the properties of graphs, cell complexes, and hyper-
    1
        Appendix C provides an overview of the aforementioned CTSs.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Real-World Combinatorial Complexes. (Left): A molecular CC where 0-cells are atoms,
1-cells are bonds, and 2-cell represent rings and functional groups. (Right): A geospatial CC where
0-cells are grid points, 1-cells are road polylines, and 2-cells are census tract polygons. For visibility,
the geospatial CC only shows one road (rank 1) and its incident lower and higher rank cells.


graphs, summarized in Appendix H, thus overcoming their mutual limitations. In a molecular CC,
the set of nodes S is the set of atoms, while the set of cells X and the rank function rk are such
that: atoms are 0-cells, bonds and functional groups made of two atoms are 1-cells, and rings and
functional groups made of more than two atoms are 2-cells (see Figure 2).
Geospatial combinatorial complexes. Geospatial CCs (GCCs) are CCs in which all cells are
subsets of a geospatial domain. For example, cells of a GCC can consist of polygons, polylines
(sequences of connected lines), and points2 , all which are elementary geometric objects used in
geospatial information systems (Ayers, 1992). Fig. 2. illustrates this scenario, where 0-cells are
points where air quality monitoring units are located (e.g., in a city), 1-cells are traffic roads as
polylines, and 2-cells are census tracts represented as polygons, geographic areas with homogeneous
demographic characteristics. Formally, GCCs are characterized by a spatial representation and a
spatially-determined neighborhood system. Let T ⊂ Rn represent a geospatial domain. A spatial
representation is an embedding s : X → P(T ) mapping each cell x to a subset s(x) ⊂ T . Although
any neighborhoood system can be used with GCCs (such as up/down incidences), it is more natural
to construct the neighborhood system of a GCC from the spatial representation s(x), namely:
                        NA (x) = {y ∈ X | rk(y) = rk(x), s(x) ∩ s(y) ̸= ∅}
                        NI,↑ (x) = {y ∈ X | rk(y) = rk(x) + 1, s(x) ∩ s(y) ̸= ∅}
                        NI,↓ (x) = {y ∈ X | rk(y) = rk(x) − 1, s(x) ∩ s(y) ̸= ∅}.                     (12)
For instance, NA (x) can represent adjacencies between geographic spaces that share a portion
or a boundary, while the up and down incidences NI,↑ (x) and NI,↓ (x) can capture the notion of
road crossing a county, or two geographic areas of different rank overlapping. Evidently, more
than one neighborhood function can be used or combined with the standard choices in (1) -(2)
according to the application. It is not always necessary to use points and polylines. One can
also consider geographic divisions (polygons) with multiple resolution levels, each mapping to a
different rank. For example, in the United States, census tracts are smaller than zip codes, which
are smaller than counties, and so on. A census tract can intersect multiple zip codes, and zip codes
can belong to multiple counties, partitioning space irregularly. As an example, Fig. 2 portrays a
road polyline traversing multiple census tract polygons. Unlike classical multi-resolution spatial
modeling (Kolaczyk & Huang, 2001; Hengl et al., 2021), we don’t require regular structures such
as grids or nested partitions. More importantly, we allow each resolution to have unique features.
This point illustrates a crucial difference and advantage over graph modeling, which requires all
data to be pre-aggregated at the same rank (typically the 0-cells), see Appendix H. This work is
the first to explore combinatorial topological modeling of multi-resolution irregular geospatial data,
which are the backbone of geographic information systems. The dataset and hyper-local air pollution
   2
       Represented as singleton sets.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


downscaling task that we will present in the next section will not only propose a novel technique for
learning from irregular multi-resolution geospatial data, but can be used as a benchmark for TDL.
5    E XPERIMENTS
Molecular property prediction. We evaluate our model on molecular property prediction using the
QM9 dataset (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014), a comprehensive collection of quantum chemical calcula-
tions for small organic molecules. It includes geometric, energetic, electronic, and thermodynamic
properties for 134k stable molecules with up to nine heavy atoms (C, O, N, F). See Appendix I.1.1
for a summary.
We consider several different variants of ETNNs (see Appendix J), but the most general molecular
combinatorial complexes (CCs) that we design is the one as in Fig. 2. It employs three ranks to
capture different levels of molecular interactions: i) atoms as 0-cells, ii) bonds, i.e., pairs of atoms, as
1-cells, and iii) rings and functional groups of size greater than two, i.e., at least triplets of atoms,
as 2-cells. Similar to methodologies for global connections (e.g. EGNN(Satorras et al., 2021) and
VN-EGNN (Sestak et al., 2024)), we generalize the notion of virtual node by incorporating a single
cell, that we refer to as virtual cell, containing the whole set of 0-cells (the atoms), and having
maximum rank, e.g. in the most general case it would have rank 3. As neighborhood functions, we
employed the up/down adjacencies and incidences from (1)-(2), and a "max" adjacency defined as
    NA,max (x) = {y ∈ X |rk(y) = rk(x), ∃z ∈ X : rk(z) = max rk(z), x ⊂ z, and y ⊂ z}                  (13)
                                                                     z∈X

The virtual cell together with the max adjacency in (13) acts as a hub across all cells of the same
rank, connecting each pair, following a common practice (Satorras et al., 2021; Eijkelboom et al.,
2023). However, the max adjacency is an object of independent interest, even when the virtual cell
is not in the complex. In that case, it would allow cells of lower ranks to communicate based on
the highest order cells they are part of, e.g. atoms belonging to the same ring or functional group.
In this setting, it is clear how ETNN naturally handles heterogeneity, e.g., the same pair of bonds
could be connected because part of the same functional group (up adjacency) and the virtual cell
(max adjacency), but the two messages will be different across the neighborhoods. Similarly, ETNN
allows us to equip each rank with unique features without any ad-hoc aggregations at the atom or
bond levels. We consider four distinct types of non-geometric feature vectors: atom features, bond
features, ring features, and functional group features. We provide a full list of the non-geometric
feature vectors we used in Appendix I.1.2. As geometric features, we use the atoms’ positions. The
complete list of the model parameters is in Appendix I.1.3. A description of all the configurations
and a detailed reproducibility discussion is found in Appendix J. In all the experiments, following
(Satorras et al., 2021; Eijkelboom et al., 2023), we use the invariant version of ETNN.
In Table 1, we present the results for the first 6 molecular properties, from which it is clear that
ETNN significantly outperforms EGNN (Satorras et al., 2021). Details and full results for all
the properties are described in Appendix J. ETNN generally improves the prediction performance
of EGNN, with notable improvements on α and µ, achieving state-of-the-art performance for µ
despite being a general framework not tailored for chemical tasks. To ensure further fairness in
the comparison, the table shows the results of a 1.5M EGNN obtained through our framework and
codebase (EGNN-graph-W), as explained in Appendix J. Comparing this with the original EGNN,
we observe performance improvements. Finally, the low prediction performance of ETNN-w/o VC
(ETNN without the virtual cell) highlights the significant impact of the virtual cell. The reproduced
EMPSN* (Eijkelboom et al., 2023) is obtained by running ETNN on a combinatorial complex being
the same exact Vietoris-Rips simplicial complex of the original paper, similarly using the up/down
adjacencies and incidences plus the max adjacency, and with architectural hyperparameters as similar
as possible to the original architecture. See Appendix J for a detailed discussion. As the reader can
see, ETNN generally matches or outperform the reproduced EMPSNs. However, ETNN employs
almost two orders of magnitude less cells. In particular, the original VR complex of dimension 2 used
in EMPSN has 555.25 cells per molecule on average (18 nodes, 157.9 edges, 379.36 triangles) and it
is also expensive to compute in the preprocessing step, while our molecular CC (in the worst case)
has 39.8 cells per molecule on average (18 nodes, 19 edges, 1.8 rings, and 1.3 functional groups) and
it requires slightly more than a lookup table to be computed. As a consequence, ETNNs have half
of the memory usage and almost half of the runtime per epoch w.r.t. EMPSNs, as we describe in
Appendix G. This fact ultimately showcases the effectiveness of the principled inductive bias given
by the molecular CC.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Mean Absolute Error for the molecular property prediction benchmark in QM9 dataset.
ETNN-* corresponds to the configurations, among the ones we tested, that produced the best results
for each property. ETNN-single-* corresponds to the configuration, among the ones we tested,
that produced the average best results across properties. ETNN-graph-W and EMPSN* are EGNN
(Satorras et al., 2021) and EMPSN (Eijkelboom et al., 2023) derived as instances of ETNNs through
our codebase. All the models except ETNN-w/o VC use the virtual cell. We report the improvement
of ETNN-* over the original EGNN. TopNet† is the best performing variant of TopNets (Verma et al.,
2024). The other baselines are from (Satorras et al., 2021). Details and full results in Appendix J.

       Task                             α       ∆ε        εHOMO     εLUMO        µ           Cν
       Units (↓)                      bohr3     meV        meV       meV         D       cal/mol K
       NMP                             .092      69        43         38        .030        .040
       Schnet                          .235      63        41         34        .033        .033
       Cormorant                       .085      61        34         38        .038        .026
       L1Net                           .088      68        46         35        .043        .031
       LieConv                         .084      49        30         25        .032        .038
       DimeNet++                       .044      33        25         20        .030        .023
       TFN                             .223      58        40         38        .064        .101
       SE(3)-Tr.                       .142      53        35         33        .051        .054
       Equiformer (SotA)               .046      30        15         14        .011        .023
       TopNet†                         .083      47        37         24        .035        .032
       EGNN                            .071      48        29         25        .029        .031
       ETNN-*                          .062      45         26        22        .022        .030
       ETNN-graph-W                    .067      46         27        25        .030        .036
       ETNN-w/o VC                     .161      73         49        48        .306        .051
       EMPSN*                          .061      42         29        25        .030        .028
       ETNN-single-*                   .069      46         26        23        .025        .033
       Improvement over EGNN          -13%      -6%       -10%      -12%       -26%         -3%


Hyperlocal air pollution downscaling. Next, we introduce a novel benchmark for TDL based on
the geospatial framework introduced in Section 4. We first provide a data an overview of the data and
tasks for completeness.
The task consists of predicting PM2.5 Table 2: Results for the air pollution downscaling task. AEV
air pollution at a high resolution of is the average R2 (explained variance) over 30 seeds, DEV
0.0002◦ ≈ 22m. The prediction is the difference in R2 , and MSE the Mean Squared Error.
targets of PM2.5 measurements are
obtained from a publicly available                    Baseline AEV(R2 ) Std. Err (R2 ) MSE
dataset (Wang et al., 2023) consist-                  Linear        0.51%         0.95%        1.106
ing of measurements by mobile air                     MLP           2.35%         1.61%        1.022
                                                      GNN           2.44%         0.99%        0.987
sensors installed on cars, correspond-                EGNN          1.43%          1.2%        1.041
ing to the last quarter of 2021 in the
Bronx, NY, USA. The targets are ag-                   ETNN          9.34%         2.05%        0.935
gregated at the desired spatial resolu-                       (a) Baseline model comparison
tion. The resulting Geospatial CC con-         Baseline                  DEV (R2 ) Std. Err (R2 ) MSE
sists of 3,946 point measurement units         no virtual node            -1.80%          2.32%      0.957
(0-cells), 550 roads (1-cells), and 151        no position update:
                                                                          -1.37%          2.52%      0.956
census tracts (2-cell). Fig. 3 provides         invariant ETNN
an overview of the features for each           no geometric  features:
                                                                          -1.08%          2.05%      0.946
                                                CCMPN
rank, including demographics, land-
                                                                 (b) Ablation study results
use information, daily traffic rates and
traffic composition per road, and distance to schools and other points of interest. The most important
predictor for the downscaling task is the coarse-level annual PM 2.5 from the previous year (Di et al.,
2019), available at a coarser 1 km resolution which is projected to the roughly equivalent census-tract
area level. In total, we include 5 point-level features, 2 road-level features, and 17 tract-level features.
The full list of features and their data sources is in Appendix I.2.2. All the pre-processing code is
included in our code repository.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Overview of features used in the air pollution downscaling benchmark. The task is to
predict the local PM2.5 measured at the 0-cells, which have an approximate resolution of 22 × 22
meters. As such, this is a node regression task.

We create a geospatial CC using the neighborhood functions described by Eq. (12). For the geometric
features, we use the coordinates of the 0-cells with Mercator projection. This projection has the
key property that Euclidean distance in coordinate space approximates geodesic distance in meters.
As such, E(n)-equivariance is implicitly essential to the purpose of the Mercator projection. The
exact coordinate values are irrelevant: What is most important for our application is its usefulness in
expressing geodesic distances. By using these geometric features in GCCs, we allow the model to
use the coordinates but only modulo Euclidean transformations, which is the original intention of the
Mercator projection. In other words, the model can still capture location-specific effects in node-level
tasks without using the coordinates directly, which would lead to poor inductive biases.
Since only CCs can support multi-level features, we create point-level features for other baselines
(MLP, GNN, and EGNN) by concatenating the features of each point with the features of the 1-cell
and 2-cell that the point belongs to. For the base ETNN, we again employ a virtual cell as defined
in the previous paragraph. Since the task is at the node level, the base implementation uses the
equivariant update from 1. We will perform ablation experiments over these defaults. Appendix I.2.3
presents in detail the hyper-parameter and architecture configurations used for the experiments
The experiment results are shown in√Table 2a. The results are averaged over 30 seeds. Standard errors
are computed with the formula σ/ n, which is recommended when having at least sample size 30.
The table indicates that ETNN outperforms EGNN, GNN, and MLP, emphasizing the benefits of
multi-level modeling combined with E(n) equivariance. We additionally conduct ablations studies
on ETNN, presented in Table 2 (b). The results show that, as expected, not including geometric
features decreases performance. Perhaps surprisingly, the ablation of ETNN using only the geospatial
CC structure without geometric features (invariants) performed slightly better than using the features
but not using the position update in (7), i.e., using the invariant version of ETNN. Nonetheless, the
largest decrease came from not using the virtual cell.


6    C ONCLUSION

We introduced E(n) Equivariant Topological Neural Networks (ETNNs), a framework for designing
scalarization-based equivariant message passing networks on combinatorial complexes. Combinato-
rial complexes flexibly represent arbitrary hierarchical higher-order interactions, thus ETNNs are
a legitimate proxy for designing equivariant models on a wide class of combinatorial topological
spaces, such as simplicial or cell complexes, or, more in general, over combinatorial objects used to
model interactions among entities, such as hierarchical graphs. We showed that ETNNs are at least
as expressive as existing scalarization-based equivariant architectures for geometric graphs. Experi-
ments on the QM9 molecular benchmark demonstrated ETNNs’ effectiveness for richly structured
molecular data. Moreover, we introduced a novel geographic regression task, highlighting ETNNs’
ability and showing for the first time how combinatorial complexes can be used to model irregular
multi-resolution geospatial data. We discuss the limitations and future directions in Appendix A.
ETNNs represent, overall, a unifying framework showcasing the benefits of a principled synergy
between combinatorial and geometric equivariances over beyond-graph domains. We believe that our
methodological contribution, together with the easy-to-use and solid codebase we provide, can mark
a step in boosting and standardizing research for scalarization-based equivariant TDL.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We include all the details about our experimental setting, e.g. the choice of hyperparam-
eters and the specifications of our machine, in Appendix I. The code, data splits, and
virtual environment needed to replicate the experiments and easily use the ETNN frame-
work are provided at the following repository: https://github.com/NSAPH-Projects/
topological-equivariant-networks. An in-depth discussion about the reproducibility
of the molecular property prediction task is in Appendix J.

B IBLIOGRAPHY
Mathieu Alain, So Takao, Brooks Paige, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. Gaussian processes on cellular
 complexes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01198, 2023.
Brandon Anderson, Truong-Son Hy, and Risi Kondor. Cormorant: covariant molecular neural
  networks. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
Orhun Utku Aydin, Abdel Aziz Taha, Adam Hilbert, Ahmed A. Khalil, Ivana Galinovic, Jochen B.
  Fiebach, Dietmar Frey, and Vince Istvan Madai. On the usage of average hausdorff distance for
  segmentation performance assessment: hidden error when used for ranking. European Radiology
  Experimental, 5(1), January 2021. ISSN 2509-9280. doi: 10.1186/s41747-020-00200-2. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s41747-020-00200-2.
Daniel Ayers. Data formats for gis: A survey of popular systems, 1992.                         URL
  https://ir.canterbury.ac.nz/server/api/core/bitstreams/
  bf5a52ef-cafe-422c-a7bc-ee525342abf0/content.
Paolo Bajardi, Matteo Delfino, André Panisson, Giovanni Petri, and Michele Tizzoni. Unveiling
  patterns of international communities in a global city using mobile phone data. EPJ Data Science, 4
  (1), April 2015. doi: 10.1140/epjds/s13688-015-0041-5. URL https://doi.org/10.1140/
  epjds/s13688-015-0041-5.
S. Barbarossa and S. Sardellitti. Topological signal processing over simplicial complexes. IEEE
  Transactions on Signal Processing, 2020.
Federico Barbero, Cristian Bodnar, Haitz Sáez de Ocáriz Borde, Michael Bronstein, Petar Veličković,
  and Pietro Liò. Sheaf neural networks with connection laplacians, 2022.
Ilyes Batatia, David P Kovacs, Gregor Simm, Christoph Ortner, and Gábor Csányi. Mace: Higher
   order equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields. Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:11423–11436, 2022.
C. Battiloro, Z. Wang, H. Riess, P. Di Lorenzo, and A. Ribeiro. Tangent bundle filters and neural
  networks: From manifolds to cellular sheaves and back. In ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5, 2023a.
Claudio Battiloro. Signal Processing and Learning over Topological Spaces. PhD thesis, Sapienza
  Unviersity of Rome, 2024.
Claudio Battiloro, Stefania Sardellitti, Sergio Barbarossa, and Paolo Di Lorenzo. Topological signal
  processing over weighted simplicial complexes. In ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5, 2023b.
Claudio Battiloro, Lucia Testa, Lorenzo Giusti, Stefania Sardellitti, Paolo Di Lorenzo, and Sergio
  Barbarossa. Generalized simplicial attention neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02138,
  2023c.
Claudio Battiloro, Indro Spinelli, Lev Telyatnikov, Michael M. Bronstein, Simone Scardapane, and
  Paolo Di Lorenzo. From latent graph to latent topology inference: Differentiable cell complex
  module. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=0JsRZEGZ7L.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Claudio Battiloro, Zhiyang Wang, Hans Riess, Paolo Di Lorenzo, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Tangent
  bundle convolutional learning: from manifolds to cellular sheaves and back. IEEE Transactions on
  Signal Processing, 2024b.
Simon Batzner, Albert Musaelian, Lixin Sun, Mario Geiger, Jonathan P Mailoa, Mordechai Kornbluth,
  Nicola Molinari, Tess E Smidt, and Boris Kozinsky. E (3)-equivariant graph neural networks for
  data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature communications, 13(1):2453, 2022.
C. Bodnar, F. Frasca, N. Otter, Y. Wang, P. Liò, G. F. Montufar, and M. Bronstein. Weisfeiler and
  lehman go cellular: Cw networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021a.
C. Bodnar, F. Frasca, Y. Wang, N. Otter, G.F. Montufar, P. Liò, and M. Bronstein. Weisfeiler and
  lehman go topological: Message passing simplicial networks. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2021b.
Cristian Bodnar. Topological Deep Learning: Graphs, Complexes, Sheaves. PhD thesis, Cambridge
  University, 2023.
Cristian Bodnar, Francesco Di Giovanni, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Pietro Lio, and Michael M.
  Bronstein. Neural sheaf diffusion: A topological perspective on heterophily and oversmoothing in
  GNNs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Geoff Boeing. Osmnx: A python package to work with openstreetmap data. https://github.
  com/gboeing/osmnx, 2017. Version 1.1.1, Accessed: 2024-05-22.
Johannes Brandstetter, Rob Hesselink, Elise van der Pol, Erik J Bekkers, and Max Welling. Ge-
  ometric and physical quantities improve e (3) equivariant message passing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.02905, 2021.
Johann Brehmer, Pim De Haan, Sönke Behrends, and Taco S Cohen. Geometric algebra transformer.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
M.M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, T. Cohen, and P. Veličković. Geometric deep learning: Grids, groups,
 graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
J. Bruna, W. Zaremba, A. Szlam, and Y. LeCun. Spectral networks and locally connected networks
   on graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, Banff, Canada, 2014.
Junwu Chen and Philippe Schwaller. Molecular hypergraph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.13136, 2023.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 2990–2999. PMLR, 2016.
Taco S Cohen, Mario Geiger, and Maurice Weiler. A general theory of equivariant cnns on homoge-
  neous spaces. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Lorenz Demey and Hans Smessaert. The relationship between aristotelian and hasse diagrams. In
  International Conference on Theory and Application of Diagrams, pp. 213–227. Springer, 2014.
Qian Di, Heresh Amini, Liuhua Shi, Itai Kloog, Rachel Silvern, James Kelly, M Benjamin Sabath,
  Christine Choirat, Petros Koutrakis, Alexei Lyapustin, et al. An ensemble-based model of pm2. 5
  concentration across the contiguous united states with high spatiotemporal resolution. Environment
  international, 130:104909, 2019.
Francesco Di Giovanni, Lorenzo Giusti, Federico Barbero, Giulia Luise, Pietro Lio, and Michael M
  Bronstein. On over-squashing in message passing neural networks: The impact of width, depth,
  and topology. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7865–7885. PMLR, 2023.
Tobias Diehl, Thomas Brunner, Marco Tiezzi Le, and Alois Knoll. Towards graph pooling by edge
  contraction. In ICML 2019 Workshop on Learning and Reasoning with Graph-Structured Data,
  2019.
S. Ebli, M. Defferrard, and G. Spreemann. Simplicial neural networks. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems Workshop on Topological Data Analysis and Beyond, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Floor Eijkelboom, Rob Hesselink, and Erik J Bekkers. E (n) equivariant message passing simplicial
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9071–9081. PMLR, 2023.

Yam Eitan, Yoav Gelberg, Guy Bar-Shalom, Fabrizio Frasca, Michael Bronstein, and Haggai Maron.
  Topological blind spots: Understanding and extending topological deep learning through the lens
  of expressivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05486, 2024.

Michelle Feng and Mason A. Porter. Persistent homology of geospatial data: A case study with
 voting. SIAM Review, 63(1):67–99, 2021. doi: 10.1137/19M1241519. URL https://doi.
 org/10.1137/19M1241519.

Yifan Feng, Haoxuan You, Zizhao Zhang, Rongrong Ji, and Yue Gao. Hypergraph neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3558–3565, 2019.

Marc Finzi, Samuel Stanton, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Generalizing convolutional
 neural networks for equivariance to lie groups on arbitrary continuous data. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3165–3176. PMLR, 2020.

Fabian Fuchs, Daniel Worrall, Volker Fischer, and Max Welling. Se (3)-transformers: 3d roto-
  translation equivariant attention networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  1970–1981, 2020.

Johannes Gasteiger, Janek Groß, and Stephan Günnemann. Directional message passing for molecular
  graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=B1eWbxStPH.

J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl. Neural message passing for
   quantum chemistry. In International Conference on Machine learning, 2017a.

Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
  Machine Learning - Volume 70, ICML’17, pp. 1263–1272. JMLR.org, 2017b.

Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
  Machine Learning - Volume 70, ICML’17, pp. 1263–1272. JMLR.org, 2017c.

C. Giusti, R. Ghrist, and D. S. Bassett. Two’s company, three (or more) is a simplex. Journal of
  computational neuroscience, 2016.

L. Giusti, C. Battiloro, P. Di Lorenzo, S. Sardellitti, and S. Barbarossa. Simplicial attention neural
   networks, 2022.

Lorenzo Giusti, Claudio Battiloro, Lucia Testa, Paolo Di Lorenzo, Stefania Sardellitti, and Sergio
  Barbarossa. Cell attention networks. In 2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
  (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2023a.

Lorenzo Giusti, Teodora Reu, Francesco Ceccarelli, Cristian Bodnar, and Pietro Liò. Cin++: Enhanc-
  ing topological message passing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03561, 2023b.

C. Wei Jin Goh, C. Bodnar, and P. Lio. Simplicial attention networks. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations Workshop on Geometrical and Topological Representation Learning,
  2022.

M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli. A new model for learning in graph domains. In IEEE
 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2005.

L. J. Grady and J. R. Polimeni. Discrete calculus: Applied analysis on graphs for computational
  science. Springer, 2010.

Phillip Griffiths and Wilfried Schmid. Recent developments in hodge theory: a discussion of
  techniques and results. 1975.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sravanthi Gurugubelli and Sundeep Prabhakar Chepuri. SaNN: Simple yet powerful simplicial-aware
  neural networks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=eUgS9Ig8JG.

M. Hajij, G. Zamzmi, T. Papamarkou, N. Miolane, A. Guzmán-Sáenz, and K. N. Ramamurthy.
 Higher-order attention networks, 2022a.

Mustafa Hajij, Kyle Istvan, and Ghada Zamzmi. Cell complex neural networks. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems Workshop on TDA & Beyond, 2020.

Mustafa Hajij, Ghada Zamzmi, Theodore Papamarkou, Nina Miolane, Aldo Guzmán-Sáenz,
 Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Tolga Birdal, Tamal K Dey, Soham Mukherjee, Shreyas N Sam-
 aga, et al. Topological deep learning: Going beyond graph data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00606,
 2022b.

Mustafa Hajij, Mathilde Papillon, Florian Frantzen, Jens Agerberg, Ibrahem AlJabea, Ruben Ballester,
 Claudio Battiloro, Guillermo Bernárdez, Tolga Birdal, Aiden Brent, et al. Topox: a suite of python
 packages for machine learning on topological domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02441, 2024.

Jiaqi Han, Yu Rong, Tingyang Xu, and Wenbing Huang. Geometrically equivariant graph neural
   networks: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07230, 2022.

Jiaqi Han, Jiacheng Cen, Liming Wu, Zongzhao Li, Xiangzhe Kong, Rui Jiao, Ziyang Yu, Tingyang
   Xu, Fandi Wu, Zihe Wang, et al. A survey of geometric graph neural networks: Data structures,
   models and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00485, 2024.

J. Hansen and R. Ghrist. Toward a spectral theory of cellular sheaves. Journal of Applied and
   Computational Topology, 2019.

Jakob Hansen and Thomas Gebhart. Sheaf neural networks, 2020.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.

Tomislav Hengl, Matthew A. E. Miller, Josip Križan, Keith D. Shepherd, Andrew Sila, Milan
  Kilibarda, Ognjen Antonijević, Luka Glušica, Achim Dobermann, Stephan M. Haefele, Steve P.
  McGrath, Gifty E. Acquah, Jamie Collinson, Leandro Parente, Mohammadreza Sheykhmousa,
  Kazuki Saito, Jean-Martial Johnson, Jordan Chamberlin, Francis B. T. Silatsa, Martin Yemefack,
  John Wendt, Robert A. MacMillan, Ichsani Wheeler, and Jonathan Crouch. African soil properties
  and nutrients mapped at 30 m spatial resolution using two-scale ensemble machine learning.
  Scientific Reports, 11(1), March 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-85639-y. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1038/s41598-021-85639-y.

Sajjad Heydari and Lorenzo Livi. Message passing neural networks for hypergraphs. In International
  Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 583–592. Springer, 2022.

Abigail Hickok, Deanna Needell, and Mason A. Porter. Analysis of spatial and spatiotempo-
  ral anomalies using persistent homology: Case studies with covid-19 data. SIAM Journal
  on Mathematics of Data Science, 4(3):1116–1144, 2022. doi: 10.1137/21M1435033. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1137/21M1435033.

A. N. Hirani, K. Kalyanaraman, and S. Watts. Least squares ranking on graphs, Hodge Laplacians,
  time optimality, and iterative methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1011.1716, 2010.

Peter J. Huber. Robust estimation of a location parameter. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35(1):
  73–101, 1964. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177703732.

Michael J Hutchinson, Charline Le Lan, Sheheryar Zaidi, Emilien Dupont, Yee Whye Teh, and
 Hyunjik Kim. Lietransformer: Equivariant self-attention for lie groups. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 4533–4543. PMLR, 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhixuan Jia, Yushun Fan, Chunyu Wei, and Ruyu Yan. A spatial–temporal hypergraph based method
  for service recommendation in the mobile internet of things-enabled service platform. Advanced
  Engineering Informatics, 57:102038, 2023.
Dejun Jiang, Zhenxing Wu, Chang-Yu Hsieh, Guangyong Chen, Ben Liao, Zhe Wang, Chao Shen,
  Dongsheng Cao, Jian Wu, and Tingjun Hou. Could graph neural networks learn better molecular
  representation for drug discovery? a comparison study of descriptor-based and graph-based
  models. Journal of Cheminformatics, 13(1), February 2021. ISSN 1758-2946. doi: 10.1186/
  s13321-020-00479-8. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13321-020-00479-8.
Fabian Jogl, Maximilian Thiessen, and Thomas Gärtner. Expressivity-preserving GNN simulation.
  In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ytTfonl9Wd.
Chaitanya K Joshi, Cristian Bodnar, Simon V Mathis, Taco Cohen, and Pietro Lio. On the expressive
  power of geometric graph neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  15330–15355. PMLR, 2023.
J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool,
   R. Bates, A. Žídek, A. Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold.
   Nature, 2021.
L. Kanari, P. Dłotko, M. Scolamiero, R. Levi, J. Shillcock, K. Hess, and H. Markram. A topological
   representation of branching neuronal morphologies. Neuroinfor., 16(1):3–13, 2018.
T. N. Kipf and M. Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Jonas Köhler, Leon Klein, and Frank Noé. Equivariant flows: sampling configurations for multi-body
  systems with symmetric energies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00753, 2019.
Eric D. Kolaczyk and Haiying Huang. Multiscale statistical models for hierarchical spatial aggre-
  gation. Geographical Analysis, 33(2):95–118, 2001. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-4632.
  2001.tb00439.x. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.
  1538-4632.2001.tb00439.x.
Veljko Kovač, Erik J Bekkers, Pietro Liò, and Floor Eijkelboom. E (n) equivariant message passing
  cellular networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03145, 2024.
Junhyun Lee, Inyeong Lee, and Jaewoo Kang. Self-attention graph pooling. In Proceedings of the
  36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3734–3743, 2019.
Longlong Li, LIU Xiang, Guanghui Wang, Yu Guang Wang, and Kelin Xia. Path complex neural
  network for molecular property prediction. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Geometry-grounded
  Representation Learning and Generative Modeling, 2024a.
Ming Li, Emmanuel Perrier, and Chengbin Xu. Deep hierarchical graph convolution for election
 prediction from geospatial census data. In Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, pp. 647–654, 2019.
Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for
  semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  pp. 3538–3545, 2018.
Xuan Li, Zhanke Zhou, Jiangchao Yao, Yu Rong, Lu Zhang, and Bo Han. Neural atoms: Propagating
  long-range interaction in molecular graphs through efficient communication channel. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=CUfSCwcgqm.
L. Lim. Hodge Laplacians on graphs. Siam Review, 2020.
Cong Liu, David Ruhe, Floor Eijkelboom, and Patrick Forré. Clifford group equivariant simplicial
  message passing networks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Zz594UBNOH.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Derek Lo and Briton Park. Modeling the spread of the zika virus using topological data analysis.
  PLOS ONE, 13(2):e0192120, February 2018. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192120. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0192120.
Hehuan Ma, Yatao Bian, Yu Rong, Wenbing Huang, Tingyang Xu, Weiyang Xie, Geyan Ye, and
  Junzhou Huang. Multi-view graph neural networks for molecular property prediction, 2020.
Hiren Madhu, Sravanthi Gurugubelli, and Sundeep Prabhakar Chepuri. Unsupervised parameter-
  free simplicial representation learning with scattering transforms. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning.
Kelly Maggs, Celia Hacker, and Bastian Rieck. Simplicial representation learning with neural
  $k$-forms. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Djw0XhjHZb.
D. Mulder and G. Bianconi. Network geometry and complexity. Journal of Statistical Physics, 173
  (3):783–805, 2018.
New York City Department of City Planning.     Primary land use tax lot output
  (pluto) data. https://www1.nyc.gov/site/planning/data-maps/open-data/
  dwn-pluto-mappluto.page, 2024. Accessed: 2024-05-22.
New York City Department of Transportation. Average daily traffic (aadt) data. https://data.
  cityofnewyork.us/Transportation/Average-Daily-Traffic-AADT-/
  fp86-8v8r, 2024. Accessed: 2024-05-22.
Marco Pacini, Xiaowen Dong, Bruno Lepri, and Gabriele Santin. A characterization theorem for equiv-
 ariant networks with point-wise activations. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=79FVDdfoSR.
Theodore Papamarkou, Tolga Birdal, Michael Bronstein, Gunnar Carlsson, Justin Curry, Yue Gao,
  Mustafa Hajij, Roland Kwitt, Pietro Liò, Paolo Di Lorenzo, et al. Position paper: Challenges and
  opportunities in topological deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08871, 2024.
Mathilde Papillon, Sophia Sanborn, Mustafa Hajij, and Nina Miolane. Architectures of topological
 deep learning: A survey on topological neural networks, 2023.
Junyoung Park, Fangying Chen, and Jinkyoo Park. A molecular hypergraph convolutional network
  with functional group information. 2021.
A. Patania, G. Petri, and F. Vaccarino. The shape of collaborations. EPJ Data Sci., 6(1):18, 2017.
Sergey N Pozdnyakov, Michael J Willatt, Albert P Bartók, Christoph Ortner, Gábor Csányi, and
  Michele Ceriotti. Incompleteness of atomic structure representations. Physical Review Letters,
  125(16):166001, 2020.
Raghunathan Ramakrishnan, Pavlo O. Dral, Matthias Rupp, and O. Anatole von Lilienfeld. Quantum
  chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Scientific Data, 1(1), August 2014. ISSN
  2052-4463. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2014.22. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sdata.
  2014.22.
Emily Ribando-Gros, Rui Wang, Jiahui Chen, Yiying Tong, and Guo-Wei Wei. Graph and hodge
 laplacians: Similarity and difference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.12218, 2022.
T. M. Roddenberry, N. Glaze, and S. Segarra. Principled simplicial neural networks for trajectory
   prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
T. Mitchell Roddenberry, Michael T. Schaub, and Mustafa Hajij. Signal processing on cell complexes.
   In ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
   (ICASSP), pp. 8852–8856, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9747233.
Yu Rong, Wenbing Huang, Tingyang Xu, and Junzhou Huang. The truly deep graph convolutional
  networks for node classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.10903, 2019. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1907.10903.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David Ruhe, Johannes Brandstetter, and Patrick Forré. Clifford group equivariant neural networks.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

S. Sardellitti, S. Barbarossa, and L. Testa. Topological signal processing over cell complexes. In
  Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, 2021.

Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural networks.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9323–9332. PMLR, 2021.

M. T. Schaub, Y. Zhu, J.B. Seby, T. M. Roddenberry, and S. Segarra. Signal processing on higher-order
  networks: Livin’on the edge... and beyond. Signal Processing, 2021.

Kristof Schütt, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Huziel Enoc Sauceda Felix, Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre
  Tkatchenko, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Schnet: A continuous-filter convolutional neural network
  for modeling quantum interactions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Florian Sestak, Lisa Schneckenreiter, Johannes Brandstetter, Sepp Hochreiter, Andreas Mayr, and
  Günter Klambauer. Vn-egnn: E (3)-equivariant graph neural networks with virtual nodes enhance
  protein binding site identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07194, 2024.

Jonathan Shlomi, Peter Battaglia, and Jean-Roch Vlimant. Graph neural networks in particle physics.
  Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 2(2):021001, dec 2020. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/
  abbf9a. URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2632-2153/abbf9a.

Bernadette Stolz, Heather Harrington, and Mason Alexander Porter. The topological 'shape' of brexit.
  SSRN Electronic Journal, 2016. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2843662. URL https://doi.org/10.
  2139/ssrn.2843662.

Bohan Tang, Siheng Chen, and Xiaowen Dong. Hypergraph-mlp: learning on hypergraphs without
  message passing. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 13476–13480. IEEE, 2024.

Lev Telyatnikov, Guillermo Bernardez, Marco Montagna, Pavlo Vasylenko, Ghada Zamzmi, Mustafa
  Hajij, Michael T Schaub, Nina Miolane, Simone Scardapane, and Theodore Papamarkou.
  Topobenchmarkx: A framework for benchmarking topological deep learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.06642, 2024.

Nathaniel Thomas, Tess Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick Riley.
  Tensor field networks: Rotation-and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3d point clouds.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08219, 2018.

Quang Truong and Peter Chin. Weisfeiler and lehman go paths: Learning topological features via
  path complexes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp.
 15382–15391, 2024.

Marc van Kreveld, Tillmann Miltzow, Tim Ophelders, Willem Sonke, and Jordi L. Vermeulen.
 Between shapes, using the hausdorff distance. Computational Geometry, 100:101817, 2022.
 ISSN 0925-7721. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comgeo.2021.101817. URL https://www.
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925772121000730.

Yogesh Verma, Amauri H Souza, and Vikas Garg. Topological neural networks go persistent,
  equivariant, and continuous. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03164, 2024.

An Wang, Simone Mora, Yuki Machida, Priyanka deSouza, Sanjana Paul, Oluwatobi Oyinlola,
  Fábio Duarte, and Carlo Ratti. Hyperlocal environmental data with a mobile platform in urban
  environments. Scientific data, 10(1):524, 2023.

Jing Wei, Jun Wang, Zhanqing Li, Shobha Kondragunta, Susan Anenberg, Yi Wang, Huanxin Zhang,
   David Diner, Jenny Hand, Alexei Lyapustin, et al. Long-term mortality burden trends attributed to
   black carbon and pm2· 5 from wildfire emissions across the continental usa from 2000 to 2020: a
   deep learning modelling study. The Lancet Planetary Health, 7(12):e963–e975, 2023.


                                                 17
Maurice Weiler, Patrick Forré, Erik Verlinde, and Max Welling. Equivariant and Coordinate
 Independent Convolutional Networks. 2023. URL https://maurice-weiler.gitlab.
 io/cnn_book/EquivariantAndCoordinateIndependentCNNs.pdf.
B. Weisfeiler and A. Leman. The reduction of a graph to canonical form and the algebra which
  appears therein. NTI, Series, 1968.
Ning Wu, Xiaowen Wu, Jingyuan Wang, and Daojing Pan. Learning effective road network rep-
  resentation with hierarchical graph neural networks. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD
  International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 6–14, 2020.
Wenwen Xia, Yuchen Li, Jun Wu, and Shenghong Li. Deepis: Susceptibility estimation on social
 networks. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data
 Mining, WSDM ’21, pp. 761–769, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing
 Machinery.
K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural networks? In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Maosheng Yang and Elvin Isufi. Convolutional learning on simplicial complexes, 2023.
Ruochen Yang, Frederic Sala, and Paul Bogdan. Efficient representation learning for higher-order data
  with simplicial complexes. In Bastian Rieck and Razvan Pascanu (eds.), Proceedings of the First
  Learning on Graphs Conference, volume 198 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  13:1–13:21. PMLR, 09–12 Dec 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v198/
  yang22a.html.
Rex Ying, Jiaxuan You, Christopher Morris, Xiang Ren, William Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec.
  Hierarchical graph representation learning with differentiable pooling. In Proceedings of the 32nd
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4805–4815, 2018.
Bowen Yu, Haonan Yin, and Zhanxing Zhu. St-unet: A spatio-temporal u-network for graph-
  structured time series modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.05631, 2019. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1903.05631.
Chuxu Zhang, Dongjin Song, Chao Huang, Ananthram Swami, and Nitesh V Chawla. Heterogeneous
  graph neural network. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
  knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 793–803, 2019.
M. Zhang and Y. Chen. Link prediction based on graph neural networks. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Wei Zhang, Hongzhi Liu, Yu Liu, Jianping Zhou, and Hui Xiong. Semi-supervised hierarchical
 recurrent graph neural network for city-wide parking availability prediction. In Proceedings of the
 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1186–1193, 2020.
Zuobai Zhang, Minghao Xu, Arian Rokkum Jamasb, Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Aurelie Lozano,
  Payel Das, and Jian Tang. Protein representation learning by geometric structure pretraining.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=to3qCB3tOh9.

Appendix Contents
A Limitations & Future Directions                                                                  19

B Related Works                                                                                    20

C Combinatorial Topological Spaces as Combinatorial Complexes                                      20
  C.1 Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
  C.2 Simplicial Complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
  C.3 Cell Complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
  C.4 Hypergraphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ETNNs with Velocity Type Inputs                                                                     24

E Proof of Theorem 1                                                                                  24

F Expressiveness of ETNNs                                                                             25

G Complexity Analysis                                                                                  31

H Additional References on Real-World Combinatorial Topological Spaces                                33
  H.1 Molecular Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          33
  H.2 Geospatial Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         33

I   Experimental Setup                                                                                34
    I.1 Molecular Property Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         34
        I.1.1 Dataset Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34
        I.1.2 Cell Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         34
        I.1.3 Parameter Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           35
    I.2 Hyperlocal Air Pollution Downscaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          36
        I.2.1 Dataset Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        36
        I.2.2 Cell Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         36
        I.2.3 Parameter Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           37
    I.3 Geometric Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        38

J Ablation Study and Reproducibility for Molecular Property Prediction                                38

K Architecture Description                                                                            40


A    L IMITATIONS & F UTURE D IRECTIONS
To our knowledge, ETNN is the first unifying framework for scalarization-based E(n) equivariant
networks over combinatorial topological spaces or, more in general, over combinatorial objects used
to model interactions among entities. In this work, we introduced ETNNs as a significantly more
general, expressive, and flexible framework compared to prior geometric/topological deep learning
models operating on geometric graphs (Satorras et al., 2021) or simplicial complexes (Eijkelboom
et al., 2023). The promising results open several avenues.
Methodological. First, while we introduced several useful invariants like pairwise distances, cen-
troids, Hausdorff distances, and convex hull volumes, there are likely many other meaningful
geometric quantities that could be leveraged, especially for specific application domains. Therefore,
developing a more comprehensive set of geometric invariants, as well as learning methods to discover
them from data automatically, is an important future direction. In this sense, generalizing the approach
from (Liu et al., 2024) of integrating Clifford group-equivariant layers with message passing layers.
i.e., going beyond scalarization, is a possible solution, although requiring to solve possible scalability
issues. Second, extending our framework to make it scale invariant could be useful in geospatial
tasks. Third, at this stage ETNNs cannot directly handle time-varying scenarios, thus we aim to go
beyond the static settings and develop dynamic or temporal variants of ETNNs. This could enable
new applications in areas like spatio-temporal forecasting, and physical simulations. Fourth, and
finally, ETNNs assume that (potentially) each rank should satisfy the same E(n) equivariance, but
another interesting direction is studying the setting in which each rank is required to satisfy different
symmetries, pointing towards a principled use of products of groups.
Computational. While our experimental validation of ETNNs covered both supervised inductive
and semisupervised transductive tasks, future works could tailor ETNNs to fit challenging specific
applications at scale. In this sense, unsupervised or self-supervised training methods for ETNNs could
enable the learning of meaningful representations in a data-driven manner without requiring labeled
data for every task. This could allow ETNNs to better leverage large, unlabeled geometric datasets.
Moreover, though computationally tractable, ETNNs may benefit from further improvements to
effectively scale on very large datasets. The main bottlenecks are MP operations and geometric
invariants computation. A possible solution could be neighbor samplers (Zhang et al., 2019), or


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


developing E(n) equivariant message passing-free ETNNs, building on works like (Maggs et al.,
2024).


B    R ELATED W ORKS
Topological Deep Learning. TDL is informed by foundational work in Topological Signal Processing
(TSP) (Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020; Schaub et al., 2021; Roddenberry et al., 2022; Sardellitti et al.,
2021), highlighting the value of analyzing multi-way relationships in data. The works in (Bodnar
et al., 2021b;a) extended the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph isomorphism test to simplicial and regular cell
complexes (Bodnar et al., 2021a), respectively, showing that message passing over these spaces are
more expressive than message passing over graphs. Convolutional (Ebli et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022;
Hajij et al., 2020; Yang & Isufi, 2023; Roddenberry et al., 2021; Hajij et al., 2022a) and attentional
architectures (Battiloro et al., 2023c; Giusti et al., 2022; Goh et al., 2022; Giusti et al., 2023a) over
simplicial and cell complexes have been introduced as well. Additionally, the application of message
passing or diffusion on cellular sheaves (Hansen & Ghrist, 2019) over graphs (Hansen & Gebhart,
2020; Bodnar et al., 2022; Battiloro et al., 2023a; 2024b; Barbero et al., 2022) has proven effective
in heterophilic scenarios. Models without message passing have been introduced for simplicial
complexes (Madhu et al.; Gurugubelli & Chepuri, 2024; Maggs et al., 2024) and hypergraphs (Tang
et al., 2024). An architecture for inferring a latent regular cell complex to improve a downstream
task has been introduced in (Battiloro et al., 2024a). Gaussian Processes over cell complexes have
been introduced in (Alain et al., 2023). Message passing networks over path complexes have been
introduced in (Truong & Chin, 2024; Li et al., 2024a). An extensive review of TDL is available in
(Papillon et al., 2023). A comprehensive framework for TDL was outlined in (Hajij et al., 2022b),
proposing combinatorial complexes and message-passing networks (CCMPNs) over them. A general
topological framework for expressivity analysis of CCMPNs has been proposed in (Eitan et al., 2024).
Finally, software for neural networks on combinatorial topological spaces has been presented in
(Hajij et al., 2024; Telyatnikov et al., 2024).
Equivariant Neural Networks The effectiveness of Convolutional Neural Networks (He et al., 2016),
and their first group extension to the SO(2) group (Cohen & Welling, 2016) initially demonstrated the
advantages of equivariant models, and paved the way for a series of works exploring how to design
models respecting some symmetries (Weiler et al., 2023). Loosely speaking, some of these works
employ natively equivariant function spaces (Thomas et al., 2018; Fuchs et al., 2020), or port the
spatial space into high-dimensional spaces (Cohen et al., 2019; Finzi et al., 2020; Hutchinson et al.,
2021; Batatia et al., 2022). An alternative strategy is designing neural networks (Köhler et al., 2019;
Schütt et al., 2017; Brandstetter et al., 2021; Batzner et al., 2022) that perform equivariant operations
directly within the original space, including the (VN-)EGNN from (Satorras et al., 2021; Sestak
et al., 2024). A characterization theorem for equivariant networks has been presented in (Pacini et al.,
2024). Recent works showed how to achieve equivariance by leveraging neural network architectures
operating on the Clifford algebra (Ruhe et al., 2024; Brehmer et al., 2024). Each of these approaches
has limitations and advantages, and the effectiveness of a specific design choice is related to the
considered application and computational constraints (Han et al., 2022).
Our paper builds on both classes of works. To the best of our knowledge, the most relevant works
merging TDL models and E(n) equivariant neural networks are (Eijkelboom et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2024; Verma et al., 2024). In particular, (Eijkelboom et al., 2023) generalizes the approach
from (Satorras et al., 2021) and introduces E(n) Equivariant Simplicial Message passing Networks
(EMPSNs). The framework in (Verma et al., 2024) injects information about persistent homology
(PH) on top of (equivariant) simplicial message passing networks, thus interestingly combining TDL
and Topological Data Analysis. Finally, (Liu et al., 2024) adopts the approach from (Ruhe et al.,
2024) by combining Clifford group equivariant layers with simplicial message passing networks.
However, no other combinatorial topological spaces are considered, and, overall, a general framework
for designing equivariant neural networks over combinatorial topological spaces is missing. Here we
address this important gap by introducing our ETNNs.


C    C OMBINATORIAL T OPOLOGICAL S PACES AS C OMBINATORIAL C OMPLEXES
In this appendix, we revisit a subclass of mathematical objects (not always formal topological spaces)
that can be described combinatorially, message passing networks operating on them, and how they


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: A simplicial complex of order 2, comprising of nodes (cells of rank 0), edges (cells of rank
1), and triangles (cells of rank 2).


can be cast in the ETNN frameworks. As we did for CCs, we will often overload the notation X in
the following subsections, incurring some notation abuses for the sake of exposition and consistency.

C.1 G RAPHS
The first combinatorial objects we describe are obviously graphs. They are remarkably useful in
several fields, across several tasks, thanks to their ability to encode prior data knowledge, i.e., their
networked structure.
Graphs. A graph X is a pair (S, E), where S is the set of nodes, and E is the set of edges (i.e., pairs
of nodes).
Neighbhorhood Functions in a Graph. Given a graph X , for all x ∈ S, the up adjacency NA,↑ (i.e.,
the usual node adjacency) is defined as
                         NA,↑ (x) = {y ∈ S|∃z ∈ E : x ⊂ z and y ⊂ z}.                      (14)

Graphs as Combinatorial Complexes. Graphs can be easily cast as combinatorial complexes. Let
us denote the set of singletons Se = {{s}}s∈S , a graph X is a combinatorial complex (S, X , rk),
where S is the set of nodes, the set of cells X = Se is the set of singletons, and the rank function rk
assigns rank 0 to each singleton. Please notice that there is no need to include edges as cells in the
complex, differently from, e.g., simplicial complexes, as detailed in the next subsection, because a
CCMPN as in (3) with CN = {NA,↑ } recovers the standard Graph Message Passing Network from
(Gilmer et al., 2017b). An ETNN as in (6) with the same collection of neighborhoods CN recovers
the E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural Network (EGNN) from (Satorras et al., 2021).

C.2   S IMPLICIAL C OMPLEXES

Graphs are capable of explicitly managing only pairwise interactions among nodes. However, in
numerous applications (Giusti et al., 2016; Kanari et al., 2018; Patania et al., 2017; Sardellitti et al.,
2021), including the ones presented in this work, higher-order multiway interactions need to be taken
into account. Simplicial complexes are one of the most intuitive objects to start incorporating them.
Simplicial Complexes. Given a finite set of nodes S, a k-simplex x is a subset of S with cardinality
k + 1. A face of x is a k − 1-simplex being a subset of it, thus a k-simplex has k + 1 faces. A
coface of x is a (k + 1)-simplex being a superset of it (Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020; Lim, 2020). A
simplicial complex (SC) X of order K is a collection of k-simplices x, k = 0, . . . , K such that, if a
simplex x belongs to X , then all its subsets y ⊂ x also belong to the complex (inclusivity property).
In most of the cases, the focus is on complexes of order up to two, thus having a set of nodes, a set of
edges, and a set of triangles. To give a simple example, in Fig. 4 we sketch a simplicial complex of
order 2.
Neighbhorhood Functions in a Simplicial Complex. Given a SC X , the coboundary and boundary
neighborhood functions NC and NB , respectively, are defined, as
          NC (x) = {y ∈ X |y is a coface of x}, NB (x) = {y ∈ X |y is a face of x}.        (15)
The up and down adjacencies NA,↑ and NA,↓ , respectively, are defined, as
 NA,↑ (x) = {y ∈ X |y shares a coface with x}, NA,↓ (x) = {y ∈ X |y shares a face with x}. (16)


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Simplicial Complexes as Combinatorial Complexes. It is easy to frame SCs in the CC framework.
In particular, a simplicial complex X is a combinatorial complex (S, X , rk), where S is the set
of nodes, the set of cells X is the set of simplices, and the rank function rk assigns to each cell
its cardinality minus one. A CCMPN as in (3) with CN = {NC , NB , NA,↑ , NA,↓ } recovers the
Message Passing Simplicial Network from (Bodnar et al., 2021b). An ETNN as in (6) with the same
collection of neighborhoods CN recovers the E(n) Equivariant Message Passing Simplicial Network
(EMPSN) from (Eijkelboom et al., 2023).

C.3 C ELL C OMPLEXES
Simplicial complexes are capable of managing relationships of varying degrees, yet the inclusion
property often binds them. This property mandates that if a set is part of the space, then all its
respective subsets must also be included in that space. In numerous applications, this restriction is
not only unnecessary but also lacks a justified basis. Consequently, cell complexes are frequently
employed instead (Mulder & Bianconi, 2018; Hirani et al., 2010). These structures are versatile and
support a hierarchical organization.
Regular Cell Complexes. A regular cell complex (or regular CW complex) is a topological space X
together with a partition {Xx }x∈HX of subspaces Xx of X called cells, where HX is the indexing set
of X , such that

1. For each x ∈ X , every sufficient small neighborhood of x intersects finitely many Xx ;
2. For all x,y we have that Xx ∩ X y ̸= ∅ iff Xx ⊆ X y , where X y is the closure of the cell;
3. Every Xx is homeomorphic to Rk for some k;
4. For every x ∈ HX there is a homeomorphism g of a closed ball in Rk to X x such that the
   restriction of g to the interior of the ball is a homeomorphism onto Xx .

From 2, HX has a poset structure, given by y ≤ x iff Xy ⊆ Xx , and we say that y bounds x. This
is known as the face poset of X . From 4, all of the topological information about X is encoded in
the poset structure of HX . Then, a regular cell complex can be identified with its face poset. From
now on we will indicate the cell Xx with its corresponding face poset element x. The dimension
or order dim(σ) of a cell σ is k, and we call it a k−cell. The dimension or order of a regular cell
complex is the largest dimension of any of its cells. In the following, we will refer to regular cell
complexes simply as cell complexes or CW complexes. Cell complexes can be described via an
incidence relation (boundary relation) with a reflexive and transitive closure that is consistent with the
partial order introduced in the above definition. In particular, we have the boundary relation y ≺ x iff
dim(y) ≤ dim(x) and there is no cell z such that y ≤ z ≤ x. In other words, the boundary of a cell x
of dimension k is the set of all cells of dimension less than k bounding x. The k-skeleton of a regular
cell complex X is the subcomplex of X consisting of cells of dimension at most k. Usually, CW
complexes X are constructed through a hierarchical gluing procedure starting from a set of nodes S
(Hansen & Ghrist, 2019; Bodnar et al., 2021a). Therefore, we can interpret the 0-skeleton of a cell
complex X as the set S of 0-cells (nodes) and the 1-skeleton as the set of nodes together with the set
of 1-cells (edges), thus a graph. For this reason, given a graph G, i.e., a realization of an order-1 cell
complex, it is possible to lift it to an order-2 cell complex X whose 1-skeleton is isomorphic to G.
A way to do it is by attaching order 2 cells to the/a set/subset of simple/induced cycles of G. Cells
of order greater than 2 can be attached as well using the same gluing procedure mentioned above
(Sardellitti et al., 2021; Grady & Polimeni, 2010), but there is usually little interest in them. In Fig. 5,
we sketch an order 2 CW complex.
Remark 2 . It is easy to notice that a CW complex considering cycles of length up to 3 is equivalent
to a simplicial complex of order 2 having the same set S of 0-simplices (nodes), the same set of
1-simplices (edges), and the same set of 2-simplices (triangles). In general, simplicial complexes are
special cases of CW complexes for which any k-cell is composed of exactly k + 1 nodes.
Remark 3 . The reader may have noticed that we gave no explicit characterization of a simplicial
complex as a topological space, although it is pretty easy to particularize cell to simplicial complexes.
This is because our definition of SC in Sec. C.2 is, to be completely rigorous, the definition of an
abstract simplicial complex, that itself is not a topological space. However, when we refer to a
simplicial complex as a topological space, we are implicitly talking about the geometric realization
of an abstract simplicial complex. Therefore, we are implicitly stating that the SC has a topology


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: A CW complex of order 2, comprising of nodes (cells of rank 0), edges (cells of rank 1),
and cycles (cells of rank 2).


coherent with its simplices, which are "topologized" as homeomorphisms of the standard simplices
living in Euclidean space. Please refer to (Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020) for a detailed but accessible
description. We will not incur any ambiguity by referring to abstract simplicial complexes as just
simplicial complexes.
Neighbhorhood Functions in a Cell Complex. Given a CW complex X , the coboundary and
boundary neighborhood functions NC and NB , respectively, are defined, as
                        NC (x) = {y ∈ X |y ≺ x},             NB (x) = {y ∈ X |x ≺ y}.                         (17)
The up and down adjacencies NA,↑ and NA,↓ , respectively, are defined, as
NA,↑ (x) = {y ∈ X |∃z such that x ≺ z, y ≺ z}, NA,↓ (x) = {y ∈ X |∃z such that z ≺ x, z ≺ y}.
                                                                                          (18)
Cell Complexes as Combinatorial Complexes. It is again straightforward to frame CW complexes
in the CC framework. In particular, a cell complex is a combinatorial complex (S, X , rk), where S
is the set of nodes, X is the set of cells, and the rank function rk assigns to each cell its dimension
dim. A CCMPN as in (3) with CN = {NB , NA,↑ } on a CW complex recovers the Molecular
Message Passing Network from (Bodnar et al., 2021a). ETNNs as in (6) with the same collection of
neighborhoods CN give rise to E(n) Equivariant Molecular Message Passing Networks, not present
in literature3 .
Remark 4 . Simplicial Complexes and Cell Complexes are rich topological objects. Neighborhoods in
a simplicial or a cell complex are strongly rooted in arguments from algebraic topology. In particular,
Hodge theory (Griffiths & Schmid, 1975) is used to derive formal notions of boundary, coboundary,
and Hodge Laplacians (Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020). More detailed descriptions can be found in
(Grady & Polimeni, 2010; Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020; Battiloro et al., 2023b; Ribando-Gros et al.,
2022). In this work, we are interested in the definition of cells (in the CC sense) and neighborhood
functions that these objects (SCs and CWCs) induce. For this reason, a reader familiar with algebraic
topology could find our definitions and treatment not totally comprehensive. However, we aim to
provide a unifying framework in the context of (equivariant) TDL, thus our presentation is sufficiently
consistent and strikes a good tradeoff between generality, rigor, and applicability.

C.4    H YPERGRAPHS
Cell complexes have their formal hierarchical and topology-grounded characterization as their main
strength. However, their structure is still constrained by the homeomorphism requirements, preventing
them from modeling arbitrary higher-order hierarchical interactions. On the other hand, hypergraphs
are combinatorial objects that have total flexibility, but without any hierarchical and (in the general
case) topological structure.
Hypergraphs. A hypergraph (HG) on a nonempty set of nodes S is a pair (S, E), where X is a
subset of the power set of P(S)\{∅} of S. Elements of S are called hyperedges. In Fig. 6, we sketch
a hypergraph with 3 nodes and 3 hyperedges.
   3
     This approach was recently explored in (Kovač et al., 2024), appeared online only after we released the first
preprint of ETNN.


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 6: A hypergraph, comprising of nodes (cells of rank 0), hyperedges (cells of rank 1).


Neighbhorhood Functions in a Hypergraph. Let us again denote the set of singletons Se =
{{s}}s∈S . Given a HG X , for all x ∈ Se ∪ E, the up and down incidences NI,↑ and NI,↓ , respectively,
are defined as
               NI,↑ (x) = {y ∈ Se ∪ E|x ⊂ y}, NI,↓ (x) = {y ∈ Se ∪ E|y ⊂ x}.                     (19)
Therefore, if x is a node, the down and up incidences evaluated at x are the empty set and the
hyperedges containing x, respectively. If x is a hyperedge, then the down and up neighborhood
functions evaluated at x are the nodes contained in x and the empty set, respectively.
Hypergraphs as Combinatorial Complexes. Even in this case, framing HGs in the CC framework
is straightforward. In particular, a hypergraph X is a combinatorial complex (S, X , rk), where S is
the set of nodes, the set of cells X = Se ∪ E, and the rank function rk assigns rank 0 to the nodes and
rank 1 to the hyperedges. A CCMPN as in (3) with CN = {NI,↑ , NI,↓ } recovers the Hypergraph
Message Passing Networks from (Feng et al., 2019) (in the convolutional realization) and (Heydari
& Livi, 2022). ETNNs as in (6) with the same collection of neighborhoods CN give rise to E(n)
Equivariant Hypergraph Message Passing Networks, not present in literature.

D    ETNN S WITH V ELOCITY T YPE I NPUTS
As EGNNs, ETNNs can handle settings in which nodes come with velocity type geometric features.
In this case, we have non-geometric feature hx ∈ RF , and positions xz ∈ Rn and velocities vz for
cell z ∈ S. We simply need to modify the position update in (7) to include the velocity update. Let
us denote the velocity of the z-th node at layer l with vzl . At the l-th layer, an ETNN updates the
embeddings hlx of every cell x ∈ X as in (6), and the position xlz and velocity vzl of every node
z ∈ S as
                             X         X
     vzl+1 = ζ hlz vz + C                         xlz − xlt ξ mN           xl+1  = xlz + vzl+1 .

                                                                  z,t ,     z                    (20)
                             N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)


E    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
The proof of Theorem 1 is a straightforward generalization of the proof provided for Equivariant
Graph Neural Networks (EGNN) in (Satorras et al., 2021). In particular, we can directly state that the
update of the features in (6) is E(n) invariant because the positions {xz }z∈x are used only as input
to the geometric invariant(s) Inv and the features hx contain no geometric information, i.e.
                                                                                           
          l O             M
  hl+1                          ψN ,rk(x) hlx , hly , Inv {Oxlz + b}z∈x , {Oxlz + b}z∈y 
                                                                                         
   x   =β
         hx ,                                                                             , (21)
                  N ∈CN y∈N (x)
                                |                            {z                         }
                                                             mN
                                                              x,y


for all x ∈ X and (O, b) ∈ E(n). Therefore, we just need to show that the update of the positions in
(7) is E(n) equivariant, i.e., we want to prove that
                                    X         X
    Oxl+1   + b = Oxlz + b + C                       (Oxlz + b) − (Oxlt + b) ξ mN

         z                                                                             z,t ,    (22)
                                  N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)



                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for all z ∈ S and (O, b) ∈ E(n). By direct computation, as showed in (Satorras et al., 2021), we
can write
                          X       X
           Oxlz + b + C                     (Oxlz + b) − (Oxlt + b) ξ mN

                                                                           z,t
                                  N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)
                                        X             X
            = Oxlz + b + OC                                       xlz − xlt ξ mN

                                                                               z,t
                                       N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)
                                                                                    
                                    X            X
                                                                              N
            = O xlz + C                                    xlz − xt ξ mz,t  + b = Oxl+1
                                                                     l

                                                                                      z   + b.          (23)
                                   N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)

Therefore, the proof is concluded as the updates in (6)-(7) are E(n) invariant and equivariant,
respectively.
The proof is slightly different if velocities vz are available. In this case, we want to prove that the
updates in (20) are E(n) equivariant. Therefore, for the velocity update, we want to show that
                                    X         X
    Ovzl+1 = ζ hlz Ovz0 + C                              Oxlz + b − Oxlt + b ξ mN

                                                                                          z,t ,    (24)
                                        N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)

for all z ∈ S and (O, b) ∈ E(n). Again by direct computation, we can write
                             X        X
             ζ hli Ovz0 + C                       Oxlz + b − Oxlt + b ξ mN

                                                                           z,t
                                     N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)
                                              X           X
                       hli       vz0 + OC                            xlz − xlt ξ mN

             = Oζ                                                                 z,t
                                            N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)
                                                                                        
                                X                         X
             = O ζ hli vz0 + C                                       xlz − xlt ξ mN      = Ovzl+1 .

                                                                                   z,t                  (25)
                                             N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z)

It is trivial to see that the position update in (20) is E(n) equivariant. Therefore, the proof is concluded
as the updates in (6)-(20) are E(n) invariant and equivariant, respectively.

F    E XPRESSIVENESS OF ETNN S
The ability of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to differentiate between non-isomorphic graphs is
typically employed as an expressivity metric. In particular, it is well known that vanilla GNNs
are at maximum as powerful as the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968) in
discriminating isomorphic graphs. As such, the WL test sets a limit on the expressiveness of GNNs.
To broaden the use of this method to include geometric graphs, the Geometric Weisfeiler-Leman test
(GWL) has been introduced (Joshi et al., 2023). This test evaluates whether two (undirected) graphs
are geometrically isomorphic, as defined next.
Geometrically Isomorphic Graphs.(Joshi et al., 2023; Sestak et al., 2024) Two geometric graphs
G1 = (S1 , E1 ) and G2 = (S2 , E2 ) with |S1 | = |S2 |, non-geometric and geometric i-th node features
 G         G
hxij and xxij (j ∈ {1, 2}), are called geometrically isomorphic if there exists an edge-preserving
bijection b : I1 → I2 between their corresponding node indices set I1 and I2 , such that their
positions are equivalent up to the E(n) group action, i.e.:
                                            hGxb(i)
                                               2
                                                    , xGxb(i)
                                                         2
                                                              = hGxi1 , OxGxi1 + b                      (26)
for all i ∈ I1 , (O, b) ∈ E(n).
k-hop Distinct Graphs.(Joshi et al., 2023; Sestak et al., 2024) Two geometric graphs G1 and G2 are
said to be k-hop distinct if for all graph isomorphisms b, there is some node i ∈ I1 , b(i) ∈ I2 such
that the corresponding k-hop neighborhood subgraphs are distinct (not geometrically isomorphic).
Otherwise, if they are identical up to E(n) actions for all i ∈ I1 , we say G1 and G2 are said to be
k-hop identical.
To study Combinatorial Complexes (CCs) and the expressiveness of Equivariant CCMPNs (ETNNs),
we introduce the notion of Geometric Augmented Hasse Graph representation of CCs, generalizing


                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        (a)                                                 (b)

Figure 7: (a) A combinatorial complex with nodes of the underlying graph as cells of rank 0, and
with three arbitrary cells of rank 1. (b) The corresponding
                                                     L       geometric augmented Hasse graph if
CN = {NA,↑ , NI,↑ , NI,↓ } with NA,↑ as in (14), and    is the mean. This is also an example of a
skeleton-preserving lift.


(Hajij et al., 2022b) and the notion of Hasse diagram for finite partially ordered sets (Demey &
Smessaert, 2014) to the geometric setting.
Geometric Augmented Hasse Graph of a Combinatorial Complex. Let (S, X , rk) be a CC where
each node z ∈ S comes with positions xz , and CN a collection of neighborhood functions. The
Geometric Augmented Hasse graph GX of (S, X , rk) is a (possibly) directed geometric graph GX =
(X , E) with cells as nodes, edges given by
                         E = {(y, x)|x ∈ X , y ∈ X , ∃N ∈ CN : y ∈ N (x)},                       (27)
                                                                       L
and positions of cell x being a linear permutation invariant function z∈x xz of its corresponding
node positions{xz }z∈x , z ∈ S. Therefore, the geometric augmented Hasse graph of a CC is a graph
representation of it obtained by considering the cells as nodes, by inserting edges among them if the
cells are neighbors in the CC, and by assigning positions to higher-order cells as functions of the
nodes (of the CC) they contain. Fig. 7 shows an example of a CC and the corresponding geometric
augmented Hasse graph. Given a CC C, a standard graph message-passing network that runs over the
augmented Hasse graph GX induced by a collection of neighborhoods CN is equivalent to a specific
CCMPN derived as a particular case of (3) and running over X using CN (Hajij et al., 2022b). The
following also holds.
Proposition 1 . Let (S, X , rk) be a CC where each node z ∈ S comes with positions xz , CN a
collection of neighborhood functions, and GX the corresponding geometric augmented Hasse graph.
Assuming that:

1. a single message function for all neighborhoods and ranks, i.e., ψN ,rk(x) = ψ in (6);
                                                                               N L
2. the inter- and intra-neighborhood aggregation functions are the same, i.e.,   =      in (6);
3. the only employed geometric invariants are sum of distances of linear permutation invariant
   functions as in (10), e.g. sum or mean.

Then ETNNs over (S, X , rk) are equivalent to EGNNs (Satorras et al., 2021) over GX with the
following modified update for positions of node x (of the Hasse graph):
                  (
                    xlx + C N ∈CN t∈S:{t}∈N (z) xlx − xlt ξ (mx,t ) , if x ∈ S,
                            P         P
           l+1
          xx =                                                                          (28)
                    xl+1 = z∈x xl+1
                            L
                      x              z ,x ∈ X \ S


Proof. The proof is trivial and is obtained by simple direct substitution in (6)-(7).

Intuitively, the modified update is required because higher-order cells do not come with positions,
thus they cannot be updated as the positions of the nodes in S.
Lifting of a Graph into a CC. Given a graph, many ways exist to lift it into a combinatorial complex.
As shown in Appendix C.1, denoting the set of singletons Se = {{s}}s∈S , a graph G(S, E) is a


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


combinatorial complex (S, X , rk), where S is the set of nodes, the set of cells X = Se is the set of
singletons, the rank function rk assigns rank 0 to each singleton, and the up adjacency from (14)
is employed. However, we can enrich the representation by including the edges E as cells, i.e.,
         S
X = Se E, and assign rank 1 to them. In this setting, it is possible to make nodes communicate
with edges and vice-versa, rather than just making nodes communicate through edges. In general, a
natural question is how to define higher-order cells, i.e., cells of rank greater than 0. We have already
shown in Section 4 that domain knowledge can be injected by properly modeling higher-order cells.
However, we are now interested in understanding which conditions should higher-order cells respect
to result in an increased expressive power of ETNN. To perform a fair analysis, we consider only
skeleton-preserving lifts (Bodnar et al., 2021a), i.e., lifts in which the original connectivity among the
nodes in S is preserved. In other words, we don’t directly rewire the underlying graph G. As shown
in Fig. 7, a straightforward example of skeleton-preserving lifts is choosing (1)-(14) as neighborhood
functions without necessarily adding the edges as cells. Another example is choosing (1)-(2) as
neighborhood functions including the edges as cells.
Expressivity of ETNN. Due to Proposition 1, given two geometric graphs G1 and G2 and two
combinatorial complexes XG1 and XG2 obtained by respectively lifting them, we can study how
expressive ETNNs are by analyzing how the GWL performs on the geometric augmented Hasse
graphs GXG1 and GXG1 of XG1 and XG2 , respectively, w.r.t. how it would perform directly on the
underlying graphs G1 and G2 . Since the GWL operates on undirected graphs, we need to assume that
the produced Hasse graph is undirected. The two examples of skeleton-preserving lifts clearly result
in undirected Hasse graphs. We would obtain a directed Hasse graph if, e.g., only one of the up/down
incidences in (1) is used as a neighborhood function. Similar to the standard graph WL test, the GWL
method updates node colors iteratively based on the features of nodes in the local neighborhood.
Additionally, GWL maintains E(n)-equivariant hash values that capture each node’s local geometry.
Therefore, any k-hop distinct, (k − 1)-hop identical geometric graphs can be distinguished by k
iterations of GWL, i.e., when the updated hash values that capture each node’s local geometry differ
across the two graphs for the first time, or by k layers of an EGNN, i.e., when the geometric invariants
differ across the two graphs for the first time (Joshi et al., 2023).
Proposition 2 . Assume to have two k-hop distinct geometric graphs G1 = (S1 , E1 ) and G2 = (S2 , E2 )
where the underlying graphs are isomorphic in the standard sense, two combinatorial complexes XG1
and XG2 and a collection CN of neighborhood functions obtained via a skeleton-preserving lift and
leading to undirected geometric Hasse graphs GXG1 and GXG2 , respectively. An ETNN operating over
XG1 and XG2 respecting Assumptions 1-3 can distinguish G1 and G2 in M layers, where M is the
number of layers required to have at least one cell in XG1 /XG2 whose receptive field is the whole set
of nodes in G1 /G2 .

Proof. To prove the result, we study the behavior of the GWL on the geometric augmented Hasse
graphs GXG1 and GXG2 of XG1 and XG2 , respectively. For 1-hop distinct graphs, one iteration of GWL
suffices to distinguish them even without any lifting into a CC and, thus, the proposition holds.
Now, let us assume that G1 and G2 are k-hop distinct and (k − 1)-hop identical for any k > 1, k ∈ N.
As a direct consequence of Proposition 1, M GWL iterations are required for (at least one) node of
the Hasse graphs GXG1 /GXG2 to have the entire set of nodes S1 /S2 in its receptive field. Denote that
node with xi ∈ G1 and xb(i) ∈ G2 , where b is any isomorphism between G1 and G2 . Due to the k-hop
distinctness of the graphs, the hash values corresponding to node xi ∈ G1 and xb(i) ∈ G2 will differ
in the M -th iteration, thus M iterations of GWL can distinguish the graphs. Therefore. Combining
the fact that EGNNs are as powerful as the GWL in distinguishing k-hop distinct graphs (Sestak
et al., 2024; Joshi et al., 2023) with the result from Proposition 1, the proof is completed.

Corollary 1 . An ETNN as in Proposition 2 is strictly more powerful than an EGNN (Satorras et al.,
2021) in distinguishing k-hop distinct graphs G1 and G2 if the employed skeleton-preserving lifting is
such that the number of ETNN layers required to have at least one cell in XG1 /XG2 whose receptive
field is the whole set of nodes in G1 /G2 is smaller than the number of EGNN layers required to have
at least one node in G1 /G2 whose receptive field is the whole set of nodes in G1 /G2 .

Proof. Direct consequence of Proposition 2.



                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: k-chain geometric graphs, i.e., k aligned nodes and two end nodes with opposite orientations.


Remark 5 . The reader may have noticed that, in proving Proposition 2, we used the result from
Proposition 1 ignoring the modified position update rule in (28), i.e., implicitly assuming that also the
positions of higher-order cells, when seen as nodes of the corresponding augmented Hasse graph, are
updated as in (7), following the standard EGNN. This is not relevant, as the modified update rule in
(28) is actually more powerful than the standard rule in (7), because L the positions of the higher-order
cell x at layer l is updated using the already updated node positions z∈x xl+1  z    and not the xlz s. For
this reason, Proposition 2 is somehow a pessimistic scenario for the practical use of ETNNs, and
there could be corner cases in which ETNNs can distinguish k-hop distinct geometric graphs with a
lower number of layers than prescribed. Finally, in practice, we observed it is not important to stick
to the homogeneous setting (Assumption 1), to a unique aggregation function (Assumption 2), or to a
certain geometric invariant (Assumption 3). These assumptions are useful to simplify the tractation
and have a perfect match with the geometric augmented Hasse graph formalism.
Discussion. Proposition 2 provides formal hints about how different lifts of graphs into combinatorial
complexes can impact the expressive power of ETNNs. Our result can be seen as a proper generaliza-
tion of Proposition 2 in (Sestak et al., 2024) about the expressivity of VN-EGNNs. Indeed, adding a
virtual node connected to all the other nodes can be interpreted as a combinatorial complex in which
the cells are the set of singletons (the nodes) plus a cell containing all the nodes (the virtual node). A
(simplified) variant of a VG-EGNN is then obtained by using the adjacency induced by the edges of
the original graph and the up/down incidences as neighborhood functions. In this case, as prescribed
from Proposition 2, the receptive field of the virtual node is the whole graph by definition, making
VN-EGNNs able to distinguish k-hop distinct graphs in one layer. Our results also go in the direction
of (Jogl et al., 2023), in which the expressivity of standard graph message passing networks on
transformed/lifted graphs is systematically studied. This work provides a first, preliminary intuition
on how the framework from (Jogl et al., 2023) could be extended to the geometric graph setting.
Moreover, it is worth noting that our expressivity analysis could be enriched through the same GWL
framework from (Joshi et al., 2023), eventually leading to a topological/higher-order generalization
of it. An interesting direction is studying the expressivity of ETNNs when the lifts result in directed
geometric augmented Hasse graphs. Finally, our result could shed light on which lifts should be
preferred. In the current literature (Bodnar et al., 2021a; Hajij et al., 2022b; Battiloro et al., 2023c;
Eijkelboom et al., 2023) except for (Battiloro et al., 2024a), the lifts are always decided based on
simple criteria (e.g., if the domain is a simplicial complex, all the triangles of the underlying graphs
are considered as 2-simplices). However, lifts could strike desirable tradeoffs between expressivity
and learning performance (e.g. if the domain is again a simplicial complex, only some triangles could
be chosen without expressivity drop).
Experimental Validation. To validate our theoretical claims, we follow the approach from (Joshi
et al., 2023; Sestak et al., 2024). In particular, we employ pairs of k-chain geometric graphs, where
each graph pair consists of k nodes linearly aligned    and two endpoints with different orientations, as
shown in Fig. 8. These graphs are clearly k2 + 1 -hop distinct, and thus should be distinguishable


by k2 + 1 EGNN layers or the same number of GWL iterations (Joshi et al., 2023; Sestak et al.,

2024). To show the correctness of our result, we consider k = 4, and we lift each pair of graphs into
a CC in different ways, listed below. In all the cases, we use the mean to assign positions to cells in
the Hasse graph (Assumption 3 of Proposition 1). Without loss of generality, we use NA,↑ as in (14)
(the usual node adjacency) and the up/down incidences NI,↑ /NI,↓ in (1) as neighborhood functions,
i.e., we keep the connectivity among nodes as in the original pair of graphs without including edges
as cells and we allow higher-order cells to communicate only with nodes but not among them (thus
resulting in a hypergraph-like structure). The readout classifier takes as input the geometric invariants
computed on the final updated positions.

• Lift 1a: we consider a set of cells composed of the nodes of the original graphs plus one 1-cell
  containing all the nodes, as shown in Fig. 9a (a). In Figure 9b, we show the corresponding


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Table 3: Classification Accuracy on 4-chain geometric graphs.

                                                                      Number of Layers
       k=4                                   Hidden Dim.      1        2        3         4
       GWL                                                    50%      50%      100%      100%
                                             32               50%      50%      56.5%     50%
       EGNN from (Sestak et al., 2024)
                                             64               50%      50%      100%      99%
                                             128              50%      50%      96.5%     98.5%
                                             32               100%     100%     100%      100%
       ETNN Lift 1a
                                             64               100%     100%     100%      100%
                                             128              100%     100%     100%      100%
                                             32               100%     100%     100%      100%
       ETNN Lift 2a
                                             64               90%      100%     100%      100%
                                             128              90%      100%     100%      100%
                                             32               50%      85%      100%      100%
       ETNN Lift 3a
                                             64               50%      80%      95%       85%
                                             128              50%      80%      95%       95%


  geometric Hasse graphs. All the nodes will have the whole graph as their receptive field before the
  first iteration, thus we expect the GWL on the Hasse graph, hence ETNN, to distinguish the graphs
  using one layer. This case would be solved even by just feeding the initial geometric invariants to
  the readout classifier (using "0" layers).
• Lift 2a: we consider a set of cells composed of the nodes of the original graphs plus two 1-cells
  of the same cardinality being overlapping paths of length 4, as shown in Fig. 10a. In Figure 10b,
  we show the corresponding geometric Hasse graphs. It is clear that nodes {p1 },{p2 } will have the
  whole graph as their receptive field in one iteration, thus we expect the GWL on the Hasse graph,
  hence ETNN, to distinguish the graph using one layer.
• Lift 3a: we consider a set of cells composed of the nodes of the original graphs plus two 1-cells
  of different cardinality and not overlapping, as shown in Fig. 11a. In Figure 11b, we show the
  corresponding geometric Hasse graphs. It is clear that nodes {p1 },{p2 },{o1 },{p2 } will have the
  whole graph as their receptive field in two iterations, thus we expect the GWL on the Hasse graph,
  hence ETNN, to distinguish the graph using two layers.

Per each lift, we trained ETNNs with an increasing number of layers to classify the pairs of graphs.
Due to possible oversquashing effects (Joshi et al., 2023), we also trained ETNNs with 5 different
hidden dimensions and averaged over 10 different seeds. In Table 3, we report the results. We also
report the results for EGNN (taken from (Sestak et al., 2024)) and the GWL on the original pair of
graphs without any lifting into a CC. As the reader can see, empirical results confirm the validity
of our analysis, and the clear advantage, in terms of expressivity, of using CCs and ETNNs over
standard EGNNs. Further empirical advantage is reported, pointing at higher-order interactions as a
practical solution to oversquashing (Giusti et al., 2023b; Di Giovanni et al., 2023).
Remark 6 . The lifts we used in the experiments above are handcrafted lifts, employed to validate
Proposition 2 in a easy and consistent way. However, our result obviously holds in all the cases,
even with more ranks and more sophisticated collections of neighborhood functions (e.g. induced
by skeleton-preserving lift to simplicial, cell, or path complexes(Bodnar et al., 2021a; Giusti et al.,
2023a; Battiloro et al., 2023c; Truong & Chin, 2024; Bodnar et al., 2021b)). Moreover, it is worth it
to notice that, with the experiments above, we investigated the role of the choice of the cells given the
collection of neighborhood functions. However, it is interesting to study even the opposite case, in
which the cells are fixed and the neighborhood functions are chosen. For example, in Lift 2a, adding
the lower adjacency from (2) would have led to solving the task with just one layer because the cells


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Table 4: Classification Accuracy on the counterxamples graphs.

                                                                      Body Order
                                                             2-body     3-body     4-body
              EGNN from (Joshi et al., 2023)                 50%        50%        50%
                                                   Inv.      100%       100%       50%
              ETNN Lift 1b
                                                   Equiv.    100%       100%       50%
                                                   Inv.      100%       50%        50%
              ETNN Lift 2b
                                                   Equiv.    100%       100%       50%
                                                   Inv.      100%       100%       50%
              ETNN Lift 3b
                                                   Equiv.    100%       100%       50%
                                                   Inv.      100%       100%       50%
              ETNN Lift 4b
                                                   Equiv.    100%       100%       50%


c1 /c2 and d1 /d2 would have had the whole graph as their receptive field before the first iteration. An
opposite example serves as proof of Proposition 3 of the main body.
Proposition 3 . There exists a pair of CCs whose nodes come with geometric features and a collection
of neighborhoods such that the CCs are undistinguishable by ETNN.

Proof. We take again a pair of k-chain graphs G1 and G1 , and we lift them in two CCs using Lift 3a
but employing only the up adjacency from (2) as neighborhood function. In this case, ETNN is not
able to distinguish the CCs because the resulting geometric augmented Hasse graph is a disconnected
graph, since p1 /p2 and o1 /o2 are been connected.

Counterexamples Structures. To provide an even more in-depth analysis of the expressivity of
ETNNs beyond the distinguishability of k-hop distinct graphs, we also tested them on the coun-
terexamples graphs from (Pozdnyakov et al., 2020; Joshi et al., 2023), which test a layer’s ability to
create distinguishing fingerprints for local neighborhoods and stress exactly the importance of higher
body order of scalarization. In particular, this task evaluates single-layer geometric architectures
in distinguishing counterexample graphs that cannot be differentiated using k-body scalarization.
we refer the reader to (Pozdnyakov et al., 2020; Joshi et al., 2023) for further details. We tested 4
different lifts:

• Lift 1b: we consider nodes and edges as 0-cells and 1-cells.
• Lift 2b: we consider a set of cells composed of the nodes of the original graphs plus one 1-cell
  containing all the nodes (equivalent to Lift 1a).
• Lift 3b: we consider nodes, edges, and a cell containing all the nodes as 0-cells, 1-cells, and 2-cell,
  respectively.
• Lift 4b: we consider nodes, edges, and paths of length 3 as 0-cells, 1-cells, and 2-cells (this is
  equivalent to a path complex).

For all the lifts, we use the up/down incidences NI,↑ /NI,↓ and adjacencies NA,↑ /NA,↓ from (1)-(2),
respectively, as neighborhood functions, and we test both the invariant and equivariant versions of
ETNN. The results are presented in Table 4. As the reader can see, ETNN is able to distinguish all
the counterexamples but the 4-body (chiral).
Remark 7 . Finally, please notice that we also indirectly showed that lifting (in a skeleton-preserving
way) a graph to a CC and using ETNN can be more effective than lifting it to a simplicial complex
(SC) and using EMPSN (Eijkelboom et al., 2023). In particular, on both the numerical expressivity
tasks, EMPSN with any skeleton preserving lifting would be as expressive as an EGNN (and, thus,
less expressive than an ETNN), as there are no triangles nor cliques.


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 (a)


                                                 (b)

         Figure 9: (a) Lift 1a. (b) The corresponding geometric augmented Hasse graphs.


                                                 (a)


                                                 (b)

         Figure 10: (a) Lift 2a. (b) The corresponding geometric augmented Hasse graphs.


G    C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS



Given the flexibility in the definition of cells and neighborhood functions, the complexity of an
ETNN layer can vary. To provide a reference complexity, let us consider a CC with |X | cells, and the
up/down incidences and adjacencies from (1)-(2) as neighborhood functions. A cell x ∈ X has then
|NI,↑ (x)| + |NI,↓ (x)| incident cells and there are |NA,↑ (x)| + |NA,↓ (x)| = |NI,↑ (x)|+|N
                                                                                          2
                                                                                              I,↓ (x)|

                                                                                 |NI,↑ (z)|
up/down adjacencies between them. Therefore, each node z ∈ S has |NA,↓ (z)| =        2       adjacent
nodes. Then, an ETNN layer as in (6)-(7) has a computational complexity given by


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        (a)


                                                        (b)

         Figure 11: (a) Lift 3a. (b) The corresponding geometric augmented Hasse graphs.



                                                                                                     
                                                                   X               
       X                                 |NI,↑ (x)| + |NI,↓ (x)|        |NI,↑ (z)| 
      Θ
            (|NI,↑ (x)| + NI,↓ (x)|) +                            +                
       x∈X                                          2                       2      
                                                                     z∈S            
        |                           {z                            } |     {z       }
                                   hx update from (6)                          xz update from (7)
                                                                                                  !
              X                                                                X
       =Θ           ((|NI,↑ (x)| + NI,↓ (x)|) + (|NA,↑ (x)| + |NA,↓ (x)|)) +         |NA,↑ (z)|
              x∈X                                                              z∈S
                                               !
              X
       =Θ           (|NA,↑ (x)| + |NA,↓ (x)|) .                                                           (29)
              x∈X

If we consider the connectivity of the CC to be sufficiently sparse, which is usually the case, then

                                               Avg. runtime (seconds/epoch)
                         EGNN-graph-W                      60.34
                         ETNN                             193.16
                         EMPSN*                            251.3

               Table 5: Average runtime per epoch for different ETNN configurations


                                             Avg. memory consumption (GB)
                        EGNN-graph-W                    13.63
                        ETNN                            12.05
                        EMPSN*                           27.7

                Table 6: Average memory usage for different ETNN configurations

the neighborhoods’ cardinalities can be absorbed in the bound. Therefore, the overall complexity
will be linear in the number of the cells Θ (|X |). Clearly, in the worst case, each cell could be
connected to all the other cells, resulting in a quadratic cost in the number of cells. In practice, with
our implementation, both the model’s forward and backward pass scale linearly with the number of
neighborhood functions, as they are processed in a loop. In Table 5, we compare the runtimes of
EGNN-graph-W, EMPSN* (i.e., EMPSN reproduced with our codebase as an instance of ETNN), and
an instance of ETNN using the complete Molecular CC (configs. 35 of Tables 11-12). We decided
to use this configuration of ETNN because is one of the most computationally intensive. However,
better learning performance can be obtained with even (much) lighter configurations, as shown in


                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tables 11-12. In this case, ETNN uses exactly 3 times as many neighborhoods as in EGNN-graph-W,
as the runtimes confirm. A different implementation could parallelize the processing, making the
runtime constant w.r.t. the number of neighborhoods. Most importantly, Table 5 provides the reader
with a quantitative metric of the significantly reduced computational burden of ETNN w.r.t. EMPSN
(Eijkelboom et al., 2023), as described in the main body. To further highlight this gain, in Table 6 we
show the memory usage of the same architectures, proving that ETNN needs less than half memory
w.r.t. EMPSN.

H     A DDITIONAL R EFERENCES ON R EAL -W ORLD C OMBINATORIAL
      T OPOLOGICAL S PACES

H.1    M OLECULAR DATA

Molecular graphs. One of the most renowned representations of molecules is graphs. In this case,
atoms are the nodes, and bonds among them are the edges(Gilmer et al., 2017b; Gasteiger et al., 2020;
Jiang et al., 2021). Message passing networks on molecular graphs have been proven to be effective
on several tasks. However, graphs cannot explicitly model higher-order, multiway interactions among
the atoms. For instance, graphs cannot explicitly consider the information coming from the rings, i.e.,
the induced cycles of the molecular graphs. To represent different atomic relations, efforts focused on
learning representations for small molecules and larger biomolecules (i.e., proteins) via multi-view or
relational graphs(Ma et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023; Sestak et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b).
Molecular cell complexes. To overcome the above limitation, cell complexes (CW complexes),
being a generalization of simplicial complexes (Eijkelboom et al., 2023; Bodnar et al., 2021b),
have been employed (Bodnar et al., 2021a). Molecular CW complexes can be seen as "hierarchical
augmented graphs" in which atoms are 0-cells (nodes), bonds are 1-cells (edges), and rings are 2-cells
(induced cycles). Message passing networks on molecular CW complexes have shown superior
performance w.r.t. models on molecular graphs (Giusti et al., 2023b; Bodnar et al., 2021a). However,
CW complexes cannot model higher-order interactions among the atoms and bonds that are not
described by a cycle in the underlying molecular graph. For instance, molecular CW complexes
cannot explicitly consider the information coming from the functional groups of the molecule, i.e.,
specific motifs (not necessarily cycles) of the underlying molecular graphs.
Molecular hypergraphs. Hypergraphs (HGs) can model arbitrary higher-order interactions due to
the flexibility of hyperedges. HGs and message passing networks on HGs have been employed for
modeling and learning from molecules (Chen & Schwaller, 2023; Park et al., 2021). In molecular
HGs, atoms are nodes, and bonds, rings, functional groups, etc, are hyperedges. However, HGs
cannot explicitly consider any hierarchy in the hyperedges, thus putting pairwise and higher-order
interactions of any kind on the same level.

H.2    G EOSPATIAL DATA

Spatial graphs and CTS The single resolution version of the spatial setting in Section 4 has been
traditionally handled using proximity graphs, i.e., geometric graphs whose connectivity is dictated
by some notion of spatial closeness. In the multiresolution case, the most common approach is
to aggregate all the data at a common denominator of spatial resolution. However, substantial
information is clearly lost in this process. Some GNN methods for expanding the receptive field of
GNNs in spatial data have been proposed. For instance, through edge removal during training to
address over-smoothing and over-fitting (Rong et al., 2019), and the introduction of skip connections
(He et al., 2016; Li et al., 2018). Yu et al. (Yu et al., 2019) introduced ST-UNet, a heuristic graph
pooling method for coarsened graph construction. Note that these methods do not admit multi-level
data, i.e., features available in each level of a hierarchy. Hierarchical GNNs (HGNNs) (Diehl et al.,
2019; Lee et al., 2019; Ying et al., 2018) create multi-level graphs balancing the expansion of receptive
fields and preservation of local features. HGNNs can admit multi-level features. A highly relevant
application is due to Li et al. (Li et al., 2019), who utilized a geography-based HGNN for modeling
geographic information systems. Importantly, this work does not consider the use of geometric
(coordinate information) directly, and therefore, it does not explore equivariant architectures. Other
related work includes Wu et al. (Wu et al., 2020), who proposed HRNR for learning road segment
representations. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2020) combined HGNNs with semi-supervised learning


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for citywide parking availability prediction. It is worth noticing that the constructions of such HGNNs
are highly reliant on the specifics of the application, while Geospatial CCs offer a more generally
applicable formalism. Motivated by topological approaches, some works used hypergraphs (Jia et al.,
2023), whose limitation have been explained in the previous subsection. Some Topological Data
Analysis (TDA) work leveraged simplicial complexes (Bajardi et al., 2015; Lo & Park, 2018; Stolz
et al., 2016; Feng & Porter, 2021; Hickok et al., 2022). However, TDL should not be confused with
TDA, which is a data-driven approach to describing the mathematical properties and “shape" of a
topological space. Instead, TDL focuses on modeling relations and data distributions defined over
such topological spaces (Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020).

I     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

I.1     M OLECULAR P ROPERTY P REDICTION

In this section, we present all dataset information, data featurization, and model parameter configura-
tion for the molecular property prediction task.

I.1.1    DATASET S TATISTICS
QM9 dataset consists of over 130, 000 molecules with 12 property prediction targets. See Table 7
for a detailed list of the 12 molecular properties, as well as statistics over the number of molecules,
atoms, bonds, rings, and functional groups.

                                Table 7: Statistics of the QM9 Dataset

    Property                                                                    Description        Units
    α                                                               Electronic spatial extent       bohr3
    ∆ϵ                                                    Gap between ϵHOM O and ϵLU M O             meV
    ϵHOM O                                 Energy of the highest occupied molecular orbital          meV
    ϵLU M O                               Energy of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital          meV
    µ                                                                        Dipole moment              D
    Cv                                                            Heat capacity at 298.15 K     cal/mol K
    G                                                               Free energy at 298.15 K          meV
    H                                                                  Enthalpy at 298.15 K          meV
    U                                                           Internal energy at 298.15 K          meV
    U0                                                                Internal energy at 0 K         meV
    ZP V E                                                     Zero-point vibrational energy         meV
    Number of molecules                                                                          133,885
    Average number of atoms                                                                     18 nodes
    Average number of bonds                                                                            19
    Average number of rings                                                                           1.6
    Average number of functional groups                                                               1.2



I.1.2    C ELL F EATURES
For the molecular prediction task, we considered different peculiar feature vectors for each rank, that
can be easily integrated thanks to the ETNN structure.

1. 0-cells features (atom features):
        • Atom Types: QM9 molecular samples consist of 5 atoms: hydrogen (H), carbon (C), nitrogen
          (N), oxygen (O), and fluorine (F). We used one-hot encoding for the atom types.
        • Functions over atom types: Following Cormorant’s methodology(Anderson et al., 2019),
          we computed the atomic fraction (current atomic number divided by the maximum atomic
          number), multiplied the atomic number with the atomic fraction, and computed the squared
          quantities.
2. 1-cells features (bond features):


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • Bond Types: We can meet 4 different bond types in QM9 molecules: single, double, triple,
          aromatic. We used one-hot encoding for the bond types.
        • Conjugation: A binary feature telling whether the bond is part of a conjugated system,
          affecting electronic and optical properties.
        • Ring Membership: binary feature telling whether the bond is part of a ring, affecting electronic
          and structural characteristics of the molecule.
3. 2-cells features (ring and functional group features):

   Ring features
        • Ring Size: Number of atoms that form the ring.
        • Aromaticity: A binary feature telling whether the ring is aromatic.
        • Has Heteroatom: A binary feature telling whether the ring contains a heteroatom, which is
          an atom other than carbon, such as nitrogen, oxygen, or sulfur. Heteroatoms can introduce
          different electronic effects and reactivity patterns within the ring structure.
        • Saturation: A binary feature telling whether the ring is saturated, meaning all the bonds
          between carbon atoms are single bonds.
   Functional Group features
        • Conjugation: A binary feature telling whether the functional group is part of a conjugated
          system, which involves alternating double and single bonds.
        • Acidity: The ability of the functional group to donate protons (H+ ions) in a solution.
          Possible values: ["neutral", "high", "basic", "weakly acidic"].
        • Hydrophobicity: Tendency of the functional group to repel water. 3 Possible values: [hy-
          drophilic, "moderate", "hydrophobic"]
        • Electrophilicity: Tendency of the functional group to accept electrons during a chemical reac-
          tion. High electrophilicity means the functional group readily accepts electrons, influencing
          its reactivity with nucleophiles. 3 Possible values: ["low", "moderate", "high"].
        • Nucleophilicity: Tendency of the functional group to donate electrons during a chemical
          reaction. High nucleophilicity means the functional group readily donates electrons, affecting
          its reactivity with electrophiles. 3 possible values: ["low", "moderate", "high"].
        • Polarity: Distribution of electron density within the functional group. High polarity can
          significantly affect solubility, reactivity, and interactions with other molecules. 3 possible
          values: ["low", "moderate", "high"].

I.1.3    PARAMETER C ONFIGURATION

Next, we present the ETNN’s hyperparameters we used for the molecular property prediction tasks.
Table 8 shows the list of the hyperparameters of the optimizer, as well of our model. Specifically:

        • Following EGNN’s experimentation setup, we use 1e-3 as the initial learning rate for the
          properties ∆ϵ, ϵHOMO , ϵLUMO , and 5e-4 for the rest of the properties.
        • We calibrate the number of hidden units (i.e., layer width) among {70, 104, 128, 182} for
          each configuration, so that we maintain roughly the same size of parameter space (≈ 1.5M).
          The motivation for this choice is to provide the fairest comparison possible. see Appendix J
          for further motivation and details.
        • All the reported configurations were run for 1000 epochs, in agreement with the original
          EGNN(Satorras et al., 2021).
        • We used the same train/validation/test splits as introduced in EGNN(Satorras et al., 2021).
          See Appendix J for further motivation and details.
        • For all the configurations we normalize the geometric invariants via batch normalization.
          That includes the normalization of pairwise distances, Hausdorff distances, and volumes.
          Moreover, we perform gradient clipping to a maximum norm of gradients equal to 1.0.


                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Table 8: Hyperparameters for ETNN Model in the Molecular Task

                    Hyperparameter                                           Value
                    Optimizer                                                Adam
                    Initial Learning Rate                        [5 ∗ 10−4 , 10−3 ]
                    Learning Rate Scheduler                     Cosine Annealing
                    Weight Decay                                              1e-5
                    Batch Size                                                  96
                    Epochs                                   [100, 200, 350, 1000]
                    Model
                    Number of Message Passing Layers                      [4, 7, 10]
                    Hidden Units per Layer                      [70, 104, 128, 182]
                    Activation Function                                       SiLU
                    Invariant Normalization                           [True, False]
                    Gradient Clipping                                 [True, False]


I.2     H YPERLOCAL A IR P OLLUTION D OWNSCALING

I.2.1    DATASET S TATISTICS
We create a geospatial CC using the neighborhood functions described by Eq. (12). The hyperlocal
air measurements points (target) are taken from (Wang et al., 2023). The targets are aggregated at
the desired resolution of 0.0002◦ ∼ 22m. After removing roads and tracts that do not contain any
measurements, the resulting dataset contains 3,946 point measurements, 550 roads, and 151 census
tracts, corresponding to 0-, 1- and 2-cells, respectively.

I.2.2    C ELL F EATURES
The learning targets are the fine-resolution PM 2.5 from (Wei et al., 2023) as described in the main
text. As such, this is a semisupervised node regression task. We now describe the features of each
rank. For the 0-cells, we generate point-level features using the osmnx Python package (Boeing,
2017), calculating metrics such as density and distance to points of interest within a buffer radius.
We remove roads and tracts that do not contain any measurements. We consider only points that
correspond to weekdays between 9 and 5 pm. For 1-cells, we use the 2021 annual average daily
traffic information (New York City Department of Transportation, 2024). For 2-cells we generate
land-use features from the Primary Land Use Tax Lot Output (PLUTO)(New York City Department
of City Planning, 2024) and previous coarse-resolution estimates of PM 2.5 at the census-tract level
are taken from Wei et al. (Wei et al., 2023). Values are monthly averages over the last quarter of
2020, projected to the census tract level using bilinear interpolation from their native 1 km resolution.
Below is a list of the employed features. Table 9 summarizes the data sources.

1. 0-cells features (points; OpenStreetMap (OSMnx) and Wang et al.):
      • Intersection density: Using the osmnx Python package, we calculate the density of intersec-
        tions within a 100m buffer radius (Boeing, 2017).
      • Nearest school distance: Calculated using osmnx to determine the distance to the nearest
        school (Boeing, 2017).
      • Restaurant density: Using osmnx, we calculate the density of restaurants within a 300m
        radius (Boeing, 2017).
      • Road density: Derived from osmnx by calculating the density of roads within a buffer radius
        (Boeing, 2017).
      • Time of day: We include the median time of measurements by Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2023)
        for each of the points in a 0.0002◦ × 0.0002◦ area.
2. 1-cells features (road/polylines; AADT, NYC, Dept. of Transportation):
      • AADT 2021: Annual Average Daily Traffic data for 2021 (New York City Department of
        Transportation, 2024).
      • PCT 2021: Percentage of trucks traffic (New York City Department of Transportation, 2024).


                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Table 9: Data sources of the Geospatial Air Pollution Downscaling Benchmark

        Source                              Citation                                             LICENSE
        Wang et al.                         (Wang et al., 2023)                                  CC 4.0
        PLUTO, NYC Dept. of Planning        (New York City Department of City Planning, 2024)    Open Data
        AADT, NYC Dept. of Transportation   (New York City Department of Transportation, 2024)   Open Data
        OpenStreetMap (OSMnx)               (Boeing, 2017)                                       Open Data
        Wei et al.                          (Wei et al., 2023)                                   CC 4.0



3. 2-cells features (census tracts):
   PLUTO, NYC Dept. of Planning (New York City Department of City Planning, 2024)
        • Assessment total
        • Building area
        • Commercial area (% area)
        • Factory area (% area)
        • Mixed residential/commercial (% tax lots)
        • Multi-family elevator (% tax lots)
        • One/two family (% tax lots)
        • Open space/outdoor recreation (% tax lots)
        • Parking/vacant (% tax lots)
        • Public facilities/institutions (% tax lots)
        • Transportation/utility (% tax lots)
        • Lot area (sq. km)
        • Lot depth (m)
        • Office area (% area)
        • Residential area (% area)
        • Retail area (% area)
   Other sources
        • Coarse PM2.5 predictor (Di et al., 2019): Coarse-resolution monthly estimates of mean
          PM2.5 by census tract.


I.2.3    PARAMETER C ONFIGURATION

The training and evaluation scheme is similar to the molecular case. For training, we use the Huber
loss which provides additional robustness to outliers (Huber, 1964). The evaluation metric is obtained
similarly to the molecular task. Since the data consists of a single graph, we use a standard procedure
for semisupervised tasks on spatial data and generate training, validation, and test masks. To do so
while being mindful of spatial leaks and correlations, we randomly select 70% of census tracts for
training and split the remaining 30% equally in test and validation tracts. Since points in the dataset
only belong to a single census tract, we can use these splits to partition points in their corresponding
sets, ensuring that neighboring points belong, on average, to the same split. While all the nodes
(training/validation/test) are given as inputs to the model, the loss function for backpropagation is
only computed from the error in the training nodes, as in any standard semisupervised setting (Kipf
& Welling, 2017).
The evaluation metric is the root-mean-squared error (RMSE) in the test split from the best model of
each baseline. The base model is determined by the lowest RMSE in the validation RMSE at any
point during training from a sweep over the hyperparameters described in Table 10. The test split
only reports the final metric to ensure validity. The EGNN baseline used the same architecture but no
lower/upper adjacencies. It also has higher-order features concatenated with point-level features. The
multi-layer perception and linear baselines are evaluated similarly. The MLP baseline is implemented
with 5 layers to match the number of hidden layers in the ETNN and graph-based baselines.


                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Table 10: Hyperparameters for ETNN Model in the Air Pollution Downscaling Task

                      Hyperparameter                                      Value
                      Optimizer                                           Adam
                      Initial Learning Rate                       [10−3 , 10−2 ]
                      Learning Rate Scheduler                 Cosine Annealing
                      Weight Decay                                         1e-4
                      Batch Size                                              1
                      Epochs                                                500
                      Model
                      Number of Message Passing Layers                         4
                      Hidden Units per Layer                             [4, 32]
                      Activation Function                                  SiLU
                      Invariant Normalization                              False
                      Gradient Clipping                                     True
                      Dropout                                      [0.025, 0.25]


I.3   G EOMETRIC F EATURES

We note that for both the molecular property prediction, and the hyperlocal air pollution downscaling
task we are using coordinates as geometric features. Specifically, we employ 0-cell geometric features,
which are inherited in the higher ranks. Regarding the molecular property prediction, we are using the
3D atom coordinates, while for the geospatial task, we are using the latitude and longitude variables.

Computational Resources All experiments that produced the reported configurations in both tasks
were conducted using Nvidia A100-SXM4-40GB GPUs. Each system has a capacity of 80GB RAM,
40GB GPU memory, and 6 CPUs per unit.


J     A BLATION S TUDY AND R EPRODUCIBILITY FOR M OLECULAR P ROPERTY
      P REDICTION

In this section, we present the whole set of experiments we carried out to obtain our results in Table
1, i.e., all the different configurations of ETNN we tested. Moreover, we want to further specify some
details that are useful to fairly evaluate our results and ensure reproducibility.
Reproducibility. When we started to set up the experiments, we found a poor reproducibility level
for the molecular prediction task on QM9 in the literature. In particular, practically every model of
the ones listed in Table 1 uses different data splits. The two closest models to ETNN are EGNN
(Satorras et al., 2021) and EMPSN (Eijkelboom et al., 2023), which are also particular cases of our
framework. We were not able to reproduce the results of EMPSN (and this is also the reason we
did not include it in Table 1), while we were able to reproduce the EGNN results using the original
codebase. For all of the reasons above, we decided to employ the same data splits as EGNN(Satorras
et al., 2021). To guarantee a fair comparison with EMPSN, however, in this appendix we also report
the results of EMPSN from the original paper, EMPSN reproduced in TopNets (Verma et al., 2024),
and EMPSN reproduced with our codebase (as described in the main body). Again, and as explained
in Appendix C.1, EGNN can be directly derived from ETNN. Before exploring different ETNN
configurations, we aligned our training and architecture parameters with EGNN. We ensured that
our ETNN code, configured as an EGNN, could reproduce all the considered properties of the QM9
dataset reported in the original EGNN paper. Moreover, we trained our models for 1000 epochs as in
EGNN and EMPSN. Finally, to ensure further consistency, we also trained a configuration of ETNN,
dubbed ETNN-graph-W, that is again EGNN derived from our codebase but with a higher number of
hidden units, chosen such that the number of parameters of ETNN-graph-W matches the average
number of parameters of the other ETNN configurations (1.5M, while the original EGNN has 748k).
Results. In Tables 11- 12, we present the full list of the ETNN configurations we tested, representing
also an exhaustive ablation study on all the main components of our architectures. We also add the


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


results of TopNet, presented in the contemporary work (Verma et al., 2024). We grouped the relevant
model hyperparameters of ETNN into the following five groups:

• Definition of the Molecular CC. We study the performance of ETNN when bonds, rings, and
  functional groups, are included or not as cells in the complex. In Tables 11- 12, this is described in
  the first argument, Lifters. The values of the argument indicate what are the considered cells, e.g.
  A+B+F+R means that atoms, bonds, functional groups, and rings are used as cells. The rank is
  assigned in increasing order as described in Section 5.
• Adjacencies. We study the performance of ETNN when different adjacencies are employed in
  the collection of neighborhood functions CN . In Tables 11-12, this is described in the second
  argument, Adjacencies. In particular, we test the usage of NA,max as in (13) in conjunction with
  the up/down adjacencies NA,↑ and NA,↓ from (2). In Tables 11- 12, Adjacencies = max means
  that only the max adjacency from (13) is used, while Adjacencies = max,↑,↓ means that both the
  max adjacency from (13) and the up/down adjacencies from (2) are used (effectively resulting in a
  heterogeneous setting as described in the body of the paper).
• Incidences. We study the performance of ETNN when different incidences are employed in the
  collection of neighborhood functions CN .In Tables 11- 12, this is described in the third argument,
  Incidences. Testing only the he up/down incidences NI,↑ and NI,↓ from (2) would always result in
  configurations in which cells of rank k communicate only with cells of ranks k − 1 and k + 1. For
  this reason, we also test the k-up/down incidences, defined as:
                            NI,↑k (x) = {y ∈ X |rk(y) = rk(x) + k, x ⊂ y},
                            NI,↓k (x) = {y ∈ X |rk(y) = rk(x) − k, y ⊂ x}.                             (30)
  In this way, cells can communicate in a more flexible way across ranks. In Tables 11- 12, Incidences
  = all means that the k-up/down incidences from (30) are used for all the possible k, i.e., each rank
  communicates with all the other ranks; Incidences = 1 means that the up/down incidences from (1)
  (equivalently, k = 1 in (30)) are used; Incidences = 0 means that no incidences are used, i.e., there
  are no inter-rank message exchanges and the embeddings are aggregated only in the readout layer.
• Higher-order Features. We study the performance of ETNN when higher-order features (not only
  atom features) are employed. In Tables 11- 12, this is described in the fourth binary argument, HO
  Features. If HO Features = 1, higher-order features (bonds, ring and/or functional groups based on
  the complex) are fed to the model.
• Virtual Cell. We study the performance of ETNN when the virtual cell is employed. In Tables 11-
  12, this is described in the fifth binary argument, Virtual Cell. If Virtual Cell = 1, the virtual cell is
  included in the complex.
Remark 8 . In all the configurations, we don’t allow the virtual cell to exchange messages or being
included in the readout layer. The reason is that we mostly use it in the experiments to obtain a
fully connected computational graph on each rank when it is used together with the max adjacency
from (13). However, it remains an interesting object, as it is i) a straightforward way to include
whole molecule-level features in ETNN by assigning them as features to the virtual cell, and ii)
useful to improve expressiveness and generality of ETNN, as shown in Appendix F. Therefore, when
Adjacencies = max and Virtual Cell=1, the resulting configuration is equivalent to not including the
virtual cell in the complex and using the neighborhood function NA,all (x) = {y ∈ X |rk(y) = rk(x)}.
To provide the reader with some usage examples of ETNN employing the above hyperparameter
grouping (that we follow in our codebase), EGNN as in the original paper (Satorras et al., 2021)
can be obtained setting Lifters = A, Adjacencies = max, Incidences = 0, HO Features = 0, Virtual
Cell = 1; an instance of EMPSN (Eijkelboom et al., 2023) can be obtained setting Lifters = A+B+R,
Adjacencies = ↑, ↓, Incidences = 1, HO Features = 1, Virtual Cell = 0, and considering only rings of
length up to three; an equivariant version of (Bodnar et al., 2021a) can be obtained setting Lifters =
A+B+R, Adjacencies = ↑, ↓, Incidences = 1, HO Features = 1, Virtual Cell = 0, and considering rings
of arbitrary length.
As the reader can notice from Tables 11- 12, several higher-order ETNN configurations reach
near-SotA results and significant improvements over the reference EGNNs baselines, i.e., the original
EGNN (Satorras et al., 2021) in the upper part of the tables, and its implementations ETNN-graph
and ETNN-graph-W obtained through our codebase. ETNN-graph is the same exact architecture
as the original EGNN but trained with gradient clipping and geometric invariants normalization.


                                                    39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 11: Mean Absolute Error for the first six molecular property predictions in QM9.

 Task                                                                              α     ∆ε    εHOMO   εLUMO    µ          Cν
 Units                                                                           bohr3   meV    meV     meV     D      cal/mol K
 NMP                                                                             .092    69     43      38     .030      .040
 Schnet                                                                          .235    63     41      34     .033      .033
 Cormorant                                                                       .085    61     34      38     .038      .026
 L1Net                                                                           .088    68     46      35     .043      .031
 LieConv                                                                         .084    49     30      25     .032      .038
 DimeNet++*                                                                      .044    33     25      20     .030      .023
 TFN                                                                             .223    58     40      38     .064      .101
 SE(3)-Tr.                                                                       .142    53     35      33     .051      .054
 EGNN                                                                            .071    48     29      25     .029      .031
 EMPSN(Eijkelboom et al., 2023)                                                  .066    37     25      20     .023      .024
 EMPSN*                                                                          .061    42     29      25     .030      .028
 EMPSN(Verma et al., 2024)                                                       .066    51     32      25     .031      .027
 TopNet (VC, discrete)(Verma et al., 2024)                                       .083    47     37      24     .035      .032
 TopNet (VC, continuous)(Verma et al., 2024)                                     .075    49     36      27     .030      .035
 TopNet (RePHINE, discrete)(Verma et al., 2024)                                  .072    57     33      28     .029      .028
 TopNet (RePHINE, continuous)(Verma et al., 2024)                                .070    50     35      25     .032      .030
 ETNN (Configurations)
 [ Lifters | Adjacencies | Incidences | HO Features | Virtual Cell ]
 1: [A+B | max | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                      .074    46     30      24      .03      .032
 2: [A+B+F | max | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                    .078    50     32      25     .029      .032
 3: [A+B+R | max | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                    .079    50     34      25     .029      .033
 4: [A+B+F +R | max | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                 .077    54     31      27     .032      .033
 5: [A+B | max | 0 | 0 | 1]                                                       .062   48     27      25      .03      .033
 6: [A+B | max | all | 1 | 1]                                                      .07   47     26      23     .023       .03
 7: [A+B+F | max | all | 1 | 1]                                                  .072    47     27      23     .024      .032
 8: [A+B+R | max | all | 1 | 1]                                                  .071    49     26      23     .023      .032
 9: [A+B+F+R | max | all | 1 | 1]                                                .069    46     26      23     .025      .033
 10: [A+B+F+R | max, ↑,↓ | all | 1 | 0]                                           .157    72     45      46     .31      .053
 11: [A+B | max | 0 | 1 | 0]                                                     .149    69     45      45     .298      .048
 12: [A | max | 0 | 0 | 1] (ETNN-graph)                                            .07   45     28      23     .029      .035
 13: [A | max | 0 | 0 | 1] (ETNN-graph-W)                                          .07   49     28      25      .03      .036
 14: [A+B+F+R | max | all | 1 | 0]                                                 .13   66     44      42     .285      .046
 15: [A+B+R | max | all | 1 | 1] (triangles only, EMPSN-like)                    .071    46     27      24     .022      .032
 16: [A+B+F+R | max | all | 1 | 1] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)           .191    85     62      59     .339      .078
 17: [A+B+F+R | max | all | 1 | 0] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)           .184    86     61      59     .351      .075
 18: [A+B | max | 1 | 1 | 1]                                                     .069    47     26      22     .024       .03
 19: [A+B+F | max | 1 | 1 | 1]                                                   .067    44     27      23     .023      .032
 20: [A+B+R | max | 1 | 1 | 1]                                                   .069    46     26      24     .023      .033
 21: [A+B+F+R | max | 1 | 1 | 1]                                                 .075    45     27      23     .024      .034
 23: [A+B+F+R | max | 1 | 1 | 0]                                                 .139    68     41      43     .281      .046
 25: [A+B+F+R | max | 1 | 1 | 1] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)             .193    90     60      63     .359      .075
 26: [A+B | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                 .187    85     61      58    .342      .074
 27: [A+B+F | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 1 | 1]                                              1.179   438    282     333    .772      .678
 28: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 1 | 1] (equivariant CWN-like)                       1.143   352    262     262    .713      .628
 29: [A+B | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 0 | 1]                                                1.038   332    237     284    .721      .548
 30: [A+B | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 0 | 1]                                                 .984   267    209     229    .657      .496
 31: [A+B | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 1]                                                1.224   410    251     307    .712      .848
 32: [A+B+F | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 1]                                               .141   74     50      48     .312      .049
 33: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 1]                                               .143    75     48      47    .337      .048
 34: [A+B+F+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 1]                                             .129    69     44      45    .297      .046
 35: [A+B+F+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 0]                                             .134    71     46      45    .302      .046
 36: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 0] (triangles only, heterogeneous EMPSN-like)    .132    71     45      45    .309      .045
 37: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 1 | 0] (no geometric features, CWN-like)             .145    75     49      49    .324      .049
 38: [A+B+F+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 0] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)         .184    90     62      62    .371      .077
 39: [A+B+F+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 0] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)          .19    92     62      60     .36      .076
 Best ETNN Configuration
 ETNN-*                                                                           .062    45     26      22     .022     .030
 Improvement over EGNN                                                           -13%    -6%   -10%    -12%    -26%      -3%



As mentioned at the beginning of this section, we made sure that ETNN-graph without gradient
clipping and normalization almost exactly reproduces the results of the original EGNN. We report
EGNN-graph because it is sometimes able to reach better results than the original EGNN on some
targets. Moreover, some configurations that we test are also instances of other architectures like
EMPSN (Eijkelboom et al., 2023) or CWN (Bodnar et al., 2021a), further highlighting the versatility
of our framework. Notably, ETNN consistent outperforms TopNet(Verma et al., 2024) too. Overall,
these results validate our TDL approach and show that the flexibility of CCs is necessary.

K        A RCHITECTURE D ESCRIPTION
In this section, we describe the implementation of E(n) Equivariant Topological Neural Networks
(ETNNs). The model architecture is kept as similar to EGNN as possible so as to not introduce


                                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 12: Mean Absolute Error for the last five molecular property predictions in QM9.

 Task                                                                             G     H     U     U0   ZPVE
 Units                                                                           meV   meV   meV   meV   meV
 NMP                                                                             19    17    20    20     1.50
 Schnet                                                                          14    14    19    14     1.70
 Cormorant                                                                       20    21    21    22     2.03
 L1Net                                                                           14    14    14    13     1.56
 LieConv                                                                         22    24    19    19     2.28
 DimeNet++*                                                                       8     7     6     6     1.21
 TFN                                                                              -     -     -     -       -
 SE(3)-Tr.                                                                        -     -     -     -       -
 EGNN                                                                            12    12    12    11     1.55
 EMPSN(Eijkelboom et al., 2023)                                                   6     9     7    10     1.37
 EMPSN*                                                                          11    11    10    10     1.46
 EMPSN(Verma et al., 2024)                                                        -     -     -     -     1.44
 TopNet (VC, discrete)(Verma et al., 2024)                                        -     -     -     -     1.45
 TopNet (VC, continuous)(Verma et al., 2024)                                      -     -     -     -     1.43
 TopNet (RePHINE, discrete)(Verma et al., 2024)                                   -     -     -     -     1.38
 TopNet (RePHINE, continuous)(Verma et al., 2024)                                 -     -     -     -     1.37
 ETNN (Configurations)
 [ Lifters | Adjacencies | Incidences | HO Features | Virtual Cell ]
 1: [A+B | max | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                       15    13    14    13     1.75
 2: [A+B+F | max | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                     14    12    12    12    1.733
 3: [A+B+R | max | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                     15    15    14    14    1.763
 4: [A+B+F +R | max | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                  15    15    15    15    1.749
 5: [A+B | max | 0 | 0 | 1]                                                       13    12    12    12   1.589
 6: [A+B | max | all | 1 | 1]                                                    11    12    12    11    1.648
 7: [A+B+F | max | all | 1 | 1]                                                   12    12    12    12     1.66
 8: [A+B+R | max | all | 1 | 1]                                                   11    13   11    13    1.668
 9: [A+B+F+R | max | all | 1 | 1]                                                 12    12    13    11    1.742
 11: [A+B | max | 0 | 1 | 0]                                                      26    27    27    27    2.275
 12: [A | max | 0 | 0 | 1] (ETNN-graph)                                           15    15    14    16    1.658
 13: [A | max | 0 | 0 | 1] (ETNN-graph-W)                                         14    14    14    13    1.624
 14: [A+B+F+R | max | all | 1 | 0]                                                23    24    24    24    2.278
 15: [A+B+R | max | all | 1 | 1] (triangles only, EMPSN-like)                     12    12    11    12    1.703
 16: [A+B+F+R | max | all | 1 | 1] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)            32    34    35    32    3.268
 17: [A+B+F+R | max | all | 1 | 0] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)            32    34    34    34    3.202
 18: [A+B | max | 1 | 1 | 1]                                                      12    12    11    13     1.65
 19: [A+B+F | max | 1 | 1 | 1]                                                    13    14    12    13    1.644
 20: [A+B+R | max | 1 | 1 | 1]                                                    12    13    12    11    1.714
 21: [A+B+F+R | max | 1 | 1 | 1]                                                  12   12    13    11    1.694
 23: [A+B+F+R | max | 1 | 1 | 0]                                                  24    24    24    24    2.183
 25: [A+B+F+R | max | 1 | 1 | 1] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)              32    35    35    34    3.361
 26: [A+B+F+R | max | 1 | 1 | 0]                                                  32    35    34    34    3.183
 27: [A+B | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 1 | 1]                                                427   432   434   431   17.279
 28: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 1 | 1] (equivariant CWN-like)                       367   371   376   373   16.298
 29: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 1 | 1]                                              302   302   302   302   13.019
 30: [A+B | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 0 | 1]                                                236   238   237   236   12.175
 31: [A+B | max, ↑,↓ | 0 | 0 | 1]                                                477   491   485   484   25.588
 32: [A+B | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 1]                                                 29    30    29    30    2.369
 33: [A+B+F | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 1]                                               28    29    28    30    2.227
 34: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 1]                                               23    24    25    23    2.165
 35: [A+B+F+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 1]                                             25    25    25    24    2.178
 36: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 0] (triangles only, heterogeneous EMPSN-like)    25    26    25    25    2.215
 37: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 0] (no geometric features, CWN-like)             27    28    27    27    2.222
 38: [A+B+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 1 | 0] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)           34    34    34    34    3.154
 39: [A+B+F+R | max, ↑,↓ | 1 | 0 | 0] (no geometric features, CCMPN-like)         32    33    33    32    3.148
 Best ETNN Configuration
 ETNN-*                                                                           11    12    11    11   1.589
 Improvement over EGNN                                                           -8%   0%    -8%   0%    2.5%


alternative explanations for differences in model performance. The main components of ETNNs are
as follows:
Model Initialization:


                                                          41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • Invariant Normalizer: Normalizes invariant features dynamically using batch normalization
        with no learnable parameters. Each rank is normalized separately.
      • Feature Embedding: Embeds input features into a hidden representation. Input features of
        each rank are embedded with a separate featurizer.
      • Equivariant Message Passing (EMP) Layers: Repeatedly updates the hidden representations
        of each cell using messages from neighboring cells. For details, see below.
      • Pre-Pool Layer: Updates the hidden representation of each cell using distinct MLPs for each
        rank.
      • Post-Pool Layer: MLP applied after the global pooling operation to produce the final output.

Forward Pass:

     1. Input Handling:
           • Retrieves pre-computed non-geometric cell features, adjacency relationships, and
              positional information.
     2. Initial Feature Computation:
           • Computes node and membership features for each rank. Cells with higher rank may
              either use their own non-geometric features, the mean feature vector of the nodes the
              cell is composed of, a membership vector denoting the lifter that generated the cell, or
              any combination of these.
           • Embeds the chosen non-geometric features into a common hidden representation.
     3. Geometric Invariant Computation:
           • Computes E(n) invariant geometric features using the absolute positions of nodes and
              the specified compute_invariants function.
           • Optionally normalizes the computed invariant features.
     4. Message Passing:
           • Applies EMP layers to update cells’ hidden represntations via message passing. For
              details on message passing, see below.
     5. Readout and Pooling:
           • Applies pre-pooling MLPs to the hidden representations of cells. Each rank is processed
              by a different MLP.
           • If the task is graph-level prediction, hidden representations of cells of same rank are
              added together to arrive at rank representations. These representations are concatenated
              and a post-pooling MLP is applied to generate the final output.

Equivariant Message Passing (EMP) Layers: The computation of the EMP layer takes place in the
following steps:

     1. Computation of individual messages:
          • For each cell, a message is computed for each of its parents. This message is computed
             by an adjacency-specific MLP that takes as input the hidden representations of the
             sending and receiving cells, and the E(n) invariant geometric features derived from the
             absolute positions of the nodes they are composed of. A separate MLP is defined for
             each rank pair.
     2. Adjacency-wise aggregation of computed messages:
          • For any given cell, the set of messages it received from its neighbors are grouped
             according to the rank of the sender. The messages within each group are aggregated
             using a weighted sum of the messages, where the weights are the nonnegative, scalar
             outputs of an adjacency-specific MLP that takes as input a message.
     3. Cell representation update:
          • Finally, an update is computed by feeding the concatenation of the adjacency-wise
             aggregated messages to a rank-specific update MLP. This update is added to the cell’s
             hidden representation.


                                                 42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     4. (Optional) position update:
           • Optionally, node positions are updated as a weighted sum of differences between the
             position of the node and its neighboring nodes. The weight is a learnable function of
             the message that was passed to the node from its neighbor.


                                               43
