Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R ISK -S ENSITIVE D IFFUSION : ROBUSTLY O PTIMIZING
D IFFUSION M ODELS WITH N OISY S AMPLES
 Yangming Li, Max Ruiz Luyten, Mihaela van der Schaar
 Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
 University of Cambridge
 yl874@cam.ac.uk



                                            A BSTRACT
         Diffusion models are mainly studied on image data. However, non-image data
         (e.g., tabular data) are also prevalent in real applications and tend to be noisy due
         to some inevitable factors in the stage of data collection, degrading the generation
         quality of diffusion models. In this paper, we consider a novel problem setting
         where every collected sample is paired with a vector indicating the data qual-
         ity: risk vector. This setting applies to many scenarios involving noisy data and
         we propose risk-sensitive SDE, a type of stochastic differential equation (SDE)
         parameterized by the risk vector, to address it. With some proper coefficients,
         risk-sensitive SDE can minimize the negative effect of noisy samples on the op-
         timization of diffusion models. We conduct systematic studies for both Gaussian
         and non-Gaussian noise distributions, providing analytical forms of risk-sensitive
         SDE. To verify the effectiveness of our method, we have conducted extensive ex-
         periments on multiple tabular and time-series datasets, showing that risk-sensitive
         SDE permits a robust optimization of diffusion models with noisy samples and
         significantly outperforms previous baselines.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Prevalence of noisy non-image data. Current studies on diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020) (or score-based generative models (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021))
have primarily focused on high-quality image data, achieving promising performance (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021) in image synthesis. However, non-image data (e.g., tabular data and time series) are in
fact more popular in real applications (e.g., medicine (Johnson et al., 2016) and finance (Takahashi
et al., 2019)). A survey conducted by Kaggle (Kaggle, 2017; van Breugel et al., 2023) revealed that
79% of the data scientists are mainly working on tabular data. Importantly, while image datasets
are commonly of high quality, non-image data contain noisy samples in most cases. For example,
sensor data are susceptible to measurement errors (Steinvall & Chevalier, 2005), and such noise can
significantly degrade the performance of diffusion models.

Introduction of risk vectors. In this work, we are interested in a novel problem setup where every
sample in the dataset is associated with a vector indicating the sample quality: risk vector. The
purpose of setting this vector is to provide information that a potential method can use to robustly
optimize diffusion models in the presence of noisy samples. While this setup might seem artificial, it
applies to many real scenarios involving noisy data. For example, tabular data often contain missing
values (Barnard & Meng, 1999), and practitioners typically impute those values before using the
data. During this preprocessing step, many imputation methods can provide confidence values (i.e.,
risk information) for their predictions. Even when such risk vectors are not directly accessible,
a class of methods known as uncertainty quantification (Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021) can offer
viable alternatives. In Appendix D, we provide a detailed discussion and more real-world examples,
showing the broad applicability of our proposed setup.

Principled method: risk-sensitive diffusion. To address the problem setup: noisy samples paired
with risk vectors, we first study the negative impact of noisy samples on optimizing diffusion mod-
els, with a conclusion that such samples mainly cause a marginal distribution shift in the diffusion


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


process. In light of this finding, we introduce an error measure called perturbation instability, which
quantifies the negative effect of noisy samples, and propose risk-sensitive SDE, a type of stochastic
differential equation (SDE) parameterized by the risk vector, with the aim to minimize the instability
measure. For both Gaussian and general non-Gaussian noise perturbation, we determine the optimal
coefficients of risk-sensitive SDE, and prove that, in the case of isotropic Gaussian noises, that type
of negative impact can be fully eliminated. In experiments, we show that our method is still very
effective in the scenario with non-Gaussian (e.g., Cauchy) noises.

Contributions. In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:

       • Conceptually, we are the first to introduce risk vectors to robustly optimize diffusion models
         with noisy samples, with a principled method: risk-sensitive SDE, to incorporate such a
         vector, reducing the negative impact of noisy samples: perturbation instability;
       • Technically, we solve the analytical forms of risk-sensitive SDE for both Gaussian and
         non-Gaussian noise distributions, with a notable conclusion that, in the case of Gaussian
         perturbation, the negative impact of noisy samples can be fully reduced;
       • Empirically, experiment results on multiple tabular and time-series datasets show that risk-
         sensitive SDE can effectively handle noisy samples, even when the noise distribution is
         mis-specified or non-Gaussian, and notably outperform previous baselines.

We have publicly released the code at https://github.com/LeePleased/rdm.

2     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we first briefly introduce the background of diffusion models, with basic terminolo-
gies and notations that will also be used later. Then, we present the motivation and formulation of
our problem setup: noisy samples paired with a risk vector.

2.1   BACKGROUND OF D IFFUSION M ODELS

While diffusion modes (or score-based generative models) have different versions and variants,
we adopt the formulation of Song et al. (2021), which generalizes DDPM (Ho et al., 2020),
SMLD (Song & Ermon, 2019), VDM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), etc.
At the core of diffusion models lies a diffusion process, which drives data samples xp0q „ p0 pxp0qq
(i.e., a finite-dimensional vector) towards noise xpT q „ pT pxpT qq at time T P R` , and can be
expressed through a stochastic differential equation (SDE) (Itô, 1944):
                                  dxptq “ f ptqxptqdt ` gptqdwptq,                                    (1)
where wptq is a standard Wiener process, f ptqxptq : R ˆ Rd Ñ Rd is a predefined vector-valued
function that specifies the drift coefficient, and gptq : R Ñ R is a predetermined scalar-valued
function that specifies the diffusion coefficient. We call pT , T Ñ 8 the prior distribution, which is
fixed and retains no information of p0 via a proper design of coefficients f ptq, gptq.
Interestingly, the reverse process (i.e., reverse version of the diffusion process) also follows an SDE.
For a process of the form as Eq. (1), it shapes as:
                              `                                     ˘
                     dxptq “ f ptqxptq ´ gptq2 ∇xptq ln pt pxptqq dt ` gptqdwptq,
                                                                                s                     (2)
which runs another standard Wiener process wptq    s     backward in time. For generative purposes, we
can sample randomly from the prior distribution pT and use the reverse process to map such samples
into data samples that will follow p0 , that is, the distribution of inputs. The challenge is to determine
the expression ∇x ln pt pxq in the backward process (known as the score function) since the term
is analytically intractable in most cases. A common practice (Song & Ermon, 2019) is to use an
approximation called the score-based model sθ px, tq, for instance, a neural network.
To optimize the score model towards the score function, previous works (Song & Ermon, 2019;
Song et al., 2021) derived the following score-matching loss:
                                      “                                         ‰
                      L “ Ept,x0 ,xt q λptq}sθ pxptq, tq ´ ∇xptq ln pt pxptqq}22 ,      (3)


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the weight λptq : r0, T s Ñ R` is generally set uniformly. Importantly, it is common (Song
et al., 2021) to adopt an upper bound of the above loss to fit the model sθ pxptq, tq with the kernel
pt|0 pxptq | xp0qq (i.e., the density of xptq conditioning on xp0q).

2.2    P ROBLEM S ETUP

For standard diffusion models, the observed sample xp0q P RD is implicitly assumed to be without
noise perturbation. However, this simplification does not apply to many real applications. Fig. 1
shows an example of medical time series, which consists of irregularly spaced observations. To
apply diffusion models to such data, one will first fill in the missing values with some interpolation
method (Rubanova et al., 2019), resulting in noises in the form of interpolation errors.

Misguidance effect of Noisy Samples. Noisy sample x       rp0q intuitively has a negative impact on the
optimization of score-based model sθ px, tq, degrading the generation quality of diffusion models.
For this point, a solid explanation is as below.
Remark 2.1. In the standard case with only clean sample xp0q, the score-based model sθ px, tq is
optimized to match the score function ∇x ln pt pxq. Since noisy sample x     rp0q has a different initial
distribution pr0 pxq from that p0 pxq of clean sample xp0q, their marginal distributions prt pxq, pt pxq at
time step t will also be different, with the same diffusion process (i.e., Eq. (1)). As a result, we have
∇x ln prt pxq ‰ ∇x ln pt pxq, indicating that noisy sample xrp0q causes a wrong objective ∇x ln prt pxq
for optimizing the model sθ pxptq, tq.
In short, we can say that noisy sample x
                                       rp0q misleads the diffusion models in training.

Introducing risk information. Although noisy samples are in-
escapable in some situations, they are usually with additional infor-
mation, estimating the potential risk of using such samples. Fol-
lowing the previous example, a Gaussian process (MacKay et al.,
1998) that interpolates the missing samples in Fig. 1 naturally pro-
vides uncertainty information (i.e., confidence intervals) for each
prediction. We can thus pair every possibly noisy sample x          rp0q “
 x1 p0q, x
rr                       rD p0qsJ with its risk information r, available
         r2 p0q, ¨ ¨ ¨ , x
for free. While risk r is defined in a very general way in Defini-
tion 3.1, its concrete form depends on the noise type. For example,
in the case of non-isotropic Gaussian perturbation, the risk r is a
vector r “ rr1 p0q, r2 p0q, ¨ ¨ ¨ , rD p0qsJ of the same D dimensions        Figure 1: A segment of
as the sample x rp0q, indicating its entry-wise   data quality. The closer   noisy time series from
                                                                             MIMIC (Johnson et al.,
                                         Ť
to 0 the value in each entry ri P R` t0u of r is, the higher the ex-
pected quality, where ri “ 0 indicates that entry x    ri p0q is clean.      2016). The data points out-
                                                                             side the orange region (i.e.,
Provided with the risk vector r, an ideal generative model could             95% confidence intervals)
draw information from both risky pr  xp0q, r ‰ 0q and clean sam-             are observed, and a Gaussian
      xp0q “ xp0q, r “ 0q, and importantly, this model was only
ples pr                                                                      process interpolates the ones
optimized towards the distribution of clean samples: p0 pxq.                 within the area.

3     M ETHOD : R ISK - SENSITIVE D IFFUSION

To reduce the misguidance of noisy samples on optimizing diffu-
sion models, we present a principled method: risk-sensitive SDE, a type of SDE parameterized by
risk vector r. In the following, we first define risk-sensitive SDE and some other useful concepts, and
then solve its optimal coefficients for different noise perturbations. Finally, we present the training
and inference algorithms for diffusion models under the framework of risk-sensitive SDE,

3.1    BASIC D EFINITIONS

Risk vectors and noise distribution families. Intuitively, risk information r represents the data
quality of a noisy sample xrp0q. To formalize this concept in a more rigorous way, we provide the
below definition, which still aligns with the intuition.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 3.1 (Risk Vectors). The risk information r shapes as a vector that is element-wise non-
negative and controls a family of continuous noise distributions:
                              !                    ż              ˇ      )
                                         D
                        Pϵ “ ρr pϵq : R Ñ R` , ρr pϵqdϵ “ 1 ˇ r ‰ 0 ,                          (4)
                                                                  ˇ

with each one perturbing clean sample xp0q „ p0 pxp0qq
                                                    ş      into noisy sample x
                                                                             rp0q “ xp0q ` ϵ, which
is with respect to a distribution as pr0,r pr
                                            xp0qq “ p0 pxp0qqρr pr xp0q ´ xp0qqdxp0q. For zero risk
r “ 0, it means the sample x rp0q ” xp0q is noise-free.
Remark 3.1. This definition might not seem intuitive. For better understanding, let us take isotropic
Gaussian perturbation as an example. In this case, the risk vector r can be simplified as a scalar r
and the family of noise distributions Pϵ is as tN p0, rIq | r ą 0u.
Remark 3.2. The operation of noise perturbation can be regarded as a form of “local averaging”,
which is typically not reversible. Even suppose that the reverse operation was possible, recovering
the potential clean sample xp0q from noisy sample x rp0q, would require knowledge of the probabilis-
tic densities of samples, which are not accessible in practice.

Motivation and definition of risk-sensitive SDE. In light of the misguidance effect of noisy sam-
ple x
    rp0q, we aim to seek an alternative diffusion process parameterized by the risk r, such that noisy
sample pr xp0q, rq under this process has the same distribution prt,r pxq at some iteration t in r0, T s
as that of clean sample xp0q under the ordinary diffusion process: pt pxq. For iteration t where the
equality prt,r pxq “ pt pxq holds, the score function of noisy samples: ∇x ln prt,r pxq, can be used to
safely optimize model sθ px, tq. The new process chosen in this spirit is a specific choice of SDE
whose parameterization includes the risk vector r. We name such an SDE as risk-sensitive SDE,
with a strict definition as follows.
Definition 3.2 (Risk-sensitive SDE). For a noisy sample x    rp0q with risk vector r, the risk-sensitive
SDE is a type of SDE that incorporates the risk r into its coefficients, extending a sample vector
x
rp0q into a dynamics tr  xptqutPr0,T s as
                            dr
                             xptq “ pf pr, tq d x
                                                rptqqdt ` gpr, tq d dwptq,                             (5)
where d stands for the Hadamard product, and the coefficient functions f pr, tq, gpr, tq are every-
where continuous with right derivatives.
Remark 3.3. For zero risk r “ 0, the above SDE is fed with clean sample xp0q, and thus corre-
sponds to a standard diffusion model with risk-unaware coefficients f p0, tq, gp0, tq. We refer to this
particular case as risk-unaware SDE.
Remark 3.4. One might notice that risk-sensitive SDE is more expressive than the ordinarily defined
diffusion process (i.e., Eq. (1)): The risk-sensitive coefficients f pr, tq, gpr, tq are vectors (i.e. non-
isotropic), while risk-unaware coefficients f ptq, gptq are just scalars. In Theorem 3.2, we will see
this setting is essential for non-isotropic perturbation.

Error measure: perturbation instability. As previously discussed, we aim to find a type of risk-
sensitive SDE that satisfies a nice property at some time step t: prt,r pxq “ pt pxq, which we define as
perturbation stability. While this condition is indeed possible to reach for Gaussian noises, we will
see in Theorem 3.1 that it is not achievable in the case of non-Gaussian perturbation. Therefore, we
have to introduce a new “criterion” that generalize the stability condition, measuring how much it
is violated. With this type of criterion, we can score all the coefficient candidates of a risk-sensitive
SDE and search for the best candidate, which minimizes the stability violation.
Because probability densities are uniquely determined by their cumulant-generating functions (i.e.,
log-characteristics functions) (Chung, 2001), an obvious way to define the criterion is to measure
the mean square error (Weisberg, 2005) between the cumulant-generating function of prt,r pxq and
that of pt pxq. A formal definition is in the following.
Definition 3.3 (Measure of Perturbation Instability). For a given risk vector r and time step t, the
perturbation instability St prq of a risk-sensitive SDE (as defined in Eq. (5)) measures the discrep-
ancy between its marginal density prt,r pxq for a noisy sample x  rp0q and that of the ordinary diffusion
process pt pxq for a clean sample xp0q as:
                                         ´ż           ˇ                  ˇ2 ¯
                          St prq “ sup           Ωpyqˇχ rt,r pyq ´ χt pyqˇ dy ,                       (6)
                                                      ˇ                  ˇ
                                   p0 pxq   RD


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Ωpyq : RD Ñ R` is a positive weight function and | ¨ | is the complex modulus. In par-
ticular, χ rt,r pyq, χt pyq respectively stand for the cumulant-generating functions (Chung, 2001) of
prt,r pxq, pt pxq, which both depends on the distribution of real samples: p0 pxq.
Remark 3.5. Extending our terminology, we say a risk-sensitive SDE achieves perturbation stability
at time step t if and only if it also satisfies St prq “ 0. The forward direction of this claim is obvious
and the reverse is proved in the appendix: Lemma G.1. Importantly, we will see in the next section
that such stability is not always reachable. In that case, we say a risk-sensitive SDE, which achieves
the infimum of St prq, has the property of minimum instability.
Remark 3.6. The significance of perturbation stability is that, when this property holds, then the
desired equality ∇x ln prt pxq “ ∇x ln pt pxq will also hold. In this situation, the score-based model
sθ px, tq can be robustly optimized with noisy samples pr    xp0q, r ‰ 0q.
One might adopt another way to define the instability measure, considering that there are many
other methods (e.g., KL divergence (Shlens, 2014)) to quantify the discrepancy of two probability
distributions. However, we find that our defined measure St prq leads to meaningful theoretical
results and performs well in experiments. We remain the explorations of other possible measures
and their implications for future work.

3.2   M AIN T HEORY

In this part, we aim to answer the following three questions:
      1. In what conditions is there a risk-sensitive SDE that facilitates perturbation stability? For
         example, does this depend on specific noise types or sample distribution p0 pxq?
      2. If the stability property is not reachable, is there a possibility to have a analytical solution
         that minimally violates the stability property?
      3. In the above two situations, what are the actual forms of risk-sensitive SDE? Is it general-
         izable to extend the current diffusion models for application?
To improve readability, we present simplified theoretical results while preserving the key ideas. The
complete theory and detailed proofs can be found in Appendices E, F, G.

Answer to the 1st question. Our theorems provide a satisfactory answer as follows.
Theorem 3.1 (Simplified and Reinterpreted from Theorem E.1 and Proposition F.1). The necessary
and sufficient conditions for a risk-sensisitve SDE to achieve perturbation stability: prt,r pxq “ pt pxq,
include: 1) the noisy sample x rp0q is perturbed by a diagonal Gaussian noise and the risk r indicates
its variance; 2) the time step t is within the stability interval T prq.
In particular, suppose the Gaussian noise is isotropic, then it suffices to represent the risk vector r
as a scalar r and the form of risk-sensitive SDE under this condition is as
                $
                            d ln uptq
                &f pr, tq “           , @t P r0, T s
                ’
                ’
                                dt
                                                                                          ,         (7)
                                   d ´ vpr, tq2 ¯
                % gpr, tq “ uptq2                        T                        T     c
                ’
                ’                                 , @t P   prq, gpr, tq “ 0, @t P   prq
                                   dt uptq2
where uptq, vpr, tq are continuous functions with right derivatives, satisfying
                                vpr, tq2 “ maxpvp0, tq2 ´ r2 uptq2 , 0q,                              (8)
and T prq “ tt P r0, T s | vpr, tq ą 0u is defined as the stability interval. For zero risk r “ 0, the
above equations reduce to an ordinary risk-unaware diffusion model.
We can see that the ideal situation with perturbation stability is reachable if and only if the noise
distribution is Gaussian and the time step is within the stability interval. This conclusion is also very
intuitive from two perspectives: Firstly, since the backbones of risk-sensitive SDE and diffusion
model are in fact a drifted Brownian motion, it is not likely that our tool can reduce the impact of a
noise distribution beyond Gaussian; Secondly, noisy sample x    rp0q is surely less informative than the
clean sample xp0q, so it is reasonable that noisy samples cannot be used to correctly optimize the
score-based model sθ px, tq at every time step t. In Theorem E.1 of the appendix, one can also find
a more general conclusion for non-isotropic Gaussian noises.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Training                                  Algorithm 2 Sampling
1: repeat                                             1: Set time points ttM “ T, tM ´1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , t2 , t1 “ 0u
2: Sample prxp0q, r q from the training set           2: Set zero risk r “ 0 and xptM q „ pT pxq
3: Sample t from stability interval T prq             3: for i “ M, M ´ 1, . . . , 2 do
4: η „ N p0, Iq                                       4: sθ pxpti q, ti q “ gpr, ti q2 d sθ pxpti q, ti q
5: xr ptq “ uptq d xr p0q ` vpr, tq d η               5: bpxpt
                                                          p      i q, ti q “ f pr, ti q d xpti q ´ sθ pxpti q, ti q
6: Update θ with ´∇θ ›η { vpr, tq ` sθ prxptq, tq}2
                       ›
                                                      6: η „ N p0, pti ´ ti´1 qIq
7: until converged                                    7: xpti´1 q “ xpti q ´ bp¨qpt
                                                                                  p     i ´ ti´1 q ´ gpr, ti q d η

                                                      8: end for


Answer to the 3rd question for Gaussian noises. We have the following corollary that extends
VP SDE (Song et al., 2021) (i.e., the continuous relaxation of DDPM) to risk-sensitive VP SDE,
which supports a robust optimization with isotropic Gaussian noises.
Corollary 3.1 (Risk-sensitive VP SDE, Simplified from Corollary G.2). Under the setting of
isotropic Gaussian perturbation, the risk-sensitive SDE for VP SDE is parameterized as follows
                                      1
                          f pr, tq “ ´ βptq, gpr, tq “ 1 1 ą p1 ` r2 qαptq βptq,
                                                        `                 ˘a
                                                                                                                      (9)
                                      2

where 1p¨q is an indicator function and the coefficient αptq is defined as αptq “ expp´ 0 βpsqdsq.
                                                                                       şt

The stability interval in this case is T prq “ tt P r0, T s | αptq´1 ą 1 ` r2 u. As expected, for
the special case with zero riskar “ 0, the risk-sensitive SDE reduces to an ordinary VP SDE, with
f p0, tq “ ´ 21 βptq, gp0, tq “ βptq, and T “ r0, T s.

Risk-sensitive VP SDE is the same as vanilla VP SDE for optimization with clean sample pxp0q, r “
0q, otherwise it will adopt a different coefficient gpr, tq and a restricted set of sampling time steps
T prq to reduce the negative impact of noisy sample prxp0q, r ą 0q. We will discuss this point more in
the next section, with detailed optimization and sampling algorithms. Corollary G.2 in the appendix
also provides its version for non-isotropic Gaussian noises.

Answer to the 2nd question. This question is very important, considering that the perturbation
distributions in the real world might be non-Gaussian. As shown below, we can always find the
optimal parameterization of risk-sensitive SDE that minimizes the negative impact of an arbitrarily
complex noise distribution on the optimization of model sθ px, tq.
Theorem 3.2 (General Stability Theory, Simplified from Theorem F.1). Suppose the risk vector
r is element-wise positive and controls
                                  ş     a family of continuous noise distributions, with each one
formulated as ρr pϵq : RD Ñ R` , ρr pϵqdϵ “ 1, then the optimal coefficients for the risk-sensitive
SDE to minimize the instability measure St prq satisfy the following equality:
     $          2
                          `         2
                                                    ˘
     & vpr, tq “ max 0, vp0, tq ` Ψpuptq, rq
                       ´ż                ¯´1 ´ ż            ˇ    `             ˘ˇ       ¯,    (10)
     %Ψpuptq, rq “ 2      ΩpyqryyJ s2 dy           Ωpyq ln ˇ exp χr puptq d yq ˇrys2 dy

where the vectorized coefficients uptq, vpr, tq come from the formal definition of risk-sensitive SDE
(i.e., Definition 3.2) and the new terms Ωpyq, χr p¨q are basic elements that defines the instability
measure St prq (i.e., Definition 3.3).

We can see that the general form of perturbation distribution ρr pϵq incurs a very complex expres-
sion Ψpuptq, rq in the optimal coefficient vpr, tq. In particular, if the noise ϵ follows an isotropic
Gaussian ρr pϵq “ N pϵ; 0, rIq, then we can verify that Ψpuptq, rq “ r2 uptq2 regardless of the
weight function Ωpyq, which is consistent with our previous conclusion: Theorem 3.1. Another
complication of non-Gaussian noise is that: even for some isotropic noise distribution ρr pϵq, the
term Ψpuptq, rq appearing in coefficient vpr, tq might have different expressions in different dimen-
sions. Therefore, distinct from our Theorem 3.1, the vectorized coefficients uptq, vpr, tq cannot be
simplified into scalar functions (e.g., uptq, vpr, tq) for isotropic noise perturbation.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Comparison between the diffusion process of a standard VP SDE for clean samples (i.e.,
the upper 5 subfigures) and its alternative: risk-sensitive SDE, for Gaussian-corrupted samples (i.e.,
the lower 5 subfigures). With the proper risk-sensitive coefficients, the clean and noisy samples will
have the same marginal densities in the stability interval: t P r0.26, 1s.


Answer to the 3rd question for non-Gaussian noises. To finally answer this question for non-
Gaussian noises, we have the below corollary that extends VE SDE (Song et al., 2021) (a type of
diffusion model also used in Song et al. (2023)) to risk-sensitive VE SDE, which supports a robust
optimization with Cauchy noises.
Corollary 3.2 (Risk-sensitive VE SDE, Simplified from Corollary G.3). For some properly de-
fined weight function Ωpyq and an isotropic Cauchy perturbation specified by a scale r as
        śD
ρr pϵq “ j“1 pπpr ` ϵ2j {rqq´1 , ϵ “ rϵ1 , ϵ2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , ϵD sJ , the minimally-unstable risk-sensitive SDE
for VE SDE has coefficients as
                                                                              c
                                          ´                         D ` 2 2 ¯ dσptq2
                f pr, tq “ 0, gpr, tq “ 1 σptq ą σp0q `
                                                    2           2
                                                                          r             .             (11)
                                                                    D`5            dt
Notably, for the setting with no risk r “ 0, risk-sensitive VE SDEa  reduces to the ordinary risk-
unaware VE SDE, which has fixed coefficients f p0, tq “ 0, gp0, tq “ dσptq2 {dt.

With a heavy tail in the distribution, Cauchy noise has a high probability to drift a clean sample far
away, exhibiting a very distinct behavior from Gaussian noises. In Sec. 5, our numerical experiments
(e.g., Fig. 4) show that risk-sensitive VE SDE rarely generates outliers, indicating that the optimal
risk-sensitive SDE is very effective in reducing the negative impact of Cauchy-corrupted samples.
Corollary G.3 in the appendix stands as its version for non-isotropic Cauchy noises.

3.3   O PTIMIZATION AND S AMPLING

Similar to the score matching loss L of standard diffusion models, the loss function under the frame-
work of risk-sensitive SDE shapes as
                           Lt,r “ Ex„prt,r pxq r}sθ px, tq ´ ∇x ln prt,r pxq}2 s.                    (12)
Proposition G.1 in Appendix G shows that this loss function for noisy sample pr   x, rq is equal to the
score matching loss L for clean sample px, r “ 0q within the stability interval T prq, and has another
form for computation in practice.
Proposition 3.1 (Risk-free Loss, Simplified from Proposition G.1). The loss function Lt,r for risky
        xp0q, r ‰ 0) is equivalent to the below expression:
sample pr
                                      “›                                               ›2 ‰
            Exr p0qpr0,r pxq,η„N p0,Iq ›η { vpr, tq ` sθ puptq d x
                                                                 rp0q ` vpr, tq d η, tq› ,     (13)
up to a constant. Here uptq, vpr, tq are vectorized versions of terms uptq, vpr, tq that appear in
Eq. (7), with their formal definitions in Theorem E.1.

We respectively show the training and sampling procedures in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2. We also
highlight in blue the terms that differ from vanilla diffusion models. For the optimization algorithm,
when r “ 0, the algorithm reduces to the optimization procedure of a vanilla diffusion model, with a
trivial stability interval of T prq “ r0, T s. When the random variable r is non-zero, the risk-sensitive


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Training data, polluted (b) Samples from a stan- (c) Samples from the risk- (d) Samples from our risk-
by Gaussian noises.         dard diffusion model.    conditional baseline.      sensitive VP SDE.

Figure 3: Comparison on a Gaussian mixture data (Fig. 3(a), three-sigma regions as ellipses), with
part of Gaussian-corrupted samples. Our model (Fig. 3(d)) mostly samples within the ellipses, while
the samples from standard diffusion model (Fig. 3(b)) typically fall out of them, and conditional
generation leads to an unbalanced generation distribution (Fig. 3(c)).


coefficient vpr, tq and interval T prq will guarantee that ∇x ln pt pxq “ ∇x ln prt,r pxq for t P T prq,
such that the noisy sample prxp0q, r ‰ 0q can be used to safely train the model sθ px, tq.
For the sampling algorithm, by setting zero risk r “ 0, the coefficients f pr, tq, gpr, tq become
compatible with the model sθ px, tq and together generate high-quality sample xp0q. Our model will
generate only clean samples pxp0q, r “ 0q, but it was already able to capture the rich distribution
information contained in noisy sample prxp0q, r ‰ 0q during optimization.


4   R ELATED W ORK

Similar setups. To our knowledge, we are the first to study the problem setup of pairing noisy
samples with risk vectors in the field of diffusion models. Some previous works (Ouyang et al.,
2023; Kim et al., 2024) also focused on diffusion models with noisy data, though under different
settings. For example, Unbiased Diffusion Model (Kim et al., 2024) considered the presence of both
a biased dataset and a clean dataset and, thus, tackled a particular case of our setting: assigning risk
1 to the samples of biased dataset and risk 0 to those of the clean dataset. However, this model
cannot be adapted to the common situation where different noisy samples might have different risks.
Ambient Diffusion (Daras et al., 2024) aimed to handle a situation where the images are with missing
pixel patches, which largely differs from our setting. As discussed in Appendix D, missingness is
also a typical use case of our method: risk-sensitive SDE. Another related work is Na et al. (2024),
which considered noisy labels, instead of noisy samples.

Potential risk-conditional baseline. Our proposed risk-sensitive SDE is the first method to ad-
dress the problem setup of this paper. An alternative way is to adopt conditional diffusion mod-
els (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2021), though there is surely no such work in the
literature. One can treat the risk vector as that “conditional information” and apply these techniques
to guide diffusion models to generate low-risk samples. We name this method as risk-conditional
baseline in this paper and provide three different implementations in Appendix A. The main prob-
lem with risk-conditional diffusion models is that it might lead to a biased sampling distribution. To
understand this point, note that conditional models essentially learn a joint distribution of samples
and risk vectors. If one applies risk-conditional generation, which means a preference is imposed
towards less noisy samples during generation, then the regions that are correlated with a high noise
level in the sampling space tend to be ignored, yielding an unbalanced distribution of generated
samples. In Sec. 5, our experiment results (e.g., Fig. 3) confirm this claim.


5   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we provide two groups of empirical results: one is to verify the validity of our theo-
rems in practice and the other is to apply our method: risk-sensitive diffusion, to real datasets. Due
to the limited space, we put other experiment results in Appendix B, which involve more baselines
(e.g., Unbiased Diffusion Model), a different evaluation metric, and noisy images.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Training data, polluted (b) Samples from a stan- (c) Samples from the risk- (d) Samples from our risk-
by Cauchy noises.           dard diffusion model.    conditional baseline.      sensitive VE SDE.

Figure 4: Comparison on Gaussian mixture data (Fig. 4(a)), with part of Cauchy-corrupted samples.
Despite minimal instability, our model still recovers the potential sample distribution (Fig. 4(d)),
while both baselines (Fig. 4(c) and Fig. 4(b)) incorrectly produce many outliers.


5.1   P ROOF - OF - CONCEPT S TUDIES

Existence of stability interval. With T “ 1, βptq “ 0.1 ` 19.9t, Fig. 2 shows an experiment,
where VP SDE runs for clean samples pxp0q, r “ 0q while its risk-sensitive SDE (i.e., Corollary 3.1)
operates on Gaussian-corrupted samples pr   xp0q, r “ 1q. We can see that the clean and noisy samples
follow the same distributions for step t in the stability interval T prq “ r0.26, 1s. This experiment
verifies that Theorem 3.1 is effective in practice.

Risk-sensitive VP SDE under Gaussian perturbation. Fig. 3 shows a comparison between
our model (i.e., Corollary 3.2) and the risk-conditional baseline on a Gaussian-corrupted dataset
Fig. 3(a)). The conditional model underrepresents (Fig. 3(c)) the upper-right component at low-risk
generation because it contains many more (i.e., 95%) noisy samples than other components. Instead,
the generated samples of our model (Fig. 3(d)) are mostly unbiased, with no preference for a spe-
cific mixture component. This experiment confirms the weakness of the risk-conditional baseline
and verifies that our model is more robust in practice.

Risk-sensitive VE SDE under Gauchy perturbation. With heavy tails, Cauchy distributions can
usually distort a clean sample far away, exhibiting a distinct behavior from Gaussian noises. Fig. 4
shows an experiment on a Gaussian-mixture data (Fig. 3(a)), but with Cauchy noises corrupting
samples. While risk-sensitive SDE cannot achieve perturbation stability in this case, our model still
nicely recovers the distribution of clean samples and is robust to outliers (Fig. 4(d)). In contrast, the
generated distributions of both standard (Fig. 4(c)) and conditional models (Fig. 4(b)) are seriously
biased by outliers. This experiment highlights the flexibility of risk-sensitive SDEs and indicates
that it can still be very effective under minimally instability.

5.2   A PPLIED S TUDIES

We now assess the Gaussian versions of risk-sensitive SDE (e.g., Corollary 3.1) on multiple real-
world non-image datasets. We will find that our models still perform very well even when the data
is highly noisy and the perturbation noise is in fact not Gaussian.

Noisy time series. As depicted in Fig. 1, time-series data might have irregularly spaced observa-
tions. To reshape such data into proper training samples for diffusion models, common practices are
to first interpolate missing observations, resulting in noisy training samples. For this scenario, we
adopt 2 medical time series datasets: MIMIC-III (Johnson et al., 2016) and WARDS (Alaa et al.,
2017). For every time series in a dataset, we extract the observations of the first 48 hours and se-
lect their top 5 features with the highest variance, leading to a 240-dimensional vector. To impute
the missing values in a highly noisy manner, we apply a primitive method: Gaussian process, to
interpolate them and estimate the variances, which are treated as the risk information.

Noisy tabular data. Tabular data is naturally composed of fixed-dimensional vectors, though they
usually contain missing values, and imputations of those values introduce noise. For this scenario,
we adopt 3 UCI datasets (Asuncion & Newman, 2007): Abalone, Telemonitoring, and Mushroom.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       Time Series                   Tabular Data
                            Model
                                                  MIMIC-III     WARDS    Abalone   Telemonitoring   Mushroom
                       Standard VE SDE             10.083        9.116   1.032         8.140         5.196
                  VE SDE w/ Risk Regressor          7.721        7.923   0.797         4.983         4.636
                   VE SDE w/ Risk Variable          6.549        7.314   0.853         5.161         4.970
                 VE SDE w/ Risk Conditional         5.926        5.951   0.612         3.159         4.101
               Our Model: Risk-sensitive VE SDE    1.865        2.513    0.089         1.582         0.713
                       Standard VP SDE              9.135        8.765   0.925         9.935         6.238
                   VP SDE w/ Risk Regressor         7.981        7.832   0.732         4.197         5.327
                   VP SDE w/ Risk Variable          6.723        7.515   0.899         5.159         5.583
                 VP SDE w/ Risk Conditional         5.637        6.292   0.585         3.785         4.850
               Our Model: Risk-sensitive VP SDE    1.625        2.584    0.077         1.462         0.852


Table 1: Wasserstein distances of different models on 5 datasets across 2 tasks. Part of model
performances with another metric: MMD, are in Table 2 of Appendix B. The results not only show
that our model significantly outperforms the baselines, but also indicate: when the potential noise
type is unknown, the assumption of Gaussian perturbation works well in practice.



Since these datasets are initially complete, we force the missingness by randomly masking 5% of the
entries in each dataset. For a data instance with missing values, we first apply k-nearest neighbors
(KNN) algorithm (Peterson, 2009), to find the 10 closest samples. Then, we impute the missing
value with their median and treat their absolute median deviation as the risk. Admittedly, the data
generated in this way will be very noisy since KNN is certainly very inaccurate.


Experiment setup and results. Following com-
mon practices (Ho et al., 2020), we adopt the com-
monly used Wasserstein Distance (Heusel et al.,
2017; Kolouri et al., 2019; Colombo et al., 2021) to
evaluate the generative models, which measures the
discrepancy of two distributions. For baselines, we
adopt two standard diffusion models (VE SDE and
VP SDE) and three risk-conditional models (details
in Appendix A). In Table 1, we can see that our mod-
els significantly outperform all baselines regardless
of the backbone model and the dataset. For exam- Figure 5: PRD curves (i.e., precision and re-
ple, with VE SDE as the backbone, our model has call scores) of our model and baselines on
Wasserstein distances lower than Risk Conditional Telemonitoring dataset.
by 1.577 on the Telemonitoring dataset and 4.063
on MIMIC-III.
We also depict the PRD curves (Sajjadi et al., 2018; Razavi et al., 2019) of our model and two base-
lines on the Telemonitoring dataset. The PRD curve is similar to the precision-recall curve (Davis &
Goadrich, 2006) used in testing classification models: the curves that locate more at the upper right
corner indicate better performances. From Fig. 5, we can see that our model consistently achieves
better recall scores than the baselines at identical precision scores. Plus, the PRD curve of our model
is very close to the upper right corner, indicating the generation distribution of our model is almost
consistent with the distribution of clean samples.



6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we consider a novel problem setup to robustly train the diffusion models on noisy
datasets: pairing noisy samples with risk vectors. To address this setup, we propose a principled
method: risk-sensitive SDE, in the spirit of minimizing a defined measure: perturbation instability,
which measures the negative effect of noisy samples. We have studied both the Gaussian and non-
Gaussian noise perturbations, providing the optimal coefficients of risk-sensitive SDE in both cases.
We have conducted extensive experiments on multiple real datasets, showing that risk-sensitive SDE
can effectively handle noisy samples and significantly outperform previous baselines, even when the
potential noise distribution might be non-Gaussian or mis-specified as Gaussian.


                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We sincerely appreciate the constructive and professional feedback from the ICLR reviewers, which
has greatly improved this work. We also thank Jonathan Crabbe for several discussions. He gave
suggestions on conditional generation baselines and time series datasets.

B IBLIOGRAPHY
Peter Ahrendt. The multivariate gaussian probability distribution. Technical University of Denmark,
  Tech. Rep, pp. 203, 2005.
Ahmed M Alaa, Jinsung Yoon, Scott Hu, and Mihaela Van der Schaar. Personalized risk scoring for
  critical care prognosis using mixtures of gaussian processes. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
  Engineering, 65(1):207–218, 2017.
Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Ap-
  plications, 12(3):313–326, 1982.
William J Anderson. Continuous-time Markov chains: An applications-oriented approach. Springer
 Science & Business Media, 2012.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and
  distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511, 2021.
Arthur Asuncion and David Newman. Uci machine learning repository, 2007.
John Barnard and Xiao-Li Meng. Applications of multiple imputation in medical studies: from aids
  to nhanes. Statistical methods in medical research, 8(1):17–36, 1999.
Dwyane C Carmer and Lauren M Peterson. Laser radar in robotics. Proceedings of the IEEE, 84
 (2):299–320, 1996.
Hyungjin Chung and Jong Chul Ye. Score-based diffusion models for accelerated mri. Medical
  image analysis, 80:102479, 2022.
Kai Lai Chung. A course in probability theory. Academic press, 2001.
Pierre Colombo, Guillaume Staerman, Chloé Clavel, and Pablo Piantanida. Automatic text evalu-
  ation through the lens of Wasserstein barycenters. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang,
  Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 10450–10466, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican
  Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  emnlp-main.817. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.817.
Giannis Daras, Kulin Shah, Yuval Dagan, Aravind Gollakota, Alex Dimakis, and Adam Klivans.
  Ambient diffusion: Learning clean distributions from corrupted data. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Anirban DasGupta and Anirban DasGupta. Characteristic functions and applications. Probability
  for Statistics and Machine Learning: Fundamentals and Advanced Topics, pp. 293–322, 2011.
Jesse Davis and Mark Goadrich. The relationship between precision-recall and roc curves. In
  Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 233–240, 2006.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Lawrence C Evans. An introduction to stochastic differential equations, volume 82. American
  Mathematical Soc., 2012.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.

Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=qw8AKxfYbI.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Lei Huang, Hengtong Zhang, Tingyang Xu, and Ka-Chun Wong. Mdm: Molecular diffusion model
  for 3d molecule generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 37, pp. 5105–5112, 2023.

Kiyosi Itô. 109. stochastic integral. Proceedings of the Imperial Academy, 20(8):519–524, 1944.

Xiaodong Jia, Ming Zhao, Yuan Di, Qibo Yang, and Jay Lee. Assessment of data suitability for ma-
  chine prognosis using maximum mean discrepancy. IEEE transactions on industrial electronics,
  65(7):5872–5881, 2017.

Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.

Kaggle. 2017 kaggle machine learning & data science survey, 2017.

Ivan Kapelyukh, Vitalis Vosylius, and Edward Johns. Dall-e-bot: Introducing web-scale diffusion
  models to robotics. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2023.

Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer
  vision? Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Yeongmin Kim, Byeonghu Na, JoonHo Jang, Minsang Park, Dongjun Kim, Wanmo Kang, and
  Il chul Moon. Training unbiased diffusion models from biased dataset. In The Twelfth Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=39cPKijBed.

Youngjoo Kim, Hyochoong Bang, et al. Introduction to kalman filter and its applications. Introduc-
  tion and Implementations of the Kalman Filter, 1:1–16, 2018.

Martti Kirkko-Jaakkola, Jussi Collin, and Jarmo Takala. Bias prediction for mems gyroscopes. IEEE
 Sensors Journal, 12(6):2157–2163, 2012.

Soheil Kolouri, Kimia Nadjahi, Umut Simsekli, Roland Badeau, and Gustavo Rohde. Generalized
  sliced wasserstein distances. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Steven G Krantz. Partial differential equations and complex analysis. CRC press, 2018.

Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.

Arbind Kumar and Jagdeep Kaur. Primer based approach for pcr amplification of high gc content
  gene: Mycobacterium gene as a model. Molecular biology international, 2014, 2014.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Martin F Laursen, Marlene D Dalgaard, and Martin I Bahl. Genomic gc-content affects the accuracy
 of 16s rrna gene sequencing based microbial profiling due to pcr bias. Frontiers in microbiology,
 8:287367, 2017.
Wei-Chao Lin and Chih-Fong Tsai. Missing value imputation: a review and analysis of the literature
 (2006–2017). Artificial Intelligence Review, 53:1487–1509, 2020.
David JC MacKay et al. Introduction to gaussian processes. NATO ASI series F computer and
  systems sciences, 168:133–166, 1998.
Byeonghu Na, Yeongmin Kim, HeeSun Bae, Jung Hyun Lee, Se Jung Kwon, Wanmo Kang,
  and Il chul Moon. Label-noise robust diffusion models. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  HXWTXXtHNl.
Bernt Oksendal. Stochastic differential equations: an introduction with applications. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2013.
Bernt Øksendal and Bernt Øksendal. Stochastic differential equations. Springer, 2003.
Yidong Ouyang, Liyan Xie, Chongxuan Li, and Guang Cheng. Missdiff: Training diffusion models
  on tabular data with missing values. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00467, 2023.
Leif E Peterson. K-nearest neighbor. Scholarpedia, 4(2):1883, 2009.
Ali Razavi, Aaron van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals. Generating diverse high-fidelity images
  with vq-vae-2. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2019/file/5f8e2fa1718d1bbcadf1cd9c7a54fb8c-Paper.pdf.
Yulia Rubanova, Ricky TQ Chen, and David K Duvenaud. Latent ordinary differential equations for
  irregularly-sampled time series. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Olivier Bachem, Mario Lucic, Olivier Bousquet, and Sylvain Gelly. Assessing
 generative models via precision and recall. Advances in neural information processing systems,
 31, 2018.
Jonathon Shlens.    Notes on kullback-leibler divergence and likelihood.          arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1404.2000, 2014.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=PxTIG12RRHS.
Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Consistency models. In Proceedings
  of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023.
Ajay Sridhar, Dhruv Shah, Catherine Glossop, and Sergey Levine. Nomad: Goal masked diffu-
  sion policies for navigation and exploration. In First Workshop on Out-of-Distribution General-
  ization in Robotics at CoRL 2023, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  FhQRJW71h5.
Ove Steinvall and Tomas Chevalier. Range accuracy and resolution for laser radars. In Electro-
  Optical Remote Sensing, volume 5988, pp. 73–88. SPIE, 2005.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Daniel J Stekhoven and Peter Bühlmann. Missforest—non-parametric missing value imputation for
  mixed-type data. Bioinformatics, 28(1):112–118, 2012.
Chenxi Sun, Shenda Hong, Moxian Song, and Hongyan Li. A review of deep learning methods for
  irregularly sampled medical time series data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12493, 2020.
Shuntaro Takahashi, Yu Chen, and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. Modeling financial time-series with gen-
  erative adversarial networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 527:121261,
  2019.
Qijian Tang, Xiangjun Wang, and Qingping Yang. Scale factor model analysis of mems gyroscopes.
  Microsystem Technologies, 23:1215–1219, 2017.
Boris van Breugel, Nabeel Seedat, Fergus Imrie, and Mihaela van der Schaar. SYNG4ME: Model
  evaluation using synthetic test data, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  J7CTp-jNyJ.
Sanford Weisberg. Applied linear regression, volume 528. John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
Margaux Zaffran, Aymeric Dieuleveut, Julie Josse, and Yaniv Romano. Conformal prediction with
 missing values. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 40578–40604. PMLR,
 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
     A Risk-conditional diffusion models                                                          16
       A.1 Risk as the Variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
       A.2 Risk as the Conditional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    16

     B Additional Experiments                                                                     17

     C Backward Risk-sensitive SDE                                                                18

     D Wide Applications                                                                          18

     E Stability for Gaussian Perturbation                                                        19
       E.1 Risk-sensitive Kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
       E.2 Solution for Gaussian Perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21

     F Minimum Instability for General Noises                                                     23
       F.1 Spectral Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23
       F.2 Necessary Condition for Achieving Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
       F.3 Solution for General Noises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    25

     G Applications to Diffusion Models                                                           26
       G.1 Extensions under Gaussian Perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26
       G.2 Optimization and Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28
       G.3 Extension under Cauchy Perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     R ISK - CONDITIONAL DIFFUSION MODELS

An obvious way to adapt current diffusion models to the extra risk information r is conditional
generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). The main drawback of conditional diffusion models is that
it might have a biased sampling distribution. For example, suppose a regressor-guided diffusion
model (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) is trained on a dataset composed of blurry pictures of dogs and
clear pictures of cats, then the conditional model will generate very few images of dogs, given
that they are associated with a higher risk than cats. In the following, we present three different
implementations under this scheme.

A.1   R ISK AS THE VARIABLE

A naive implementation is first to let diffusion models learn the joint distribution of samples and risk
vectors: p0 px, rq, and then regularize the reverse process for drawing samples of a low risk: r « 0,
from the trained model.

Risk variable. In the optimization stage, we concatenate the sample and risk vectors as zp0q “
x
rp0q ‘ r in a column-wise manner, with Eq. (1) and Eq.(3) to train a vanilla diffusion model. We
draw low-risk samples from the trained model at inference time through an improved backward SDE.
Considering the technique of classifier guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), we set a parameter-free
regressor ´} ¨ }2 : the minus square norm, which takes the last D entries of variable zD`1:2D ptq :“
rptq as the input and has a derivate as ´∇rptq }rptq}2 “ ´rptq{}rptq}2 . With this regressor, the
backward process (i.e., Eq. (2)) is updated as follows:
                      ´                                                     ¯
           dzptq “ f pzptq, tq ´ gptq2 p∇zptq ln pt pzptqq ´ ∇rptq }rptq}2 q ` gptqdwptq
                                                                                     s
               ´                   ´                   rptq  ¯¯
            “ f pzptq, tq ´ gptq2 ∇ ln pt pzptqq ´              ` gptqdwptq
                                                                         s                      (14)
                                                     }rptq}2
               ´                   ´                rptq   ¯¯
            « f pzptq, tq ´ gptq2 sθ pzptq, tq ´              ` gptqdwptq,
                                                                      s
                                                   }rptq}2
where some redundant parts are omitted as p¨q. In practice, the gradient ´∇rptq }rptq}2 is re-scaled
with a positive coefficient γ, which trades diversity for quality. Intuitively, the regressor ´} ¨ }2
gradually reduces the norm of rptq as decreasing iteration t such that the final sample xp0q “
z1:D p0q will be paired with low risk rp0q.

A.2   R ISK AS THE C ONDITIONAL

Another type of implementation treats the risk vector r as a generation conditional for diffusion
models. Ideally, we can draw clean samples from a trained model by setting r “ 0.

Risk conditional. There are two types of conditional diffusion models. The easier one is classifier-
free (Ho & Salimans, 2021), which adds the risk vector r as an input to the score-based model:
sθ px, t, rq. Eq. (1) and Eq. (3) are the same to train the new model, but the input r is randomly
masked with a dummy variable ∅ to permit unconditional generation. For inference, the score
function ∇xptq ln pt pxptqq in the backward SDE (i.e., Eq. (2)) is replaced with
                             p1 ` γqsθ pxptq, t, r “ 0q ´ γsθ pxptq, t, ∅q,                         (15)
where γ is a non-negative number that plays a similar role to the first model.

Risk regressor. The other one is just classifier-guided sampling. While the diffusion model re-
mains the same, we separately train a regressor h to predict the risk of a sample:
                                        r “ lnp1 ` expphpxqq,
                                        p                                                           (16)
where the SoftPlus function expp1`lnp¨qq is to ensure that the final output p
                                                                            r is positive and variable x
is either raw sample x
                     rp0q or its noisy version x
                                               rptq, t ą 0 (obtained by Eq. (1)). For implementation,
the regressor h can be any neural network and is optimized with a square loss: }r ´ p      r}22 . To have


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Dataset                            Abalone      Telemonitoring
                      Standard VP SDE                         0.01056         0.01667
                 VP SDE w/ Risk Conditional                   0.00766         0.01267
         Our Model: VP SDE w/ Risk-sensitive Diffusion        0.00198         0.00717

                Table 2: Model performances measured by another metric: MMD.

                                                   řD
a scalar outcome, we wrap the regressor as ´        i“1 lnp1 ` expphi pxqq, with expansion hpxq “
rh1 pxq, h2 pxq, ¨ ¨ ¨ , hD pxqsJ and derivative
           D                          D                            D
       ´ ÿ                      ¯   ”ÿ             Bhi pxq        ÿ        Bhi pxq ıJ
     ∇x ´     lnp1 ` expphi pxqq “ ´     σphi pxqq         ,¨¨¨ ,     σp¨q            ,          (17)
          i“1                        i“1
                                                    Bx1           i“1
                                                                            BxD

where σ is the Sigmoid function. Similar to our first model, we apply this derivate to regularize the
backward process of a trained diffusion model as
                                                           ´ ÿD      ¯
           dxptq « pf pxptq, tq ´ gptq2 psθ pxptq, tq ´ γ∇x ´   lnp¨q ` gptqdwptq,
                                                                             s                   (18)
                                                                 i“1
               Ť
where γ P R`       t0u is non-negative.

B    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
We have performed extra experiments to further confirm the effectiveness of our method: risk-
sensitive SDE, including comparisons with other baselines (e.g., Ambient Diffusion), the introduc-
tion of another evaluation metric: MMD, and a study on the image dataset.

Another evaluation metric: MMD. Recognizing the importance of diverse evaluation criteria,
we introduced the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) metric (Jia et al., 2017) in our analysis.
This additional metric further affirms the great effectiveness of our method to bridge the gap be-
tween generated and real distributions across different noisy datasets. As shown in Table 2, our
model still significantly outperforms the baselines in terms of the new metric: MMD. Overall, given
the consistent best results of our method across different datasets and evaluation metrics (includ-
ing Wasserstein Distance, Precision-Recall Curves, and MMD), we believe the effectiveness of our
method: risk-sensitive diffusion, is well justified.

Other baselines from similar settings. While the works of Ambient Diffusion (Daras et al., 2024)
and Unbiased Diffusion Model (Kim et al., 2024) also discuss the training of diffusion models
on imperfect data, their settings are either a particular case of ours or differ altogether. In the
following, we compare the settings and purpose of each of these works to risk-sensitive diffusion
and empirically compare our method to these baselines:

      • Ambient Diffusion addressed the setting of images with missing pixels, which, although it
        is one of the applications of risk-sensitive diffusion, our method is more broadly applicable
        to the general case of ”noisy pixels”;
      • Unbiased Diffusion Model considered the presence of both a biased dataset and a clean
        dataset and, thus, tackled a particular case of our method. If one attributes risk 1 to the
        biased dataset and risk 0 to the clean dataset, then our method can be used to learn an
        unbiased diffusion model. However, our method encompasses a much more broad range
        of settings. In particular, this method does not admit varying risks for different features or
        risk distributions, as risk-sensitive diffusion does.

The experiments of our paper include tabular data with missing values, which constitute a valid
benchmark for our method against the baselines. Table 3 summarizes the obtained new results. The
performances of Ambient Diffusion and Unbiased Diffusion Model are comparable to our baseline
VP SDE w/ Risk Conditional, and our method: risk-sensitive diffusion, significantly outperforms all
of them, thereby showing the value of our contribution.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Dataset                              Abalone     Telemonitoring
                       Standard VP SDE                            0.925          9.935
                       Ambient Diffusion                          0.482          4.253
                  Unbiased Diffusion Models                       0.679          4.991
                  VP SDE w/ Risk Conditional                      0.585          3.785
          Our Model: VP SDE w/ Risk-sensitive Diffusion           0.077          1.462

         Table 3: Comparison between our method and the baselines from similar settings.

                      Model                               20% noisy images       40% noisy images
                 Standard VP SDE                               8.31                   13.29
             Unbiased Diffusion Model                          5.37                   8.53
            VP SDE w/ Risk Conditional                         6.57                   9.15
    Our Model: VP SDE w/ Risk-sensitive Diffusion              4.89                   6.97

        Table 4: Model performances on CIFAR-10 with certain numbers of noisy images.


Study on noisy images. We also explored the performance of our risk-sensitive diffusion frame-
work on image data: CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) images with pixel noises. Specifically,
we perturb certain portions of CIFAR-10 images with Gaussian noises and compare our method
with two baselines (i.e., risk-conditional diffusion model and Unbiased Diffusion Model). Table 4
contains the results in terms of FID scores, which show that risk-sensitive diffusion outperforms
other methods in this setting, too. Our finding reveals that our method outperforms conventional
and recent approaches even in domains outside our primary focus, further underscoring its general
applicability and robustness.


C    BACKWARD R ISK - SENSITIVE SDE

Although the backward risk-sensitive SDE is not necessary for our method and theorems, we still
provide it for reference. Let a risk-sensitive SDE be of the form as
                           dxptq “ pf ptq d xptqqdt ` diagpgpr, tqqdwptq,
where both coefficient functions f ptq, gpr, tq are everywhere continuous with right derivatives. Ac-
cording to (Anderson, 1982), we can get the corresponding backward SDE as
      ´                                                                       ¯
dx “ f ptq d xptq ´ ∇x ¨ diagpgpr, tq2 q ´ diagpgpr, tq2 q∇x ln pt px | rq dt ` diagpgpr, tqqdwptq  s
      ´                                            ¯
   “ f ptq d xptq ´ gpr, tq2 d ∇x ln pt px | rq dt ` gpr, tq d dwptq.s
                                                                                                   (19)
While gpr, tq “ 0 is possible for t P tt P r1, T s | gsp0, tq2 ´ s
                                                                 f pr, tq2 d r
                                                                             r2 ‰ g
                                                                                  spr, tq2 u, our above
conclusion still applies and the backward SDE is the same as the forward one in that case.


D    W IDE A PPLICATIONS

The problem formulation of our paper: noisy sample x     rp0q paired with risk vector r (i.e., accessible
information of data quality), is not only rarely seen in the field of generative models, but also highly
motivated by real-world applications.

Data with Accessible Risks. In many cases, data are naturally born with information indicating
their quality. Here are some examples from the biological and sensor domains:

       • Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is widely used In DNA sequencing to produce genomic
         data. Since the accuracy of PCR is largely affected by the Guanine-Cytosine content (GC-
         content), researchers typically regard this information as a primary indicator of the data
         quality (Kumar & Kaur, 2014; Laursen et al., 2017);


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • Laser radars resort to laser beams to generate data, indicating the spatial positions of phys-
         ical objects. This type of sensor data tends to be very noisy, so the radars also provide the
         engineers with other data sources, such as light strength (Steinvall & Chevalier, 2005) and
         device states (e.g., excessive voltage and temperature) (Carmer & Peterson, 1996), which
         reflect the data quality;
       • Gyroscopes are commonly used in navigation and robotics, which measure the angular
         velocity of an object. This type of sensor can inherently estimate the data quality to provide
         engineers with more information, including bias (offset from true value) (Kirkko-Jaakkola
         et al., 2012) and scale factor (deviation from the expected sensitivity) (Tang et al., 2017).

Recently, there is a growing trend towards applying generative models to scentific (e.g., AI for
Science) (Chung & Ye, 2022; Huang et al., 2023) and industrial data (e.g., Smart Manufactur-
ing) (Kapelyukh et al., 2023; Sridhar et al., 2023). Including the above examples, those types of
data are generally noisy and come with risk information, where our proposed risk-sensitive SDE
will play a key role.

Data without Available Risks. There are also situations where the risk information r for noisy
sample x rp0q is not available. However, since our definition of the risk vector r is not limited, it is
very likely that one can find an alternative to the vector in a low-effort manner, without resorting to
manual annotation and expert knowledge. Typical examples are time series and tabular data in the
medical domain (e.g., MIMIC dataset (Johnson et al., 2016)). Specifically, because these two types
of medical data either are irregular (Sun et al., 2020) or have missing values (Lin & Tsai, 2020), one
will preprocess the data with interpolation and imputation before using them. Such preprocessing
techniques are commonly not fully accurate, leading the final data to be noisy. In this situation, there
are at least two very efficient ways to harvest the risk information:

       • Some interpolation and imputation models can inherently quantify the uncertainties of
         their predictions. For example, Gaussian Process (MacKay et al., 1998) and MissFor-
         est (Stekhoven & Bühlmann, 2012). The uncertainties provided by these models can be
         treated as the risk information;
       • There are a number of approaches (e.g., Bayesian Dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016)) in
         the field of Bayesian Deep Learning (Kendall & Gal, 2017), which estimate the prediction
         uncertainty of a black-box model. If a preprocessing tool provides no extra information for
         its output, one can apply such a method to construct the risk vector.

Even for high-quality image data, the concept of risk information still applies and it is convenient to
find the risk vector. For example, images in the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009) are of various
sizes. To train a deep learning model (e.g., GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2020)) on that dataset, one has
to first let all images have the same shape. In this way, a clear image of a small shape H ˆ W will
                                                 1     1
be expanded to a fuzzy image of a big ashape H ˆ W . This type of sample is certainly noisy for the
                                           1   1
model and one can regard this ratio pH W q{pHW q ´ 1 as the risk information.

Determination of the Noise Types. A question might arise: How can we determine the noise type
for applying the risk-sensitive SDE? In some cases, we can infer it based on the mechanism that
generates risk vectors. For example, the arrival time of an unobserved sample in a continuous-time
Markov Chain (Anderson, 2012) has an exponential distribution. In other scenarios where the risk-
generating mechanism is unknown, we can suppose the noise is Gaussian, similar to the treatments
in Conformal Prediction (Zaffran et al., 2023; Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021) and Kalman Filter (Kim
et al., 2018). In Appendix 5, our numerical experiments (e.g., Table 1) show that this assumption
works quite well.


E    S TABILITY FOR G AUSSIAN P ERTURBATION

In this section, we aim to find the optimal risk-sensitive coefficients f pr, tq, gpr, tq that let the risk-
sensitive SDE achieves stability under Gaussian perturbation. We will first prove a lemma about the
kernel of risk-sensitive SDE and then dive into the main theorem.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.1   R ISK - SENSITIVE K ERNEL

For analysis purpose, we provide a lemma that determines the form of kernel prt|0,r px | x      rp0qq (i.e.,
the density of x conditioning on noisy sample x        rp0q) for a given risk-sensitive SDE.
Lemma E.1 (Kernel of Risk-sensitive SDE). Suppose we have a risk-sensitive SDE defined as
Eq. (5), then its associated kernel prt|0,r pr  xptq | x
                                                       rp0qq shapes as
                                                                                  gpr, tq2 qq
                   $
                   ’
                   ’ prt|0,r pr
                              xptq | xrp0qq “ N pr  xptq; s f pr, tq d x
                                                                       rp0q, diagps
                   ’
                   ’
                   ’
                   &             d ln sf pr, tq
                     f pr, tq “                                                               ,       (20)
                   ’                   dt
                                                               2¯
                   ’
                   ’                             d ´g   pr, tq
                   %gpr, tq2 “ s   f pr, tq2 d
                   ’
                   ’                                  s
                                                 dt s f pr, tq2
where sf pr, 0q “ 1, g
                     spr, 0q “ 0 and operation diag expands a vector into a diagonal matrix.

Proof. For SDE, its kernel is a Gaussian distribution and the first moment is also affine if the drift
term is affine (Evans, 2012; Oksendal, 2013). Based on these facts, we can suppose that the kernel
prt|0,r pr
         xptq | x
                rp0qq of risk-sensitive SDE has the following form:
                           prt|0,r pr      rp0qq “ N pr
                                    xptq | x          xptq; Fpr,
                                                            s tqr      s tq2 q,
                                                                 xp0q, Gpr,                      (21)
where Fpr,
      s tq, Gpr,s tq are undetermined functions that output diagonal matrices.
Considering a corner case where t Ñ 0, we can infer that Fpr, s 0q “ I and Gpr, s 0q “ 0. For t ą 0,
assume δt ą 0 and δt « 0, then we have
                                             ż
             prt`δt|0,r pr
                         xpt ` δtq | x
                                     rp0qq “ prt`δt,t|0,r prxpt ` δtq, x
                                                                       rptq | x     xptq
                                                                              rp0qqdr
                 ż                                                                      .       (22)
              “ prt`δt|t,r pr xpt ` δtq | x    pt|0,r pr
                                          rptqqr       xptq | x     xptq
                                                              rp0qqdr

Note that prt`δt|t,r pr
                      xpt ` δtq | xrptq, x
                                         rp0qq “ prt`δt|t,r pr
                                                             xpt ` δtq | x
                                                                         rptqq because of the Markov
property. For notational convenience, we represent the risk-sensitive SDE as
                                dr
                                 xptq “ Fpr, tqrxptqdt ` Gpr, tqdwptq.                          (23)
where Fpr, tq “ diagpf pr, tqq and Gpr, tq “ diagpgpr, tqq. According to Eqs. (21) and (23), we
can have the following equation:
                        $
                        &xrpt ` δtq “ Fpr,
                        ’               s t ` δtqr xp0q ` Gpr,
                                                             s t ` δtqϵ1
                               xrptq “ Fpr,
                                        s tqr xp0q ` Gpr,
                                                      s tqϵ2                    ,               (24)
                        ’
                        %                                      ?
                          x
                          rpt ` δtq “ pI ` δtFpr, tqqrxptq ` δtGpr, tqϵ3
where ϵ1 , ϵ2 , ϵ3 „ N p0, Iq are independent Gaussian noises. Combining the last two equalities, we
have the following equality:
                                                                               ?
    x
    rpt ` δtq “ pI ` δtFpr, tqqFpr,s tqxp0q ` ppI ` δtFpr, tqqGpr,s tqϵ2 ` δtGpr, tqϵ3 q.       (25)
Comparing the above two equations, we have:
                  #
                      Fpr,
                      s t ` δtq “ pI ` δtFpr, tqqFpr,
                                                 s tq
                                                                                     .                 (26)
                        s t ` δtq2 “ pI ` δtFpr, tqq2 Gpr,
                        Gpr,                          s tq2 ` δtGpr, tq2
Let δt Ñ 0, this equation can be converted into a differential form:
                           d ln Fpr,
                                s tq                        s tq2
                                                          dGpr,           d ln Fpr,
                                                                               s tq
              Fpr, tq “                  , Gpr, tq2 “                  ´2                s tq2 .
                                                                                        Gpr,            (27)
                                dt                            dt               dt
If Gpr,
   s tq is only continuous but not differentiable, then the term d ln Fpr,       s tq{dt indicates its right
derivative. Now, by converting all matrix-valued functions Fpr, tq, Gpr, tq, Fpr, tq, Gpr, tq into
                                                                        s        s
                   f pr, tq, g
their vector forms s         spr, tq, f pr, tq, gpr, tq, we have
                                 d ln s
                                      f pr, tq                            d ´g spr, tq2 ¯
                     f pr, tq “                , gpr, tq2 “ s f pr, tq2 d                 ,             (28)
                                      dt                                  dt s f pr, tq2
where operations d and ‚‚ respectively denote element-wise product and division. The initial condi-
tions for Fpr,
          s tq, Gpr,
                 s tq can also be directly transferred to r
                                                          f pr, tq, g
                                                                    rpr, tq.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The above lemma is very useful. We will also see it in Sec. G.

E.2    S OLUTION FOR G AUSSIAN P ERTURBATION

Provided with Lemma E.1, the following theorem gives a sufficient condition for letting the risk-
sensitive SDE achieve perturbation stability for Gaussian noises. In Sec. F, we will also see that this
condition is both sufficient and necessary.
Theorem E.1 (Risk-sensitive SDE for Gaussian Perturbation). Suppose that we have a Gaussian
family of perturbation distributions: Pϵ “ tN p0, diagpr2 qq | r ‰ 0u, then the risk-sensitive SDE
(as defined in Eq. (5)) parameterized as below:
                           $
                                        d ln uptq
                           ’
                           ’ f pr, tq “           , @t P r0, T s
                           ’
                           ’
                           ’
                           &                dt
                                                  d ´ vpr, tq2 ¯
                             gpr, tq “ uptq2 d                   , @t P T prq ,                (29)
                           ’
                           ’
                           ’                     dt uptq2
                           ’
                           ’                           č
                             gpr, tq “ 0, @t P r0, T s T prqc
                           %

has the property of perturbation stability (i.e., St prq “ 0) for any t in
                         T prq ” tt P r0, T s | vpr, tq2 ` r2 d uptq2 “ vpr, 0q2 u,                            (30)
regardless of the weight function Ωpyq. Here T prqc represents the complement T prq and
uptq, vpr, tq are arbitrary functions that are everywhere continuous with right derivatives.
In particular, for zero risk r “ 0, the equations correspond to the associated risk-unaware diffusion
process for clean sample pr  xp0q “ xp0q, r “ 0q.

Proof. According to Lemma E.1, the kernel of risk-sensitive SDE shapes as
                      prt|0,r pr      rp0qq “ N pr
                               xptq | x          xptq; s
                                                       f pr, tq d x          gpr, tq2 qq,
                                                                  rp0q, diagps                                 (31)

                             spr, tq2 are defined in Eq (20), d indicates the entry-wise product, and
                   f pr, tq, g
where coefficients s
diag converts a vector into a diagonal matrix.
Let xp0q P RD be a real sample that is without noise and we perturb it as x    rp0q “ xp0q ` ϵ d r, ϵ „
N p0, Iq. We aim to first find the relation between risk-unaware kernel transition pt|0 px | xp0qq and
the expected risk-sensitive transition:
                                                         “                  ‰
                               Exr p0q„N pxp0q,diagpr2 qq prt|0,r px | x
                                                                       rp0qq .                     (32)
While the risk-unaware transition is simply a multivariate Gaussian:
                                    N px; s                     gp0, tq2 qq,
                                          f p0, tq d xp0q, diagps                                              (33)
we can expand the expected risk-sensitive transition as
            ż
              N prxp0q; xp0q, diagpr2 qqr
                                        pt|0,r px | x
                                                    rp0qqdr  xp0q
               ż                                                                                               (34)
            “ N pr  xp0q; xp0q, diagpr2 qqN px; s  f pr, tq d x          gpr, tq2 qqdr
                                                              rp0q, diagps           xp0q.

The second Gaussian distribution in the above equation can be reformulated as
                                                             ´ 1                                                   ¯
N px; ¨, ¨q “ p2πq´D{2 |diagps      gpr, tq2 qq|´1{2 exp ´ px ´ s                    rp0qqJ diagps
                                                                          f pr, tq d x            gpr, tq2 q´1 p¨q
                                                                   2
             ´D{2 ˇ                     2                                                  spr, tq2 ¯´1 ´ ¯¯
      p2πq                   ´ g
                               spr, tq ˇ  ¯ˇ  ´1{2      ´     1 ´            x ¯J         ´g
                                                   exp           x                   diag
                       ˇ
 “                     ˇdiag           2
                                            ˇ             ´       r p0q ´                                   ¨
    |diagps f pr, tqq|         f pr, tq
                               s                              2           f pr, tq
                                                                          s                f pr, tq2
                                                                                           s
            1            ´            x            ´gspr, tq2 ¯¯
 “                     N   x
                           r p0q,           , diag                 .
    |diagps f pr, tqq|            sf pr, tq          f pr, tq2
                                                     s
                                                                                                                (35)


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where | ¨ | means the determinant of a matrix. According to the product rule of multivariate Gaus-
sians (Ahrendt, 2005), we can simplify the form of risk-sensitive transition as
                                                                                      spr, tq2 ¯¯
     ż ´                             ¯         1           ´           x            ´g
        N x  rp0q; xp0q, diagpr2 qq                     N x  rp0q, s         , diag s              dr
                                                                                                    xp0q
                                       |diagpf pr, tqq|
                                               s                    f pr, tq          f pr, tq2
                                                               spr, tq2 ¯¯ ´
                           ż ´
                1                   x                  ´
                                                          2    g                              ¯
                                                                                                         (36)
      “                     N             ; xp0q, diag  r   `                 N   x
                                                                                  r p0q; ¨, ¨  dr
                                                                                                xp0q
        |diagps f pr, tqq|       f pr, tq
                                 s                             f pr, tq2
                                                               s
            ´                                                        ¯
      “ N x; s  f pr, tq d xp0q, diagps f pr, tq2 d r2 ` g spr, tq2 q .

To let the two transitions equal, one must achieve the following two conditions:
                        f pr, tq “ s
                        s                    f pr, tq2 d r2 ` g
                                   f p0, tq, s                spr, tq2 “ g
                                                                         sp0, tq2 .                     (37)
The first condition indicates that the term sf is independent of risk r, while the second condition
implies that there might exist some iteration t that the two transitions are not identical. Plus, because
          spr, tq2 is always non-negative, we have
this term g
                              spr, tq2 “ maxps
                              g              gp0, tq2 ´ s
                                                        f p0, tq2 d r2 , 0q,                            (38)
which means the risk-sensitive SDE has an initial period of pure contraction, but after that, its
transition kernel is equal to the real one. Note that operation max is applied in an element-wise
manner. g spr, tq2 might not be differentiable everywhere, but we can either locally smooth the curve
or take its right derivative.
With the above derivation, we see that the following equation holds:
                                                                “                  ‰
                    pt|0 px | xp0qq “ Exr p0q„N pxp0q,diagpr2 qq prt|0,r px | x
                                                                              rp0qq ,                   (39)
if Eq. (37) holds. For the left hand, we then have
                                           ż
                  Exp0q rpt|0 px | xp0qqs “ p0 pxp0qqpt|0 px | xp0qqdxp0q “ pt pxq.                     (40)

Similarly, we apply the expectation operation Exp0q to the risk-sensitive transition:
                      “                           “                  ‰‰
                Exp0q Exr p0q„N pxp0q,diagpr2 qq prt|0,r px | x
                                                              rp0qq
                    ż     ż
                 “                p0 pxp0qqppr xp0q | xp0qqrpt|0,r px | x     xp0qdxp0q
                                                                        rp0qqdr
                     xp0q x r p0q                                                                       (41)
                    ż
                 “        pr0,r pr
                                 xp0qqrpt|0,r px | x
                                                   rp0qqdrxp0q “ prt,r pxq.
                       xp0q

Therefore, we finally get prt,r pxq “ pt pxq (i.e., perturbation stability) for t in
             T prq ” tt P r0, T s | s
                                    f pr, tq “ s         f pr, tq2 d r2 ` g
                                               f p0, tq, s                spr, tq2 “ g
                                                                                     sp0, tq2 u.        (42)
                   f p0, tq, g
Now, if we replace s         spr, tq by uptq, vpr, tq, then we get the theorem proved.
Remark E.1. From this conclusion, we can easily see that, for a fixed coefficient uptq, the setup
vpr, tq2 “ maxpvpr, 0q2 ´ r2 d uptq2 , 02 q (where max is an element-wise operation) maximizes
the period of perturbation stability: |T prq|, leading to optimal coefficients.
Remark E.2. It is apparent that stability interval T prq shrinks as the risk r increases, indicating
that a noisier sample is less valuable for training. Therefore, under Gaussian perturbation, the ratio
|T prq|{T reflects how much information is contained in noisy sample pr    xp0q, rq.
Remark E.3. If one limits the perturbation noise to be isotropically Gaussian, then the risk vector r
reduces to a scalar r, with Pϵ “ tN p0, rIq | r ą 0u. Eq. (29) and Eq. (30) in the theorem can also
be simplified in terms of r “ r1, uptq “ uptq1, vpr, tq “ vptq1.
In Sec. G, we apply the above theorem to diffusion models (e.g., Risk-sensitive VP SDE in Corol-
lary G.2) and develop tools (e.g., simplified loss in Proposition G.1) for efficient optimization. In
Appendix 5, our numerical experiments confirm the validity of the theorem (i.e., Fig. 2) and show
that its suggested coefficients let diffusion models be robust to Gaussian-corrupted samples (i.e.,
Fig. 3).


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     M INIMUM I NSTABILITY FOR G ENERAL N OISES
The goal of this section is to find the optimal coefficients f pr, tq, gpr, tq of risk-sensitive SDE for
general noise perturbation. Importantly, one will see that the property of perturbation stability:
St prq “ 0 is not achievable in the case of non-Gaussian perturbation. We will first prove two other
conclusions and then provide the main theorem.

F.1   S PECTRAL R EPRESENTATION

The first conclusion is to study the form of cumulant-generating function χrt,r pωq.
Lemma F.1 (Spectral Form of the Marginal Density). Suppose that we have a risk-sensitive SDE as
defined in Eq. (5), then the cumulant-generating function of its marginal density prt,r pxq at time step
t P r0, T s: χ
             rt,r pωq, has a form as
                                                                  D
                                                               1ÿ 2
                           χ
                           rt,r pωq “ χ     f pr, tq d ωq ´
                                      r0,r ps                       w gsi pr, tq2 ,                       (43)
                                                               2 i“1 i
            f pr, tq, g
where terms s         spr, tq are defined in Eq. (20).

Proof. Based on Fokker-Planck equation (Øksendal & Øksendal, 2003), the marginal distribution
prt,r pxq at time step t satisfies the following partial differential equation (PDE):
                    D                       D                              D
   Brpt,r pxq       ÿ                      ÿ                 pt,r pxqq 1 ÿ
                                                            Br                           B 2 prt,r pxqq
               “´      fi pr, tqr
                                pt,r pxq ´     xi fi pr, tq           `       gi pr, tq2                . (44)
       Bt          i“1                     i“1
                                                               Bxi      2 i“1                  Bx2i
                                                                                 ş
Because prt,r pxq belongs to the function space L1 pRD q “ th : RD Ñ R | |hpxq|dx ă 8u, we can
apply the continuous-time Fourier transform (Krantz, 2018),
                                             ż
                            Fphpxqqpωq “ hpxq exppiω J xqdx, ω P RD ,

where i is the imaginary unit, to the PDE as
                                    D
                   pt,r pxqqpωq
                BFpr               ÿ
                                “´     fi pr, tqFpr
                                                  pt,r pxqqpωq
                      Bt           i“1
                                                                                                          (45)
                   D                                     D               ´ B 2 pr pxq ¯
                   ÿ             ´   pt,r pxq ¯
                                    Br                1ÿ                         t,r
                ´     fi pr, tqF xi             pωq `       gi pr, tq2 F            2   pωq.
                  i“1
                                      Bx  i           2 i“1
                                                                                Bx  i

According to some basic properties of the Fourier transform, we have
               pt,r pxq ¯                      pt,r pxq ¯
   $ ´
             Br                      B ´ ´ Br                ¯      B ´                   ¯
   ’
   ’ F   x i              pωq “ ´i       F               pωq   “ ´     w i Fpr
                                                                             pt,r pxqqqpωq
   &            Bxi                Bwi          Bxi                Bwi
             2                                                                              ,             (46)
   ’    ´  B prt,r pxq  ¯
                                    2
   % F
   ’                      pωq “ ´w  i Fpr
                                        pt,r pxqqpωq
               Bx2i
By denoting Fpr
              pt,r pxqqpωq as φt,r pωq, we can cast Eq. (44) as
                            D                              D
              Bφt,r pωq    ÿ                Bφt,r pωq ´ 1 ÿ 2              ¯
                         “     wi fi pr, tq          ´        wi gi pr, tq2 φt,r pωq.                     (47)
                  Bt       i“1
                                              Bwi       2 i“1
In terms of the characteristic curves, we set ordinary differential equations (ODE) as
                                                                            D
         dt         dwi                             ď        dφ ´ 1 ÿ 2                     ¯
             “ 1,        “ ´wi fi pr, tq, i P r1, Ds N,          “ ´           wi gi pr, tq2 φ.           (48)
         ds          ds                                      ds          2 i“1
where s and N are respectively a dummy variable and the set of all natural numbers. Considering
the initial condition: tp0q “ 0, wi p0q “ ξi , φp0q “ φ0,r pξq, ξ “ rξ1 , ξ2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , ξD sJ , the solutions to
these ODE are formulated as
                                                                                D
                                                                     ´ 1ÿ               gsi pr, sq2 ¯
           tpsq “ s, wi psq “ ξi fsi pr, sq´1 , φpsq “ φ0,r pξq exp ´                ξi2 s            ,    (49)
                                                                           2     i“1
                                                                                        fi pr, sq2

                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where coefficient functions fsi pr, sq, gsi pr, sq are of the forms as
                                                                                    dż
                                      ´ż s               ¯                              t
                                                                                          gi pr, s1 q2 1
                 fsi pr, sq “ exp           fi pr, s1 qds1 , gsi pr, sq “ fsi pr, sq              1 2
                                                                                                      ds .   (50)
                                                                                       0 fi pr, s q
                                          0
                                                                                          s

Based on the above results, we can get the solution of φt,r pωq as
                                                                      D
                                                                   1ÿ 2
                              φt,r pωq “ φ0,r ps
                                               f pr, tq d ωq expp´      w gsi pr, tq2 q,                     (51)
                                                                   2 i“1 i

in      which         f pr, tq
                      s                  “         rfs1 pr, tq, fs2 pr, tq, ¨ ¨ ¨ , fsD pr, tqsJ and g
                                                                                                     spr, tq “
rgs1 pr, tq, gs2 pr, tq, ¨ ¨ ¨ , gsD pr, tqsJ .   The lemma is proved by taking logarithms on both sides
of the equation.

We can also get a similar conclusion for the term χt pωq by setting r “ 0.

F.2     N ECESSARY C ONDITION FOR ACHIEVING S TABILITY

The second conclusion is about the necessary condition to achieve perturbation stability.
Proposition F.1 (Necessary Condition for Perturbation Stability). Given the definition (i.e., Eq. (5))
of risk-sensitive SDE, then a necessary condition for it to have the property of perturbation stability
is that the perturbation results from diagonal Gaussian noises.
                                                            ş
Proof. Let the noise distribution be of a free form qpϵq : qpϵqdϵ “ 1; qpϵq ą 0, @ϵ P RD , then the
distribution of clean data p0 pxq will be perturbed into a noisy one
                                   ż
                        pr0,r pxq “ p0 px1 qqpx ´ x1 qdx1 “ pp0 p¨q ˚ qp¨qqpxq,                (52)

where ˚ represents the convolution operation. Through Fourier transform, we have
              φ0,r pωq “ Fpp0,r pxqqpωq “ Fpp0,r pxqqpωq ¨ Fpqpxqqpωq “ φ0,r pωqϕpωq,                        (53)
                                                                                 1    D
where ϕpωq :“ Fpqpxqqpωq. Here we also suppose that qpϵq P L pR q.
With the above results and applying the Lemma F.1, we can get the form of risk-unaware marginal
distribution pt,r pxq in the frequency domain as
                                                                   D
                                                                1ÿ 2
                                   χt pωq “ χ0 ps
                                                f p0, tq d ωq ´      w gsi p0, tq2 ,                         (54)
                                                                2 i“1 i

and the one for risk-sensitive marginal distribution prt,r pxq is as
                                                                            D
                                                                         1ÿ 2
                    χ
                    rt,r pωq “ χ0,r ps
                                     f pr, tq d ωq ` χq ps
                                                         f pr, tq d ωq ´      w gsi pr, tq2 ,                (55)
                                                                         2 i“1 i

where χq p¨q are the cumulant-generating function of noise distribution qpϵq.
Because the Fourier transform F is injective in the domain of definition L1 pRD q, the prop-
erty prt,r pxq “ pt pxq is equivalent to the condition χt pωq “ χ    rt,r pωq. Considering function
p0 pxq P L1 pRD q and variable ω P RD are arbitrarily selected, the above two equations are equiva-
lent indicate that the below two conditions are satisfied:
                                              ´ 1            sp0, tq2
                                                            ´g             spr, tq2 ¯ ¯
                                                                           g
              s          f pr, tq, ϕpωq “ exp ´ ω J diag s
              f p0, tq “ s                                              ´             ω .      (56)
                                                    2         f p0, tq2    sf pr, tq2

The shape of characteristic function ϕpωq indicates that its form qpxq in the spatial domain is a
multivariate Gaussian (DasGupta & DasGupta, 2011), with the following moments:
                                                             ´gsp0, tq2    spr, tq2 ¯
                                                                           g
              Ex„qpxq rxs “ 0, diagpr2 q – ErxxJ s “ diag s              ´            .     (57)
                                                               f p0, tq2   f pr, tq2
                                                                           s


                                                              24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, perturbation stability is only possible for Gaussian noise N p0, diagpr2 qq, r P RD . To
achieve this stability, we have to pick up a risk-sensitive SDE of the form:
               $             ´ d ln s
                                    f ptq       ¯      ´             spr, tq2 ¯¯
                                                                  d ´g
                                                         f ptq2 d
               ’
               &    dxptq “               d xptq dt ` s                         dωptq
                                  dt                              dt sf ptq2          ,         (58)
               ’         2                 2    2        2
                 g
                 spr, tq “ maxps   gp0, tq ´ r d f ptq , 0q
               %                                    s

                                                        spr, tq2 “ g
which is risk-unaware for iteration t in tt P r1, T s | g          sp0, tq2 ´ r2 d s
                                                                                   f ptq2 u.

Paired with Theorem E.1, this proposition indicates that the necessary and sufficient conditions for
a risk-sensitive SDE to achieve perturbation stability prt,r pxq “ pt pxq are: 1) noises follow diagonal
Gaussian distributions; 2) the time step t is within the stability interval.

F.3   S OLUTION FOR G ENERAL N OISES

Provided with former two conclusions, we can now prove the below main theorem.
Theorem F.1 (General Theory of Perturbation Stability).
                                                  ş         Suppose we have a family of continuous
noise distributions: Pϵ “ tρr pϵq : RD Ñ R` , ρr pϵqdϵ “ 1 | r ‰ 0u, controlled by a risk vector
r, then the optimal coefficients of the risk-sensitive SDE (as defined in Eq. (5)) that minimizes the
perturbation instability St prq satisfy
                                              `                        ˘
                             vpr, tq2 “ max 0, vp0, tq2 ` Ψpuptq, rq ,                           (59)
in which the term Ψp¨q is defined as
                   ´ż                  ¯´1 ´ ż         ˇ    `             ˘ˇ        ¯
    Ψpuptq, rq “ 2      ΩpyqryyJ s2 dy    b    Ωpyq ln ˇ exp χr puptq d yq ˇrys2 dy                        (60)

where b stands for a matrix multiplication, χr pyq is the cumulant-generating function of the noise
distribution ρr pϵq, and uptq, vpr, tq satisfy the same conditions as in Eq. (29). Importantly, the
property of perturbation stability St prq “ 0 is only possible to achieve for Gaussian perturbations
of a diagonal form: ρr pϵq “ N pϵ; 0, diagpr2 qq.

Proof. Based on Lemma F.1 and Proposition F.1, we can see there is no appropriate risk-sensitive
SDE to fully neutralize the negative impact of non-Gaussian noise distribution qpϵq. Therefore, we
aim to find an optimal (though not perfect) risk-sensitive SDE in this regard. Note that p0 pxq is
arbitrarily selected in space L1 pRD q, so condition sf pr, tq “ s
                                                                 f p0, tq still needs to hold. For g
                                                                                                   sp0, tq,
we first consider the objective function to optimize:
                                      ż       ˇ                     ˇ2
                                Ot “ Ωpωqˇχ     rt,r pωq ´ χt pωqˇ dω,                                (61)
                                              ˇ                     ˇ

where | ¨ | represents the magnitude of a complex number and Ωpωq : RD Ñ R` is a predefined
weight function. Considering Eq. (54) and Eq. (55), we have
        ż       ˇ1 ÿ D                       D                                       ˇ2
                                          1ÿ 2
Ot “ Ωpωqˇ              ωi2 gsi p0, tq2 ´       ωi gsi pr, tq2 ` χr ps f pr, tq d ωqˇ dω
                ˇ                                                                    ˇ
                  2 i“1                   2 i“1
        ż       ˇ1D                             E        ˇ                     ˇ        ´                ¯ˇ2
    “ Ωpωqˇ ω 2 , g       sp0, tq2 ´ g  spr, tq2 ` ln ˇϕr ps   f pr, tq d ωqˇ ` i ¨ arg ϕr ps
                                                                                            f pr, tq d ωq ˇ dω
                ˇ                                        ˇ                     ˇ                          ˇ
                  2
        ż       ´1D                               E        ˇ                     ˇ¯2    ż            ´ ¯2
                        2            2          2
    “ Ωpωq            ω ,g sp0, tq ´ g   spr, tq ` ln ˇϕr pf pr, tq d ωqˇ dω ` Ωpωq arg ¨ dω,
                                                           ˇ s                   ˇ
                   2
                                                                                                            (62)
where argp¨q and ă ¨, ¨ ą respectively represent the argument of a complex number and the inner
product of two vectors. Plus, χr p¨q and ϕr p¨q are respectively the cumulant-generating and charac-
teristic functions of noise distribution ρr pϵq.
Now, we denote g  sp0, tq2 ´ g
                             spr, tq2 as a dummy variable y “ ry1 , y2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , yD sJ . Then, we compute
the derivative of objective Ot with respect to every input entry yj , j P r1, Ds:
                           ż ´
                   dOt                     ´1D       E     ˇ                     ˇ¯¯
                               Ωpωq ¨ ωj2     ω 2 , y ` ln ˇϕr ps
                                                                f pr, tq d ωqˇ dω.                   (63)
                                                           ˇ                     ˇ
                         “
                   dyj                      2

                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Through setting dOt {dyj “ 0 for every j in r1, Ds, we can get
            D” ż               ıJ         E        ż           ˇ              ˇ
                        2 2
                 Ωpωqωj ωi dω          , y “ ´2 Ωpωqwj2 ln ˇϕr psf pr, tq d ωqˇdω,                (64)
                                                               ˇ              ˇ
                                    iPr1,Ds

where r¨sJ
         iPr1,Ds represents some column vector. By combining all results, we have
          ”ż                 ı              ”ż          ˇ                 ˇ       ıJ
              Ωpωqωi2 ωj2 dω         y “ ´2                  f pr, tq d ωqˇωi2 dω
                                                Ωpωq ln ˇϕr ps                                ,   (65)
                                                        ˇ                 ˇ
                              i,jPr1,Ds                                             iPr1,Ds

where r¨si,jPr1,Ds represents some matrix. For notational convenience, we denote
                  $” ż                 ı            ż
                  ’
                  ’
                  &     Ωpωqωi2 ωj2 dω             “ Ωpωqrωω J s2 dω
                                         i,jPr1,Ds
                    ”ż          ˇ      ˇ        ıJ      ż                        .                (66)
                  ’                        2                                2
                        Ωpωq ln ˇϕr p¨qˇωi dω         “ Ωpωq ln |ϕr p¨q|rωs dω
                  ’
                  %             ˇ      ˇ
                                                iPr1,Ds

                     sp0, tq2 ´ g
Considering that y “ g          spr, tq2 and g
                                             spr, tq2 is always non-negative, we get
               ´             ´ż                    ¯´1 ´ ż          ˇ                 ˇ       ¯ ¯
spr, tq2 “ max g
g                sp0, tq2 ` 2    Ωpωqrωω J s2 dω                         f pr, tq d ωqˇrωs2 dω , 0 .
                                                            Ωpωq ln ˇϕr ps
                                                                    ˇ                 ˇ

                                                                                                  (67)
For simplification, we introduce a new symbol Ψ as
                           ´ż                 ¯´1 ´ ż           ˇ                  ˇ        ¯
        Ψpf pr, tq, rq “ 2    Ωpωqrωω J s2 dω          Ωpωq ln ˇϕr ps f pr, tq d ωqˇrωs2 dω
                                                                ˇ                  ˇ

             ´ż                    ¯´1 ´ ż         ˇ    `                    ˘ˇˇ      ¯           (68)
                            J 2
        “2        Ωpωqrωω s dω                               f pr, tq d ωq ˇrωs2 dω .
                                           Ωpωq ln ˇ exp χr ps
                                                   ˇ


As a result, the optimal coefficient g
                                     spr, tq can be formulated as
                                             ´                             ¯
                           spr, tq2 “ max g
                           g                   sp0, tq2 ` Ψpf pr, tq, rq, 0 ,                     (69)

which finally proves the theorem.

With the above theorem, we can find the optimal risk-sensitive SDE for non-Gaussian perturbation,
though its coefficient gpr, tq might have a rather complicated form. In Sec. G, we apply this theorem
to Cauchy perturbation under the architecture of VE SDE (i.e., Corollary G.3). Our numerical exper-
iments in Appendix 5 also show that such a risk-sensitive VE SDE are very robust for optimization
with Cauchy-corrupted samples (i.e., Fig. 4).

G     A PPLICATIONS TO D IFFUSION M ODELS

In this section, we aim to apply risk-sensitive SDE and our developed theorems to the practical
implementations of diffusion models. We will show how to extend a vanilla diffusion model to
its risk-sensitive versions under different noise perturbations and provide an efficient algorithm for
optimizing the score-based model with risk-sensitive SDE.

G.1    E XTENSIONS UNDER G AUSSIAN P ERTURBATION

In terms of Theorem E.1, we have the following corollaries that extend two widely used diffusion
models to their risk-sensitive versions. One of them is VE SDE (Song et al., 2021).
Corollary G.1 (Risk-sensitive VE SDE for Gaussian Noises). Under the assumption of Gaussian
perturbation, the risk-sensitive SDE (as defined by Eq. (5)) for VE SDE, a commonly used risk-
unaware diffusion model, is parameterized as follows:
                                                                    c
                                                                      dσptq2
                   f pr, tq “ 0, gpr, tq “ 1pσptq 1 Á σp0q 1 ` r q
                                                 2         2      2
                                                                             ,
                                                                        dt

                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where 1p¨q is an element-wise indicator function, Á represents the element-wise greater-than sign.
The stability interval T prq in this case is
                                      !                               )
                            T prq “ t P r0, T s | σptq2 ´ max ri2 ą 0 .
                                                          iPr1,Ds

                                    a r “ 0, the above risk-sensitive SDE reduces to the vanilla VE
In particular, for the case of zero risk
SDE, with f p0, tq “ 0, gp0, tq “ dσptq2 {dt1, and T “ r0, T s.

Proof. For VE SDE, its risk-unaware kernel is as
                #
                   pt|0 pxptq | xp0qq “ N pxptq; s                  gp0, tq2 qq
                                                 f ptq d xp0q, diagps
                                                                                ,
                  sf ptq “ 1, g sp0, tq2 “ pσptq2 ´ σp0q2 q1
where σptq : r0, T s Ñ R` is an exponentially increasing function. Considering our previous
conclusions (i.e., Eq. (37) and Eq. (28)) for Gaussian noises, the risk-unaware and risk-sensitive
SDEs for VE SDE are parameterized as follows:
             $                                            c
                                                              dσptq2
             &dxptq “ gp0, tq d dwptq, gp0, tq “ 1
             ’
             ’
                                                                dt
                                                                                     c         ,
                                                                                       dσptq2
                 xptq “ gpr, tq d dwptq, gpr, tq “ 1pσptq 1 Á σp0q 1 ` r q
             ’
             ’
             %dr                                                2          2       2
                                                                                          dt
where 1p¨q is an element-wise indicator function. The risk-sensitive SDE of VE SDE is of perturba-
tion stability at iteration t P r0, T s iff the vector σptq2 1 ´ r2 is positive in each entry.

The other is VP SDE (Song et al., 2021), the continuous version of DDPM (Ho et al., 2020).
Corollary G.2 (Risk-sensitive VP SDE for Gaussian Noises). Under the assumption of Gaussian
perturbation, the risk-sensitive SDE for VP SDE is parameterized as follows:
                                1
                    f pr, tq “ ´ βptq1, gpr, tq “ 1 1 Á p1 ` r2 qαptq βptq,
                                                    `                  ˘a
                                2
                       şt
where αptq “ expp´ 0 βpsqdsq. The stability interval T prq in this case is
                          T prq “ tt P r0, T s | αptq´1 ą 1 ` max rj2 u.
                                                               1ďjďD

                                            ar “ 0, the risk-sensitive SDE reduces to an ordinary VP
As expected, for the situation with zero risk
SDE, with f p0, tq “ ´ 12 βptq1, gp0, tq “ βptq1.

Proof. For VP SDE, its risk-unaware kernel is as
                                                                    gp0, tq2 qq
                $
                ’  pt|0 pxptq | xp0qq “ N pxptq; s
                                                 f ptq d xp0q, diagps
                ’
                ’
                ’
                ’                 ´ 1 t ż          ¯
                   f ptq “ 1 exp ´          βpsqds
                &s
                                      2 0                                       ,
                ’
                ’                              żt
                ’                         ´              ¯
                   sp0, tq2 “ 1 ´ 1 exp ´ βpsqds
                ’
                ’g
                %
                                                  0
where βptq : r0, T s Ñ R` is a predefined curve. Similar to our discussion about VE SDE, by using
Eq. (37) and Eq. (28), the risk-unaware and risk-sensitive SDEs for VP SDE are as
$
                                                          1                 a
&dxptq “ pf ptq d xptqqdt ` gp0, tq d dwptq, f ptq “ ´ 2 βptq1, gp0, tq “ βptq1
’
’
                                                            ´                 ´ żt         ¯¯a       .
                    rptqqdt ` gpr, tq d dwptq, gpr, tq “ 1 1 Á p1 ` r q exp ´ βpsqds
                                                                        2
’
%dr
’  xptq “ pf ptq d x                                                                            βptq
                                                                                     0
                                                  şt
The stability interval T prq is as tt P r0, T s | expp 0 βpsqdsq ą 1 ` max1ďjďD rj2 u.

One can apply the two corollaries to isotropic Gaussian noises by simply setting r “ r1, such that
coefficients f ptq, gpr, tq will reduce to scalar functions. In Appendix 5, our numerical experiments
confirm that Risk-sensitive VP SDE can achieve stability under Gaussian perturbation (i.e., Fig. 2)
and it is indeed robust to Gaussian-corrupted samples (i.e., Fig. 3).


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2    O PTIMIZATION AND S AMPLING

In this part, we provide essential elements for applying risk-sensitive diffusion models in practice,
including the loss function, optimization algorithm, and sampling algorithm. Before diving into the
details, we will first prove a lemma about the stability condition.
Lemma G.1 (“Not Instable” means “Stable”). Provided with the definition of instability measure
St prq in Eq. (6) and suppose that distributions p0 pxq, ρr pϵq are continuous. If we have St prq “ 0,
then χrt,r pyq “ χt pyq, @y P RD and prt,r pxq “ pt pxq, @x P RD both hold.

Proof. We prove the first equality by contradiction. Suppose that χ      rt,r pyq ‰ χt pyq for some
point y1 P RD , then there is a closed region y1 P U Ă RD that satisfies |U | ą 0 and
χ
rt,r pyq ‰ χt pyq, @y P U because probabilistic densities χ
                                                          rt,r pyq, χt pyq are both continuous every-
where. Considering that the region U is a closed set, we have the below inequalities
                        ζ1 “ min |χ
                                  rt,r pyq ´ χt pyq| ą 0, ζ2 “ min Ωpyq ą 0.                               (70)
                              yPU                                      yPU

With these results, we further have
                         ż                                 ż
                                  ˇ                  ˇ2
                St prq ě     Ωpyq χ
                                  ˇ rt,r pyq ´ χt pyq dy ą
                                                     ˇ       ζ2 ζ12 “ |U |ζ2 ζ12 ą 0,                      (71)
                             U                                     U

which contradict the precondition St prq “ 0. Hence, we have χ rt,r pyq “ χt pyq, @y P RD . We can
also immediately get the second equality proved since probability densities are uniquely determined
by their cumulant-generating functions.

It is trivial that stability condition prt,r pxq “ pt pxq indicates zero instability measure St prq “ 0.
Therefore, an implication of the above lemma is that the two conditions are in fact equivalent if the
sample p0 pxq and noise distributions ρr pϵq are both continuous.

Risk-free loss for noisy samples. In the following proposition, we derive the loss function for
risk-sensitive SDE to robustly optimize the score-based model sθ px, tq with noisy sample pr
                                                                                           xp0q, rq.
We also further simplify the loss for efficient computation.
Proposition G.1 (Risk-free Loss for Robust Optimization). Suppose that the risky sample pr  xp0q “
xp0q ` ϵ, rq is generated from clean sample pxp0q, r “ 0q with some perturbation noise ϵ „ ρr pϵq,
then the loss of standard (i.e., risk-unaware) diffusion models at time step t:
                             Lt,r“0 “ Ex„pt pxq r}sθ px, tq ´ ∇x ln pt pxq}2 s,
is equal to the below new loss for non-zero risk r ‰ 0:
                            Lt,r “ Ex„prt,r pxq r}sθ px, tq ´ ∇x ln prt,r pxq}2 s,                         (72)
if the noise distribution ρr pϵq is Gaussian and the time step t is within the stability interval T prq.
Importantly, the alternative loss Lt,r has another form:
                                    “›                                               ›2 ‰
              Lt,r “ Ct ` Exr p0q,η ›η { vpr, tq ` sθ puptq d x
                                                              rp0q ` vpr, tq d η, tq› ,            (73)
      rp0q „ pr0,r pxq, coefficients uptq, vpr, tq are as defined in Eq. (29), η „ N p0, Iq, and Ct is a
where x
constant that does not contain the parameter θ.

Proof. Based on Theorem E.1 and Lemma G.1, we know that the stability condition prt,r pxq “ pt pxq
is achieved in this setup. Therefore, we can derive
           Lt,0 “ Er}sθ px, tq ´ ∇x ln pt pxq}22 s “ Er}sθ px, tq ´ ∇x ln prt,r pxq}22 s “ Lt,r .          (74)
Therefore, the first claim of this theorem is proved.
Secondly, we aim to derive another form of the loss Lt,r to make it computationally feasible. To
begin with, by expanding the definition of Lt,r , we have
                                ”                                           ı
    Lt,r “ Exr ptq„prt,r prxptqq }sθ pr                            xptqq}22
                                      xptq, tq ´ ∇xr ptq ln prt,r pr
             ”                                                                                           ı  (75)
         “ E }sθ pr xptq, tq}22 ` }∇xr ptq ln prt,r pr
                                                     xptqq}22 ´ 2sθ pr  xptq, tqJ ∇xr ptq ln prt,r pr
                                                                                                    xptqq .


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Considering the following transformations:
                                                                          ş
                                           ∇xr ptq prt,r pr
                                                          xptqq    ∇xr ptq pr0,t,r pr
                                                                                    xp0q, x     xp0q
                                                                                          rptqqdr
               ∇xr ptq ln prt,r pr
                                 xptqq “                        “
                                               prt,r pr
                                                      xptqq                    prt,r pr
                                                                                      xptqq
                            ş
                   ∇xr ptq pr0,r prxp0qqr pt|0,r prxptq | x       xp0q
                                                            rp0qqdr
               “
                                       prt,r pr
                                              xptqq
                   ş
                     pr0,t,r pr
                              xp0q, xrptqq∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r pr
                                                              xptq | x
                                                                     rp0qqdr xp0q                                  (76)
               “
                                              prt,r pr
                                                     xptqq
                   ż
               “ pr0|t,r pr           rptqq∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r pr
                               xp0q | x                         xptq | x
                                                                       rp0qqdr xp0q

                “ Exr p0q„pr0|t,r prxp0q|rxptqq r∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r pr
                                                                     xptq | x
                                                                            rp0qqs.
Combining the above two equations, we have
               ”                                                                                                        ı
Lt,r “ Exr ptq }sθ p¨q}22 ` }∇xr ptq ln prt,r pr    xptqq}22 ´ 2sθ pr
                                                                    xptq, tqJ Exr p0q r∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r pr
                                                                                                           xptq | x
                                                                                                                  rp0qqs
               ”                                                                                              ı
“ Exr p0q,rxptq }sθ p¨q}22 ` }∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r p¨q}22 ´ 2sθ pr  xptq, tqJ ∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r pr
                                                                                                xptq | xrp0qq ` Ct
                                                   ”                                                     ı
                                                         xptq, tq ´ ∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r pr
“ Exr p0q„pr0,r prxp0qq,rxptq„prt|0,r prxptq|rxp0qq }sθ pr                                     rp0qq}22 ` Ct ,
                                                                                        xptq | x
                                                                                                                     (77)
where Ct is a constant that does not contain parameter θ:
                                    ”                                                                     ı
               Ct “ Exr p0q,rxptq }∇xr ptq ln prt,r pr  xptqq}22 ´ }∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r pr
                                                                                        xptq | xrp0qq}22 .           (78)

Finally, we only have to simplify the derivative term:
                                               ´                                              ¯
     ∇xr ptq ln prt|0,r pr      rp0qq “ ∇xr ptq ln N pr
                         xptq | x                     xptq; s
                                                            f pr, tq d x          gpr, tq2 qq
                                                                       rp0q, diagps
                ´ D          D
                            ÿ                   1D                                       E¯
       “ ∇xr ptq ´ lnp2πq ´     ln gsj pr, tq ´     xptq ´ s
                                                   pr                 rp0qq2 , g
                                                           f pr, tq d x        spr, tq´2                           (79)
                  2         j“1
                                                2
           f pr, tq d x
           s          rp0q ´ x
                             rptq
       “                          .
                    spr, tq2
                    g
To conclude, the risk-free loss has a simplified form as
                                                          ”›               f pr, tq d x
                                                                           s                 rptq ››2 ı
                                                                                      rp0q ´ x
  Lt,r “ Exr p0q„pr0,r prxp0qq,rxptq„prt|0,r prxptq|rxp0qq ›sθ pr
                                                                xptq, tq ´                         › ` Ct . (80)
                                                           ›
                                                                                    spr, tq2
                                                                                    g               2


Similar to DDPM (Ho et al., 2020), we can further simplify this equation by Gaussian reparam-
eterization. With the reparameterization x     rptq “ s  f pr, tq d x
                                                                    rp0q ` g spr, tq d ϵ, ϵ „ N p0, Iq, we
get
                                         ”› ´                                   ¯      ϵ ››2 ı
   Lt,r “ Exr p0q„pr0,r prxp0qq,ϵ„N p0,Iq ›sθ s
                                              f pr, tq d x
                                                         rp0q ` g spr, tq d ϵ, t `          › ` Ct , (81)
                                          ›
                                                                                     g
                                                                                     spr, tq 2
where time step t belongs to stability period T .

The expression of risk-free loss in Eq. (73) permits efficient computation in practice. Importantly
but as anticipated, for the case of zero risk r “ 0, the term reduces to the loss function of ordinary
risk-unaware diffusion models: Lt,0 , for clean sample xp0q.

Optimization and sampling. We respectively show the optimization and sampling procedures in
Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4. We also highlight in blue the terms that differ from vanilla diffusion
models. For the optimization algorithm, when the risk is 0, the algorithm reduces to the opti-
mization procedure of a vanilla diffusion model, with a trivial stability interval of T prq “ r0, T s.
When the risk is non-zero, the risk-sensitive coefficient vpr, tq and interval T prq will guarantee that
∇x ln pt pxq “ ∇x ln prt,r pxq for t P T prq, such that the noisy sample prxp0q, r ‰ 0q can be used to
safely optimize the score-based model sθ px, tq.


                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Optimization Algorithm
 1: repeat
            xp0q, r q from the dataset
 2: Sample pr
 3: Sample time step t from stability interval T prq
 4:  x
     rptq “ uptq d xrp0q ` vpr, tq d η , η „ N p0, Iq
                        ›
 5: Update θ with ´∇θ ›η { vpr, tq ` sθ pr xptq, tq}2
 6: until converged


Algorithm 4 Sampling Algorithm
 1: Set time points ttM “ T, tM ´1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , t2 , t1 “ 0u
 2: Set zero risk r “ 0
 3: xptM q „ pT pxq « N px; 0, Iq
 4: for i “ M, M ´ 1, . . . , 2 do
                                                         2
 5: bpxpt
     p     i q, ti q “ f pr, ti q d xpti q ´ gpr, ti q d sθ pxpti q, ti q
 6: η „ N p0, pti ´ ti´1 qIq
 7: xpti´1 q “ xpti q ´ bpxpt
                            p      i q, ti qpti ´ ti´1 q ´ gpr, ti q d η
 8: end for
 9: return xp0q



For the sampling algorithm, by setting zero risk r “ 0, the coefficients f pr, tq, gpr, tq become
compatible with the model sθ px, tq and together generate high-quality sample xp0q. Our model will
generate only clean samples pxp0q, r “ 0q, but it was already able to capture the rich distribution
information contained in noisy sample prxp0q, r ‰ 0q during optimization.

G.3    E XTENSION UNDER C AUCHY P ERTURBATION

In terms of Theorem F.1, we provide a corollary that applies risk-sensitive diffusion to VE SDE,
letting it be robust to Cauchy-corrupted samples.
Corollary G.3 (Risk-sensitive VE SDE for Cauchy Noises). For the weight function Ωpyq “
|χt pyq|2 and a Cauchy noise distribution ρr pϵq that is specified by scales r (i.e., risk vector):
                                                D ´
                                                ź        ´   ϵ2j ¯¯´1
                                     ρr pϵq “         πrj 1 ` 2       ,
                                                j“1
                                                             rj

the minimally-unstable risk-sensitive SDE (defined by Eq. (5)) for VE SDE has a drift coefficient as
f pr, tq “ 0 and a diffusion coefficient as
                                                                c
                                                                   dσptq2
                           gpr, tq “ 1pσptq 1 Á σp0q 1 ` ψprqq
                                            2       2
                                                                          ,
                                                                     dt
where the term ψprq is defined as
                           `                       ˘´1 ` ´1 J ´1    ˘
                  ψprq “ r´2 pr´2 qJ ` diagp5r´4 q      r 1 r ` 2r´2 .
The vector r is element-wiseanon-negative. For r “ 0, the risk-sensitive SDE reduces to VE SDE,
with f p0, tq “ 0, gp0, tq “ dσptq2 {dt.

Proof. Based on Theorem F.1, we aim to derive risk-sensitive SDEs for the noises sampled from
a multivariate Cauchy distribution. We first suppose a noise ϵ “ rϵ1 , ϵ2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , ϵD sJ , with every
dimension j P r1, Ds being independent and following a univariate Cauchy distribution ρj pϵj q that
is parameterized by scale κj :
                                     1                          ´          ¯
                   ρj pϵj q “     `     2   2
                                              ˘ , ϕj pωj q “ exp ´ κj |ωj | ,                     (82)
                               πκj 1 ` ϵj {κj

                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ϕj pωj q is the characteristic function of distribution ρj pϵj q. Then, because random variables
                                                                                        śD
ϵ1 , ϵ2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , ϵD are mutually independent, their joint distribution ρpϵq is equal to j“1 ρj pϵj q and
we can derive its characteristic function ϕpωq as
                                                            ż
                           ϕpωq “ Eϵ„ρpϵq rexppiϵJ ωqs “ ρpϵq exppiϵJ ωqdϵ
                            D ´ż
                            ź                                 ¯        ´       ¯                     (83)
                                                                           J
                        “          ρj pϵj q exppiϵj ωj qdωj       “ exp ´ κ |ω| ,
                            j“1

where κ “ rκ1 , κ2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , κD s. Now, we can convert Eq. (66) into the following form:
 ”ż                  ı            ´                    ¯     ”ż            ˇ             ˇ      ıJ
     Γpωqωi2 ωj2 dω                gsp0, tq2 ´ g
                                               spr, tq2 “ ´2     Γpωq ln ˇϕps f ptq d ωqˇωi2 dω
                                                                           ˇ             ˇ
                       i,jPr1,Ds                                                                 iPr1,Ds
      ”ż       ´              ¯J            ıJ          ”ż                 ı         ´         ¯
  “2     Γpωq s  f ptq d κ |ω|ωi2 dω                “2     Γpωq|ωi |ωj2 dω            f ptq d κ .
                                                                                      s
                                          iPr1,Ds                           i,jPr1,Ds
                                                                                                    (84)
We set the weight function Γpωq as the magnitude of the characteristic function |ϕpωq| since it
indicates the importance of value ω. In this regard, consider the below five integrals:
   ż                             ż                                    ż
                            2                                    4                                 2
     expp´κj |ωj |qdωj “      ,     expp´κj |ωj |qwj2 dωj “ 3 ,          expp´κj |ωj |q|ωj |dωj “ 2 ,
                           κj                                   κj                                 κj
   ż                                  ż
                              48                                        12
     expp´κj |ωj |qwj4 dωj “ 5 ,         expp´κj |ωj |qwj2 |wj |dωj “ 4 .
                              κj                                        κj
                                                                                                    (85)
we can solve that linear equation as
                           ” 1 ` 51pi “ jq ı´1          ” 1 ` 21pi “ jq ı            ´         ¯
     sp0, tq2 ´ g
     g          spr, tq2 “                                                            f
                                                                                      s ptq d κ  .  (86)
                                  κ2i κ2j     i,jPr1,Ds        κi κ2j      i,jPr1,Ds

For demonstration purposes, let’s consider the case of D “ 1:
                                                         1
                                  gspr, tq2 “ gsp0, tq2 ´ fsptqκ2 .                                  (87)
                                                         2
For D ą 1, we can only have the below form with an inverse matrix:
                                 ´`                             ˘´1 ` ´1 J ´1    ˘¯
   gspr, tq2 “ g
               sp0, tq2 ´ s
                          f ptq d κ´2 pκ´2 qJ ` diagp5κ´4 q          κ 1 κ ` 2κ´2 ,                  (88)

where κ´n “ rκ´n   ´n           ´n        `
              1 , κ2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , κD s, n P N .


For risk-sensitive VE SDE under Cauchy Perturbation, the concept of stability interval does not
apply, though its coefficient gpr, tq is optimal in a sense that the instability measure St prq is mini-
mized. For optimization, one can simply set T prq “ r0, T s and apply Algorithm 3. In Appendix 5,
our numerical experiments show that the risk-sensitive VE SDE are very robust for optimization
with Cauchy-corrupted samples (i.e., Fig. 4).


                                                    31
