Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE F OUNDATIONS OF T OKENIZATION :
S TATISTICAL AND C OMPUTATIONAL C ONCERNS
 Juan Luis Gastaldi1 John Terilla2
 Luca Malagutti1 Brian DuSell1 Tim Vieira1 Ryan Cotterell1
 1
   ETH Zürich 2 City University of New York
 {juan.luis.gastaldi,lmalagutti,brian.dusell,ryan.cotterell}@inf.ethz.ch
 jterilla@gc.cuny.edu tim.f.vieira@gmail.com



                                             A BSTRACT
         Tokenization—the practice of converting strings of characters from an alphabet into
         sequences of tokens over a vocabulary—is a critical step in the NLP pipeline. The
         use of token representations is widely credited with increased model performance
         but is also the source of many undesirable behaviors, such as spurious ambiguity
         or inconsistency. Despite its recognized importance as a standard representation
         method in NLP, the theoretical underpinnings of tokenization are not yet fully
         understood. In particular, the impact of tokenization on language model estima-
         tion has been investigated primarily through empirical means. The present paper
         contributes to addressing this theoretical gap by proposing a unified formal frame-
         work for representing and analyzing tokenizer models. Based on the category of
         stochastic maps, this framework enables us to establish general conditions for a
         principled use of tokenizers and, most importantly, the necessary and sufficient
         conditions for a tokenizer model to preserve the consistency of statistical estimators.
         In addition, we discuss statistical and computational concerns crucial for designing
         and implementing tokenizer models, such as inconsistency, ambiguity, finiteness,
         and sequentiality. The framework and results advanced in this paper contribute
         to building robust theoretical foundations for representations in neural language
         modeling that can inform future theoretical and empirical research.


1    I NTRODUCTION
As a critical step in the natural language processing (NLP) pipeline, tokenization generally refers
to the process of breaking up sequences of symbols into subsequences that can be represented as
units, known as tokens. The tokenization of linguistic data has long been a common practice in the
processing of natural language (cf. Palmer, 2000; Jurafsky & Martin, 2024). However, the significance
of tokenizers took a turn with the emergence of deep neural models for NLP, where the representation
of linguistic units plays a renewed fundamental role. With the development and widespread adoption
of the byte-pair encoding (BPE) algorithm (Sennrich et al., 2016), subword tokenization became
the privileged representation method for neural NLP. Adapting an existing compression algorithm
(Gage, 1994) to overcome the challenges of out-of-vocabulary (OOV) terms in the context of neural
machine translation, BPE quickly replaced previous heuristic and rule-based tokenizer models such as
Morfessor (Creutz & Lagus, 2002) and Moses (Koehn et al., 2007), and was soon followed by other
data-driven models, including WordPiece (Wu et al., 2016, following Schuster & Nakajima, 2012)
and Unigram (Kudo, 2018) among the most widely adopted (cf. Mielke et al., 2021, for a survey).
The importance of subword tokenization for language models (LMs) has grown ever since, and
tokenization methods are now built into standard language modeling toolkits, remaining the only
major step not fully integrated into widely used end-to-end neural models. Among their recognized
benefits, two are often advanced in the literature. Tokenizers offer the ability to train language models
over an open vocabulary, circumventing the difficulties associated with OOV terms (Sennrich et al.,
2016). In addition, tokenization is often described as an efficient, lossless encoding of the original
data (Zouhar et al., 2023a). Moreover, based on empirical evidence of different kinds, tokenization
has been hypothesized to introduce a helpful inductive bias in language modeling (Nawrot et al.,
2023; Schmidt et al., 2024; Uzan et al., 2024), although in the current state of the art, this hypothesis


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


remains an open question. At the same time, tokenizers have also been in the spotlight for exhibiting
undesirable behaviors that can have a negative impact on LMs. To name just a few, tokenization can
be the source of spurious ambiguity (Kudo, 2018; Cao & Rimell, 2021), generate alignment issues
(Poesia et al., 2022; Athiwaratkun et al., 2024), hinder robustness (Kudo, 2018; Xue et al., 2022),
neglect relevant linguistic features (Bostrom & Durrett, 2020; Hofmann et al., 2021; Gow-Smith et al.,
2022; Beinborn & Pinter, 2023) or result in inconsistent scoring in the use of LMs in other scientific
fields, like psycholinguistics (Salazar et al., 2020; Kauf & Ivanova, 2023; Giulianelli et al., 2024).
The prominence of undesirable behaviors induced by tokenization, together with the lack of conclusive
theoretical explanations for either their positive or negative effects in language modeling, motivated
several recent attempts to dispense with tokenization altogether (Xue et al., 2022; Clark et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2024, inter alia). However, in the current state of research, the practical benefits of token
representations in neural language modeling seem to outweigh their disadvantages, indicating that
there is something to be understood rather than discarded in the process of tokenization.
The study of tokenization models has been an active area of research in recent years. Most of the
work in this direction has been driven by an empirical perspective (Ding et al., 2019; Hou et al.,
2023; Domingo et al., 2023; Fujii et al., 2023, inter alia). However, some notable exceptions exist
where the authors have adopted a more theoretical approach (Guo, 1997; Kudo, 2018; Zouhar et al.,
2023b;a; Berglund & van der Merwe, 2023; Rajaraman et al., 2024). The above-cited contributions
notwithstanding, this paper contends there is still a need for a more foundational perspective. Among
others, such a perspective should provide the means to advance results on the impact of tokenization
on language model estimation, which are conspicuously absent from the literature. A foundational
approach should also contribute to analyzing known issues in tokenization in a formal way, ultimately
informing future theoretical and empirical research and contributing to increasing the reliance on
models in situations in which properties such as formal guarantees, verification, or interpretability are
as important as performance for an LM.
Accordingly, the objective of the present paper is to take a step forward toward a robust theoretical
grounding for neural NLP by laying the foundations of tokenization from a formal perspective. To
that end, we characterize the problem of tokenization in current language modeling as arising from
the fact that, in practice, starting from an alphabet Σ of elementary units, one seeks to estimate
a probability distribution over Σ∗ indirectly, that is, by estimating a probability distribution over
sequences of tokens in ∆∗ , where the set of tokens ∆ is, in general, different from Σ. Therefore, the
problem of tokenization is determined by the forward and backward mappings between Σ∗ and ∆∗ .
To address this problem, we propose a formal framework based on what we found to be the simplest
mathematical tool allowing us to characterize tokenizer models in their full generality, namely the
category of stochastic maps. The proposed framework enables us to establish general conditions
for a principled use of tokenizers. Crucially, we prove the necessary and sufficient conditions for
a tokenizer model to preserve the consistency of statistical estimation of language modeling from
data. Additionally, this paper aims to advance the theoretical understanding of existing challenges
associated with tokenization, particularly those pertaining to inconsistency, ambiguity, finiteness,
and sequentiality. To achieve this, we characterize these known issues through the lens of formal
properties of composable maps, such as injectivity, multiplicativity, and bounded variation.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In §2, we present preliminary notions, including elementary
aspects of formal language theory and the concept of stochastic maps, extending some existing results
to cover the case of countably infinite sets. We also provide notational and terminological remarks.
In §3, we propose a unified formal framework for representing and analyzing tokenizer models and
establish various results for their use, including the necessary and sufficient conditions for a tokenizer
model to preserve the consistency of estimators. Finally, in §§ 4 and 5 we discuss, from a formal
perspective, statistical and computational concerns relevant to the study, design, and implementation
of tokenizer models.

2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1   F ORMAL L ANGUAGES , E STIMATORS , AND S TOCHASTIC M APS

An alphabet Γ is a finite, nonempty set of symbols. The set Γn consists of strings of symbols of
                                                                          def S∞
length n. The symbol ε denotes the empty string of length 0. The union Γ∗ = n=0 Γn consists of


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


all finite strings (including ε) from the alphabet Γ. Similarly, we denote by Γ≤N the set of all strings
from Γ of length less than or equal to N .
                                                                 ·
String concatenation (·) is an associative product Γ∗ × Γ∗ → Γ∗ for which ε is an identity element.
The triple (Γ∗ , ·, ε) defines a monoid, which is, in fact, a model of the free monoid on the set Γ. A
language L over an alphabet Γ is a set of strings L ⊆ Γ∗ . AP   language model p is a probability distri-
bution over Γ∗ , i.e., p is a function p : Γ∗ → [0, 1] such that γ∈Γ∗ p(γ) = 1. Language models gen-
eralize languages in the sense that the support of a language model, i.e., supp(p) = {γ | p(γ) ̸= 0}, is
a language. The definition of a language model as a probability distribution on Γ∗ is deliberately broad.
In particular, note that no compatibility between p and the monoidal structure in Γ∗ is assumed.1
In NLP, practitioners generally seek to estimate a language model p from examples of naturally
occurring text. Formally, the modeler assumes there exists a true distribution p⋆ over Γ∗ , and
                                                                   ∗
considers a multiset of naturally occurring texts {γm }M                                   ⋆
                                                         m=1 ⊂ Γ to be samples from p . In its most
general form, an estimator of p⋆ is a sequence {pn } of probability distributions on Γ∗ such that pn
becomes closer to p⋆ as n increases. We call an estimator consistent if the sequence {pn } converges
pointwise to p⋆ .2 More precisely, given a probability distribution p⋆ : Γ∗ → [0, 1] , and a sequence of
distributions {pn : Γ∗ → [0, 1]}, we say that {pn } is a consistent estimator of p⋆ if and only if, for all
strings γ ∈ Γ∗ , the sequence of numbers {pn (γ)} converges to the number p⋆ (γ).
This notion of consistent estimation is general enough to include many estimation methods, where
the pi (with 1 ≤ i ≤ n) can depend on various properties of the sample, such as the size M , and
may be parameterized by a set of parameters θ. In particular, the relationship between the data
{γm } and the estimator {pn } is determined by the practitioner through the choice of an estimation
method, e.g., maximum likelihood estimation (MLE; Lehmann & Casella, 1998). MLE is often
used in language model estimation where it corresponds to determining {pn } by minimizing the cross
entropy loss on the data. As such, MLE amounts to minimizing the relative entropy, also called
the Kullback–Leibler divergence, DKL (p⋆ ∥ pn ) between p⋆ and pn , making {pn } a consistent
estimator of p⋆ . Note that this requires a stronger form of convergence than the one we use in our
framework: if DKL (p⋆ ∥ pn ) → 0 then pn → p⋆ pointwise (a consequence of Pinsker’s lemma). By
adopting a weak kind of convergence, our definition is, therefore, compatible with a wide variety of
convergence measures while remaining relatively easy to check for.
Our definition of tokenizer models will require the use of a special kind of map between sets called a
stochastic map. The reference Baez & Fritz (2014) contains a detailed introduction to the category of
finite sets with stochastic maps between them. Here, we will extend some of the results in Baez &
Fritz (2014) to cover the case of countably infinite sets. We assume all sets are countable, either finite
or countably infinite. A stochastic map from a set X to a set Y is a function from X to the set of
probability distributions on Y . We use
                                                X⇝Y
to denote a stochastic map from X to Y and the notation x 7→ f (y | x) to denote the probability of
y ∈ Y in the distribution assigned to x ∈ X. In other words, a stochastic map f : X ⇝ Y is a function
                                          X × Y → [0, 1]
                                           (x, y) 7→ f (y | x)
           P
satisfying y∈Y f (y | x) = 1 for all x ∈ X. The notation f (y | x) is evocative of the conditional
probability of y given x, but it is more accurate to think of indexing by x rather than conditioning on
x because there is no assumption that the numbers f (y | x) can be assembled into a joint distribution
on X × Y .
Significantly, stochastic maps can be composed. The composition
                                               f          g
                                         X          Y          Z
                                                    gf

gf : X ⇝ Z is defined by
   1
    In addition, one could typically require, for instance, that p(γ · γ ′ ) ≤ min{p(γ), p(γ ′ )}.
   2
    Following the usual convention, we may denote convergence as {pn } → p⋆ , which is not to be confused
with the notation for functional types (e.g., Σ∗ → ∆∗ ). The context of use should prevent any ambiguity.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   X
                                    gf (z | x) =         g(z | y)f (y | x).                                 (1)
                                                   y∈Y


Since the sum in equation 1 contains infinitely many summands, it requires to check that the formula
for gf (z | x) is finite, and that for each x ∈ X, gf (· | x) defines a probability distribution on Z, both
of which follow from the fact that:
    X                    XX                           XX                             X
         gf (z | x) =             g(z | y)f (y | x) =          g(z | y)f (y | x) =        f (y | x) = 1.
      z∈Z              z∈Z y∈Y                           y∈Y z∈Z                      y∈Y


If one arranges a stochastic map into an |X| × |Y | matrix with the f (y | x) entry in the x, y position,
then every entry is nonnegative and the sum of every row is 1. The computation above shows that
composition of stochastic maps is realized by matrix multiplication, and that—even when the matrices
are infinite—the row-column dot products are finite, and the result of matrix multiplication is again a
matrix with nonnegative entries whose rows sum to 1. This view makes it clear that composition of
stochastic maps is associative.
Stochastic maps generalize both ordinary probability distributions and functions. A probability
distribution over a set X can be represented as a stochastic map into X from a 1-element set, denoted
      def
as 1 = {1}, i.e., p : 1 ⇝ X. In such cases, the customary notation p(x) can be used without risk
of ambiguity as a shorthand for the more cumbersome p(x | 1). An ordinary function f : X → Y
can be regarded as a stochastic map X ⇝ Y by mapping x to the probability distribution on Y
concentrated on the singleton {f (x)}, in which case we say the stochastic map f is deterministic.
For simplicity, when a stochastic map f : X ⇝ Y is deterministic, writing y = f (x) means that
f (y | x) = 1 and f (y ′ | x) = 0 for y ′ ̸= y. Composition generalizes both the composition
of functions and the pushforward of a probability function via a function. If p : 1 ⇝ X is a
probability distribution on X and f : X → Y is a deterministic function, then the composition
       p          f
 1       X           Y is a Pstochastic map f p : 1 ⇝ Y , P which is a probability distribution on Y
whose formula is f p(y) = x∈X f (y | x)p(x | 1) = x∈f −1 (y) p(x). That is, f p is just the
pushforward of the probability distribution p via the function f .
For any set X, the identity function on X behaves as an identity for stochastic maps. That is
idX : X ⇝ X is the stochastic map defined by idX (x′ | x) = 1 when x′ = x and idX (x′ | x) = 0
when x′ ̸= x. In matrix representation, idX is the identity matrix, and satisfies f idX = f = idY f
for all stochastic maps f : X ⇝ Y . Stochastic maps also come equipped with natural notions of
injectivity and surjectivity. The support of the stochastic map f is the union of the support of the
distributions f (· | x) as x ranges over X. A stochastic map f : X ⇝ Y is injective iff the supports
of f (· | x) and f (· | x′ ) are disjoint whenever x ̸= x′ . A stochastic map f : X ⇝ Y is surjective iff,
for all y ∈ Y , there exists x ∈ X such that f (y | x) ̸= 0. Injectivity and surjectivity for stochastic
maps reduce to their ordinary definitions in the case of deterministic maps.

2.2    N OTATION AND T ERMINOLOGY

We adopt the following notational conventions. We denote the length n of a string γ ∈ Γn as |γ|.
The expression γ ′ ⪯ γ denotes the fact that γ = γ ′ · γ ′′ for γ, γ ′ , γ ′′ ∈ Γ∗ , that is, γ ′ is a prefix of
γ. Alphabets will be denoted by uppercase Greek letters (e.g., Γ, B). In the context of tokenization,
we will be interested in maps between strings of languages over two different alphabets, which we
will denote Σ and ∆. For a more intuitive presentation that avoids ambiguity, we reserve the term
alphabet for the former and call the latter vocabulary, systematically using the green and violet
colors to highlight the respective relation to either of these sets. We denote symbols by lowercase
Greek letters, e.g., σ ∈ Σ and δ ∈ ∆, calling them characters in the first case and tokens in the
second. Strings will be denoted by bold lowercase Greek letters, e.g., σ ∈ Σ∗ and δ ∈ ∆∗ , reserving
the name character strings or texts for the former and token strings or token sequences for the latter.
The reader should keep in mind these terminological distinctions are for expository purposes only.
From the formal perspective advanced in this paper, we do not assume any inherent privilege of Σ
over ∆, focusing instead on how their respective elements can be mapped into each other. Maps are
denoted using the color of their codomains.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When necessary, we will distinguish the empty character string εΣ ∈ Σ∗ from the empty token
sequence ε∆ ∈ ∆∗ . Examples of strings and tokens will be written in monospace font (e.g., t, the).
There are cases where ∆ ∩ Σ∗ ̸= ∅, and it will be necessary to distinguish between concatenation
in Σ∗ and ∆∗ . In ∆∗ , concatenation will be denoted as p. So, for example, if Σ = {t, h, e} and
∆ = {th, he, e}, the expression t·h·e denotes the concatenation in Σ∗ of the three characters t, h,
and e, while the expression tphe represents the concatenation in ∆∗ of the two tokens t and he. The
cases when ∆ ∩ Σ∗ ̸= ∅ are of sufficient significance that we shall generally avoid using the simple
juxtaposition of characters to express concatenation. Therefore, the reader should always interpret th
as a token in ∆, and not a text in Σ∗ (written t·h). If further notational clarification is needed, square
brackets may be used to represent the concatenation of two texts in Σ∗ (and likewise for ∆∗ ). For
example, [t·h]·e denotes the concatenation of the text t·h with the character e in Σ∗ . Should any
ambiguity arise between specific characters and tokens (e.g., t ∈ Σ vs. t ∈ ∆), it will be explicitly
disambiguated whenever there is a risk that context alone is insufficient.

3    A F ORMAL F RAMEWORK FOR T OKENIZATION
As observed in the previous pages, in modern NLP, the problem of tokenization arises from the fact
that one seeks to estimate a model p⋆ over strings of symbols in one alphabet indirectly, that is, by
estimating a probability distribution q over strings of symbols on a different alphabet. Therefore,
from a strictly formal perspective, the problem of tokenization can be characterized as that of the
respective mappings between two sets of strings, conventionally referred to as the set Σ∗ of character
strings and the set ∆∗ of token sequences. In order to estimate p⋆ through q, Σ∗ needs to be mapped
into and from ∆∗ . The connection between Σ∗ and ∆∗ is thus made through a pair of mappings
(τ , κ) that constitutes the basis of our formal characterization of tokenization. Accordingly, in its
most general form, a tokenizer can be defined as follows:
Definition 3.1. A tokenizer model (or simply tokenizer) from Σ∗ to ∆∗ is a pair of stochastic maps
T = (τ , κ), respectively called the encoder and the decoder, where the encoder is a stochastic map
τ : Σ∗ ⇝ ∆∗ , and the decoder is a stochastic map κ : ∆∗ ⇝ Σ∗ .

Definition 3.1 is deliberately broad, covering any pair of string-to-string mappings τ and κ. Other than
the fact that the domain of each mapping constitutes the codomain of the other, we define the encoder
and decoder as arbitrary stochastic maps. In other words, we will be regarding τ and κ primarily
from the point of view of their composition. In particular, we do not require any specific connection
between the alphabet Σ and the vocabulary ∆, and hence the use of the terms encoder and decoder is
also strictly conventional. However, the distinction is motivated by an implicit assumption behind
                                                                                                     ∗
the established use of tokenizers in language models—namely, that the samples {σ m }M     m=1 ⊂ Σ of
                                                                       ∗
naturally occurring texts used for estimation can be mapped into ∆ in such a way that the estimated
model q can be, in turn, transformed into a model p over Σ∗ through the map κ, such that p = κq can
be considered as an estimate of the original distribution p⋆ . When p is given in the form of κq, we
say that p is a tokenized language model.
Despite the potential empirical increase in the predictive performance of a model resulting from
specific tokenization choices, the soundness of such a procedure is not guaranteed for arbitrary τ and
κ without further conditions. On the one hand, the notion of estimation in ∆∗ is not well defined
unless there exists a reference distribution q ⋆ over ∆∗ to which the estimator {qn } can converge. On
the other, assuming such an estimator is consistent, transforming it into a consistent estimator of p⋆
requires a way to map the sequence {qn } into a sequence {pn } that converges to p⋆ .
Assuming a reference distribution p⋆ exists on Σ∗ , one obtains a reference q ⋆ on ∆∗ simply through
the composition (Eq. (1)) with the encoder: q ⋆ = τ p⋆ . In other words, the following diagram of
stochastic maps commutes

                                                   1
                                             p⋆           q⋆


                                        Σ∗          τ          ∆∗

The distribution q ⋆ is just the pushforward of the measure p⋆ along τ , which then makes the encoder
τ a measure-preserving map between (Σ∗ , p⋆ ) and (∆∗ , q ⋆ ).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the same way, {pn } can be obtained by mapping the sequence {qn } through κ. Defining pi = κq i ,
we obtain the following commutative diagram

                                                                 N
                                                {qn }                    {pn }


                                           ∆∗                    κ           Σ∗

So far, none of these requirements imposes conditions on τ and κ other than being well-defined
mappings between their respective domains and codomains. Notably, the notion of estimation of
τ p⋆ is well defined for arbitrary τ . However, given a consistent estimator {qn } of q ⋆ , {κqn } is not
guaranteed to converge to p⋆ without further conditions on κ. To establish such conditions, we will
need the following lemmas.3
Lemma 3.1. Let {pn } be a sequence of probability distributions      P over a countable set X that
converges pointwise to a probability distribution p. Then limn→∞ x∈X |pn (x) − p(x)| = 0.
Corollary 3.0.1. Let {pn } be a sequence of probability distributions over a countable set X that
converges pointwise to a probability distribution p. Then {pn } → p uniformly.
Lemma 3.2. Let f be a stochastic map from X to Y , and {pn } be an estimator for a probability
distribution p on X. Then f pn is an estimator for the probability distribution f p on Y .

In other words, Lemma 3.2 says that stochastic maps preserve the consistency of estimators. Armed
with Lemma 3.2, it is now easy to establish a simple but fundamental principle for the use of
tokenization models in language modeling.
Theorem 3.1 (Fundamental Principle of Tokenization). Given a reference probability distribution
p⋆ over Σ∗ , a tokenizer T = (τ , κ) from Σ∗ to ∆∗ , and a consistent estimator {qn } of the image
reference distribution q ⋆ = τ p⋆ , the sequence {κqn } is a consistent estimator of p⋆ if and only if
κτ p⋆ = p⋆ .

Theorem 3.1 characterizes precisely when a consistent estimator {qn } of q ⋆ yields a consistent
estimator {pn } of p⋆ after decoding. Based on the fundamental principle expressed in Theorem 3.1,
we propose the following definitions:
Definition 3.2. Given a probability distribution p over Σ∗ , a tokenizer T = (τ , κ) from Σ∗ to ∆∗ is
consistent with respect to p if we have κτ p = p.
Definition 3.3. Let p be a probability distribution over Σ∗ and T = (τ , κ) a tokenizer from Σ∗ to
∆∗ . When κτ = idΣ∗ , we say that T is exact.

Notice that exact tokenizers are consistent, but a tokenizer that is consistent with respect to a
distribution p is not necessarily exact. Take, for instance, a probability distribution p over some set X
and x′ , x′′ ∈ X such that p(x′ ) = p(x′′ ) = c. Then one can fashion a tokenizer for which κτ (x) = x
for all x except κτ (x′ ) = x′′ and κτ (x′′ ) = x′ . Such a tokenizer is consistent with respect to p
without being exact. Consistency with respect to all distributions, however, is the same as being exact.
Proposition 3.1. A tokenizer T = (τ , κ) from Σ∗ to ∆∗ is exact if and only if it is consistent with
respect to every probability distribution over Σ∗ .

Our whole setting is quite general and can be represented by the following diagram:

                                                             1

                                          p⋆                                        p⋆
                                                        q⋆                 N
                                                                 {qn }
                                                                            {pn }
                                  Σ∗        τ            ∆∗                κ        Σ∗

                                                             idΣ∗

   3
       The proofs for all formal results (theorems, propositions, lemmas) have been placed in the Appendix (§8).


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When this diagram commutes, we have that κτ p = p for all probability distributions p over Σ∗ , and
Theorem 3.1 guarantees that {pn } → p⋆ when {qn } → q ⋆ .
Exact tokenizers have special properties. First, if a tokenizer (τ , κ) is exact, then κ is deterministic
over the image of τ , because idΣ∗ also is. We make this notion formal in the following proposition.
Proposition 3.2. Let T = (τ , κ) be an exact tokenizer from Σ∗ to ∆∗ . Then κ is deterministic on the
support of τ , i.e., κ is deterministic τ almost everywhere.

The condition κτ = idΣ∗ means τ is a right inverse (or section) of κ and κ is a left inverse (or
retraction) of τ . The proof of Proposition 3.2 shows that τ (δ | σ) places probability zero on every
δ ∈ ∆∗ such that κ(σ | δ) = 0. Since κ is deterministic in this case, it follows that, for an exact
tokenizer (τ , κ), the encoder does not place positive probability mass on a token sequence for more
than one text. In other words, τ is injective. Additionally, it must be that for each text σ there is a δ
with κ(σ | δ) = 1, and therefore κ is surjective.

4    S TATISTICAL C ONCERNS : I NCONSISTENCY AND A MBIGUITY

While in most concrete cases of statistical language modeling a tokenizer’s consistency is implicitly
or explicitly assumed, there are many ways in which the conditions established in the previous section
can, and in practice do, fail to be satisfied. In this section, we discuss two main statistical concerns
to be considered when implementing or using tokenizers, namely inconsistency and ambiguity,
and associate them with the properties of maps introduced in the previous section. The following
definitions will be convenient.
Definition 4.1. Given a tokenizer T = (τ , κ), we say T has a deterministic encoder (resp. decoder)
or is τ -deterministic (resp. κ-deterministic) if τ (resp. κ) is a deterministic map. When a tokenizer
T is both τ -deterministic and exact, we have that T is also κ-deterministic, and κ = τ −1 over τ (Σ∗ ).
Therefore, in such a case we say T is bijective.

Noninjective τ and Inconsistency. Most commonly used tokenizers have deterministic encoders,
including BPE (Sennrich et al., 2016) and WordPiece (Wu et al., 2016), as well as Unigram (Kudo,
2018) when used without regularization. As we have seen, functions can be understood as a particular
case of stochastic maps where the probability mass is concentrated on one element. Tokenizers
with deterministic encoders thus constitute a simplified form of tokenization. However, even in
this simplified setting, the consistency of the tokenization process is not guaranteed. The following
example offers an elementary intuition of this circumstance.
Example 4.1. Consider the simple configuration represented in Fig. 1, where both τ and κ are
deterministic maps. Let p⋆ (σ 1 ) = 0.2 and p⋆ (σ 2 ) = p⋆ (σ 3 ) = 0.4, with p⋆ (σ i ) = 0 for i > 3.
For q ⋆ = τ p⋆ , we have, therefore, q ⋆ (δ 1 ) = 0.2, q ⋆ (δ 2 ) = 0, and q ⋆ (δ 3 ) = 0.8, with q ⋆ (δ i ) = 0
for i > 3, and hence κτ p⋆ (σ 1 ) = 0 ̸= 0.2, κτ p⋆ (σ 2 ) = 0.2 ̸= 0.4, and κτ p⋆ (σ 1 ) = 0.8 ̸= 0.4.
Assuming {qn } is a consistent estimator of q ⋆ , the pushforward of qn through κ (i.e., κqn ) would
result in an inconsistent estimation of p⋆ . Notice that the consistency of the tokenizer is relative to the
distribution. Relative to a different distribution p in Σ∗ , where, for instance, p(σ 1 ) = p(σ 2 ) = 0 and
p = p⋆ otherwise, the tokenizer specified in Fig. 1 is consistent. Hence the importance for a tokenizer
to be exact.

As shown in §3 and illustrated in Example 4.1, a fundamental cause of a tokenizer’s inconsistency
is the lack of injectivity of the encoder τ . This is not just a theoretical concern. Even if in its
abstract specification a tokenizer’s encoder may appear to be injective, implementation decisions
often introduce noninjective behaviors. These include normalizing operations, such as lowercasing,
stripping accents, removing punctuation, or uniformizing whitespaces (e.g., Moi & Patry, 2023).
Regardless of how the core tokenization function is defined, including this preprocessing step as part of
the tokenizer model results in a noninjective encoding that compromises the consistency of estimators.
Even if text normalization is excluded from the decoding function, it can still happen that τ is
undefined for some elements in Σ, and is, therefore, only a partial function. If the exceptions
are handled by returning a unique distinguished token in ∆ (e.g., an ‘unknown’ token unk), then
τ becomes noninjective, incurring the risk of inconsistency. The appeal to an unk token and the
difficulties associated with it have been widely studied from the perspective of OOV terms, especially


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Σ∗                  ∆∗

                   τ
        σ1                   δ1            p⋆ (σ 1 ) = 0.2           q ⋆ (δ 1 ) = 0.2          κτ p⋆ (σ 1 ) = 0
        σ2                   δ2                               τ                          κ
                                           p⋆ (σ 2 ) = 0.4   −−→     q ⋆ (δ 2 ) = 0     −−→    κτ p⋆ (σ 2 ) = 0.2
                                            ⋆                          ⋆
        σ3                   δ3            p (σ 3 ) = 0.4            q (δ 3 ) = 0.8            κτ p⋆ (σ 3 ) = 0.8
                   κ
         ..                   ..
          .                    .



                              Figure 1: Example of an inconsistent tokenizer



in the context of NMT (e.g., Luong & Manning, 2016; Jean et al., 2015), ultimately leading to
subword tokenizers as a way of providing “open vocabulary” solutions (Sennrich et al., 2016; Wu
et al., 2016).4 Formally, it is enough to inject Σ into ∆ (i.e., to include the alphabet in the vocabulary)
to achieve an open vocabulary, something most tokenizers do by default. However, open vocabulary
solutions do not entirely remove the risk of noninjective decoding. Some open vocabulary models,
for instance, limit the size of Σ to the sample’s k most frequent symbols, mapping all other symbols
to an unk character in Σ (e.g., Wu et al., 2016). Understood as a preprocessing step, this operation
should not affect τ ’s injectivity. However, the use of copy models (e.g., Luong et al., 2015) that
keep track of the original out-of-alphabet symbols to restore them in decoding, violates de facto the
tokenizer’s injectivity, and with it, the model’s consistency over strings including those symbols.
Regardless of whether all symbols in the training sample are included in Σ, out-of-alphabet symbols
can always be encountered at test or inference time. The recourse to a distinguished unk symbol
either in Σ or ∆ must, therefore, be handled in such a way that the injectivity of τ is guaranteed. The
use of a stochastic κ (e.g., Mielke & Eisner, 2019) over the restricted domains of out-of-alphabet or
out-of-vocabulary elements could, in principle, provide a novel way of addressing this problem in
agreement with consistency concerns.

Noninjective κ and Ambiguity. Whenever κ is noninjective, the tokenizer introduces ambiguity in
the model because more than one token sequence is mapped into a unique text. In bijective tokenizers,
decoding is injective over the encoder’s image, thus preventing ambiguity in principle. However, in
practice, whenever τ (Σ∗ ) is a proper subset of ∆∗ , it may happen that the probability mass placed by
the estimated language model outside the image of τ is nonzero, reintroducing ambiguity into the
model (cf. Example 8.1 in the Appendix for an elementary illustration). This ambiguity is, however,
spurious because τ was assumed to be deterministic, and hence the ambiguity does not originate
from the reference distribution p⋆ , but is a side effect of the estimator. An obvious source of spurious
ambiguity lies in the fact that consistency is a property defined in the limit. As a consequence, for
any δ ∈ ∆∗ , qn (δ) can and will generally differ from q ⋆ (δ). Spurious ambiguity can also result
from the fact that, due to the properties of gradient descent and certain activation functions such as
softmax, neural models are incapable of assigning zero probability to elements of ∆∗ . While spurious
ambiguity has been identified among the motivations for introducing subword regularization (Kudo,
2018; Provilkov et al., 2020), it is often overlooked or disregarded, despite its potential nonnegligible
effect on estimation (Cao & Rimell, 2021), although mostly in the case of “strongly out-of-domain
evaluation sets” (Chirkova et al., 2023).
Spurious ambiguity is not the only kind of ambiguity that can result from the use of tokenization in
language models. Whenever a tokenizer model is stochastic, a deterministic κ must be noninjective
for the model to preserve the consistency of estimators. However, the ambiguity thus introduced
is not spurious in that it is deliberately designed for statistical purposes. In current tokenization
practices, the main reason for the introduction of stochastic ambiguity is regularization (Kudo, 2018;
Provilkov et al., 2020). The claim is that, by exhibiting different token sequences corresponding
   4
     For a tokenization-free alternative to the OOV problem, see, for instance, Xue et al. (2022) and Clark et al.
(2022), who also offer a good overview of existing approaches to this problem.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to the same text during training, a model increases its capability to handle text compositionality
as well as its robustness to noise and tokenization errors. However, one could also conceive of
a stochastic tokenizer where the possible images of a text reflect the objective probabilities of all
linguistic ambiguities potentially affecting it (e.g., anpicecream, anpicepcream, apnicepcream as
three possible token sequences for the text: a·n·i·c·e·c·r·e·a·m). This would require, however, to
enhance tokenizers with linguistically motivated segmentation (see, for instance, Bostrom & Durrett,
2020; Hofmann et al., 2021; Gow-Smith et al., 2022; Beinborn & Pinter, 2023).
Although all these classes of ambiguity (spurious, stochastic, and linguistic) are both formally and
semantically different, they all represent the same challenge for the tokenizer’s consistency: The
probability mass indirectly assigned by the model to one text in a language is spread over different
token sequences. Notice that all these cases of ambiguity can coexist and, hence, their impact is
difficult to evaluate. Yet, from a formal perspective, the solution for all these cases is the same:
The computation of κqn for a single text σ ∈ Σ∗ requires summing over all its preimages δ under
κ, for which qn (δ) > 0, following the composition of stochastic maps presented in the previous
section (Eq. (1)). However, such an operation can be computationally challenging because it can
imply summing over a large or even infinite number of terms. For different strategies to address
this challenge, see van Merriënboer et al. (2017); Buckman & Neubig (2018); Grave et al. (2019);
Hannun et al. (2020); Cao & Rimell (2021); Vieira et al. (2024).

5    C OMPUTATIONAL C ONCERNS : F INITENESS AND S EQUENTIALITY
As the end of the previous section shows, even when a tokenizer model is consistent and all statistical
concerns are taken into account, there are still computational aspects that can hinder the practice of
tokenization. In this section, we turn to issues of finiteness and sequentiality.

Multiplicativity and Finiteness. Definitions 3.1 to 3.3 are general enough to allow for many
kinds of encoding and decoding functions, including uncomputable ones; see Example 8.2 in the
Appendix for an example. However, even when a tokenizer model is computable, its tractability is
not guaranteed. Indeed, there are many reasons that could make the computation of tokenization
intractable. Many of the operations that define tokenizer models involve sums over infinite sets. This
is particularly true for the composition of stochastic maps whenever it is performed over an infinite
domain, as in our case. Therefore, it is crucial to assess the tractability not only of τ and κ, but also
of their composition κτ .
We have seen that when a tokenizer model is exact, τ is a section of κ, or equivalently, τ is injective.
It follows that, for any σ ∈ Σ∗ , τ concentrates the probability mass on only a subset of ∆∗ . This
property can help reduce computational costs by restricting the sums to just those subsets. However,
without further constraints, those subsets can still be infinite. For this reason, we introduce the
following definitions.
Definition 5.1. We say a tokenizer model T = (τ , κ) is multiplicative if its decoder κ respects the
concatenation products, i.e., if κ(δ ′ pδ ′′ ) = κ(δ ′ )·κ(δ ′′ ).
Definition 5.2. We say the kernel of a multiplicative tokenizer’s decoder κ is trivial if κ maps
nonempty token sequences to nonempty token sequences (i.e., if δ ̸= ε∆ then κ(δ) ̸= εΣ ).
The most commonly used tokenizers, including BPE, WordPiece, and Unigram, are multiplicative.
Notice that, for a kernel of a multiplicative tokenizer’s decoder to be trivial, it is enough that
κ(δ) ̸= εΣ for any δ ∈ ∆. This implies that token sequences do not include special tokens that are
erased during decoding. Importantly, when a multiplicative tokenizer’s decoder has a trivial kernel, a
decoded text cannot be shorter than the token sequence from which it has been decoded. This simple
observation guarantees that the number of preimages of a text under κ is finite. More precisely, we
have the following proposition.
Proposition 5.1. Let T = (τ , κ) be a multiplicative tokenizer model whose decoder’s kernel is trivial.
For any δ ∈ ∆∗ , κ(δ) = σ =⇒ |δ| ≤ |σ|.
Corollary 5.0.1. Let T = (τ , κ) be a multiplicative tokenizer model whose decoder’s kernel is trivial.
Then for any text σ, the set κ−1 (σ) is finite.
Proposition 5.1 guarantees that, if no token in the vocabulary is mapped to the empty string, then
the length of every preimage of a text σ of length n has length less than or equal to n. So the


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            −1
number of elements in κP       (σ), and hence also the support of τ for any given σ ∈ Σ∗ when (τ , κ)
                              n
is exact, is bounded by i=1 |∆|i . Since this bound is exponential in n, the exact or approximate
computation of a tokenizer’s encoding and decoding so that the consistency of the language model
is not compromised requires the appeal to multiple strategies as the ones mentioned at the end of
§4. Ideally, the complexity of a tokenizer model (that is, of the composition κτ ) should be at most
linear in the length of the input text. By placing all the probability mass on one token sequence, κτ in
exact deterministic tokenizers, such as BPE and WordPiece, can be computed in linear time as long
as τ and κ can be computed in linear time. However, rigorously handling spurious ambiguity still
represents a challenge in these cases. In follow-up work, Vieira et al. (2024) exploit the finiteness
of κ−1 (σ) to introduce both exact and approximate algorithms for converting token-level language
models to character-level ones, assuming κ is prefix monotone, i.e., δ ′ ⪯ δ =⇒ κ(δ ′ ) ⪯ κ(δ), a
weaker condition implied by multiplicativity which is crucial in autoregressive models.5

Bounded Variation and Sequentiality. Finally, even though multiplicativity ensures that the length
of every preimage of κ−1 (σ) is bounded by the length of σ, the latter may still be unbounded. In prac-
tice, the bounded character of tokenization is secured externally by fixing a hyperparameter that artifi-
cially limits the length of input texts. However, boundedness can be addressed as an internal property
of a tokenizer. For this purpose, we introduce the following definitions, adapted from Berstel (1979).
Definition 5.3. The (left) distance between two strings γ, γ ′ ∈ Γ∗ is the number:
                                                   def
                                  ∥γ, γ ′ ∥ = |γ| + |γ ′ | − 2 |γ ∧ γ ′ |,
where γ ∧ γ ′ is the longest common prefix of γ and γ ′ .
Definition 5.4. A function f : Γ∗ → B∗ has bounded variation if and only if ∀k ≥ 0, ∃Ck ≥ 0:
                        γ, γ ′ ∈ Γ∗ , ∥γ, γ ′ ∥ ≤ k =⇒ ∥f (γ), f (γ ′ )∥ ≤ Ck .
The importance of Definition 5.4 is that, following Choffrut’s (1979) theorem, whenever f preserves
rational sets, if f has bounded variation, then it is subsequential, that is, it can be realized by a
deterministic finite-state transducer enhanced with a function over terminal states (cf. Definition 8.4
in the Appendix). Since subsequential functions are closed under composition (Berstel, 1979,
prop. IV.2.5), for κτ to be subsequential, it is enough that both τ and κ are. Given that most
commonly used tokenizers are multiplicative, the following result is significant.
Proposition 5.2. If a function f : Γ∗ → B∗ is multiplicative then it has bounded variation.
However, in the context of tokenizers, multiplicativity concerns only the decoder κ (a multiplicative
encoder τ is not a desirable feature for a tokenizer), thus shifting the focus towards the encoder τ . The
“maximal munch” approach (Reps, 1998; Palmer, 2000) adopted by WordPiece, for instance, itera-
tively maps the successive longest prefixes of a text to tokens in the vocabulary. WordPiece’s encoder
is thus bounded by the maximum length of the preimages of ∆ under τ , and is, therefore, subsequential
(cf. Song et al., 2021, for a realization of WordPiece by a finite-state transducer). Moreover, assuming
specific conditions on the structure of the list of rules or “merges”, Berglund & van der Merwe (2023)
and Berglund et al. (2024) proposed an algorithm for constructing deterministic finite automata
realizing BPE’s encoder, thus suggesting that, under such conditions, BPE is also subsequential.

6       C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have addressed the use of token representations in NLP from a foundational
perspective. Relying on the category of stochastic maps as an elementary formal tool, we proposed
a general definition of a tokenizer as an arbitrary pair of composable maps. The framework proposed
enabled us to formally establish several properties of tokenization, and most importantly, the necessary
and sufficient condition for a tokenizer to preserve the consistency of estimators. Furthermore, our
approach allowed to shed new theoretical light on known issues concerning tokenization, namely
inconsistency, ambiguity, finiteness, and sequentiality, by characterizing the latter through formal
properties of composable maps such as injectivity, multiplicativity, or bounded variation. We believe
this framework will inform future empirical research and contribute to establishing and developing
theoretical and practical aspects of representation learning in NLP on solid grounds, especially in
cases where the reliance on a model requires to go beyond its mere performance, and take into account
properties such as formal guarantees, verification, theoretical soundness, interpretability, or liability.
    5
        Note that Vieira et al. (2024) call “non-erasing” the fact that κ has a trivial kernel.


                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Saeed Zakeri for pointing out an interesting interplay between a general fact about
the Banach spaces L1 (X) for any measure space X and the fact that for the little lp spaces, the l∞
norm is smaller than the l1 norm, which led to the proof of Lemma 3.1. The authors also thank Li Du
for useful feedback at the early stages of this work.

R EFERENCES
Ben Athiwaratkun, Shiqi Wang, Mingyue Shang, Yuchen Tian, Zijian Wang, Sujan Kumar Gonu-
  gondla, Sanjay Krishna Gouda, Rob Kwiatowski, Ramesh Nallapati, and Bing Xiang. Token
  alignment via character matching for subword completion, 2024.
John C. Baez and Tobias Fritz. A Bayesian characterization of relative entropy. CoRR, abs/1402.3067,
  2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1402.3067.
Lisa Beinborn and Yuval Pinter. Analyzing cognitive plausibility of subword tokenization. In
  Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  4478–4486, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
  18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.272. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.272.
Martin Berglund and Brink van der Merwe. Formalizing BPE tokenization. In Proceedings of the
 13th International Workshop on, Non-Classical Models of Automata and Applications, Famagusta,
 North Cyprus, 18th-19th September, 2023, volume 388 of Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical
 Computer Science, pp. 16–27. Open Publishing Association, 2023. doi: 10.4204/EPTCS.388.4.
Martin Berglund, Willeke Martens, and Brink van der Merwe. Constructing a BPE tokenization
 DFA. In Implementation and Application of Automata, pp. 66–78, Cham, 2024. Springer Na-
 ture Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-71112-1. URL https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.
 1007/978-3-031-71112-1_5.
Jean Berstel. Transductions and Context-Free Languages. Teubner, Stuttgart, Germany, 1979.
Kaj Bostrom and Greg Durrett. Byte pair encoding is suboptimal for language model pretraining.
  In Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 4617–4624, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.414. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.findings-emnlp.414.
Jacob Buckman and Graham Neubig. Neural lattice language models. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 6:529–541, 2018. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00036. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/Q18-1036.
Kris Cao and Laura Rimell. You should evaluate your language model on marginal likelihood over
  tokenisations. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau
  Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 2104–2114, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.161. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.161.
Nadezhda Chirkova, Germán Kruszewski, Jos Rozen, and Marc Dymetman. Should you marginalize
  over possible tokenizations? In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  2: Short Papers), pp. 1–12, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.1. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.1.
C. Choffrut. A generalization of Ginsburg and Rose’s characterization of G-S-M mappings. In
  Automata, Languages and Programming. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1979.
Jonathan H. Clark, Dan Garrette, Iulia Turc, and John Wieting. Canine: Pre-training an effi-
  cient tokenization-free encoder for language representation. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 10:73–91, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00448. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.5.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. Unsupervised discovery of morphemes. In Proceedings of
 the ACL-02 Workshop on Morphological and Phonological Learning, pp. 21–30. Association
 for Computational Linguistics, July 2002. doi: 10.3115/1118647.1118650. URL https://
 aclanthology.org/W02-0603.
Shuoyang Ding, Adithya Renduchintala, and Kevin Duh. A call for prudent choice of subword
  merge operations in neural machine translation. In Mikel Forcada, Andy Way, Barry Haddow,
  and Rico Sennrich (eds.), Proceedings of Machine Translation Summit XVII: Research Track, pp.
  204–213, Dublin, Ireland, August 2019. European Association for Machine Translation. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/W19-6620.
Miguel Domingo, Mercedes García-Martínez, Alexandre Helle, Francisco Casacuberta, and Manuel
 Herranz. How much does tokenization affect neural machine translation?         In Computa-
 tional Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pp. 545–554, Cham, 2023. Springer Na-
 ture Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-24337-0. URL https://link.springer.com/chapter/
 10.1007/978-3-031-24337-0_38.
Takuro Fujii, Koki Shibata, Atsuki Yamaguchi, Terufumi Morishita, and Yasuhiro Sogawa. How do
  different tokenizers perform on downstream tasks in scriptio continua languages?: A case study
  in Japanese. In Vishakh Padmakumar, Gisela Vallejo, and Yao Fu (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 4: Student Research
  Workshop), pp. 39–49, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-srw.5. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-srw.5.
Philip Gage. A new algorithm for data compression. C Users Journal, 12(2), 1994. ISSN 0898-9788.
  URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/177910.177914.
Mario Giulianelli, Luca Malagutti, Juan Luis Gastaldi, Brian DuSell, Tim Vieira, and Ryan
 Cotterell. On the Proper Treatment of Tokenization in Psycholinguistic. In Proceedings of
 the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for
 Computational Linguistics, November 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.1032. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.1032/.
Edward Gow-Smith, Harish Tayyar Madabushi, Carolina Scarton, and Aline Villavicencio. Im-
  proving tokenisation by alternative treatment of spaces. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva,
  and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 11430–11443, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.786. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.786.
Edouard Grave, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin. Training hybrid
  language models by marginalizing over segmentations. In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluís
  Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 1477–1482, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1143. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1143.
Jin Guo. Critical tokenization and its properties. Computational Linguistics, 23(4):569–596, 1997.
   URL https://aclanthology.org/J97-4004.
Awni Hannun, Vineel Pratap, Jacob Kahn, and Wei-Ning Hsu. Differentiable weighted finite-state
 transducers, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.01003.
Valentin Hofmann, Janet Pierrehumbert, and Hinrich Schütze. Superbizarre is not superb: Derivational
  morphology improves BERT’s interpretation of complex words. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia,
  Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3594–3608, Online, August 2021. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.279. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2021.acl-long.279.
Jue Hou, Anisia Katinskaia, Anh-Duc Vu, and Roman Yangarber. Effects of sub-word segmentation
  on performance of transformer language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7413–7425, Singapore, December 2023.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.459. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.459.
Sébastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. On using very large
  target vocabulary for neural machine translation. In Chengqing Zong and Michael Strube (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 1–10, Beijing, China, July 2015. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/
  P15-1001. URL https://aclanthology.org/P15-1001.
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural
  Language Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition. Third edition edition,
  2024. URL https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/.
Carina Kauf and Anna Ivanova. A better way to do masked language model scoring. In Anna
  Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 925–935, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.80.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.80.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola
  Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar,
  Alexandra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine
  translation. In Sophia Ananiadou (ed.), Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics Companion Volume Proceedings of the Demo and Poster Sessions,
  pp. 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/P07-2045.
Taku Kudo. Subword regularization: Improving neural network translation models with multiple
  subword candidates. In Iryna Gurevych and Yusuke Miyao (eds.), Proceedings of the 56th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 66–75, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/P18-1007. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1007.
Erich L. Lehmann and George Casella. Theory of Point Estimation. Springer Texts in Statistics.
  Springer, 2nd edition, 1998. ISBN 978-0-387-98502-2.
Minh-Thang Luong and Christopher D. Manning. Achieving open vocabulary neural machine trans-
 lation with hybrid word-character models. In Katrin Erk and Noah A. Smith (eds.), Proceedings of
 the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
 pers), pp. 1054–1063, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-1100. URL https://aclanthology.org/P16-1100.
Thang Luong, Ilya Sutskever, Quoc Le, Oriol Vinyals, and Wojciech Zaremba. Addressing the
  rare word problem in neural machine translation. In Chengqing Zong and Michael Strube (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  11–19, Beijing, China, July 2015. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/
  P15-1002. URL https://aclanthology.org/P15-1002.
Sabrina J. Mielke and Jason Eisner. Spell once, summon anywhere: A two-level open-vocabulary
  language model. AAAI’19/IAAI’19/EAAI’19. AAAI Press, 2019. ISBN 978-1-57735-809-1. doi:
  10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33016843. URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33016843.
Sabrina J. Mielke, Zaid Alyafeai, Elizabeth Salesky, Colin Raffel, Manan Dey, Matthias Gallé, Arun
  Raja, Chenglei Si, Wilson Y. Lee, Benoît Sagot, and Samson Tan. Between words and characters:
  A brief history of open-vocabulary modeling and tokenization in NLP. CoRR, abs/2112.10508,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10508.
Anthony Moi and Nicolas Patry. HuggingFace’s Tokenizers, April 2023. URL https://github.
  com/huggingface/tokenizers.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Piotr Nawrot, Jan Chorowski, Adrian Lancucki, and Edoardo Maria Ponti. Efficient transformers
  with dynamic token pooling. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 6403–6417, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.353. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.353.
David D. Palmer. Tokenisation and sentence segmentation. In Handbook of Natural Language
  Processing, chapter 2, pp. 24–25. Marcel Dekker, 2000.
Gabriel Poesia, Oleksandr Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher Meek, and
  Sumit Gulwani. Synchromesh: Reliable code generation from pre-trained language models, 2022.
Ivan Provilkov, Dmitrii Emelianenko, and Elena Voita. BPE-dropout: Simple and effective subword
  regularization. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1882–1892,
  Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.
  170. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.170.
Nived Rajaraman, Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. Toward a theory of tokenization in LLMs,
  2024.
Thomas Reps. “Maximal-munch” tokenization in linear time. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst.,
  20(2):259–273, mar 1998. ISSN 0164-0925. doi: 10.1145/276393.276394. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1145/276393.276394.
Julian Salazar, Davis Liang, Toan Q. Nguyen, and Katrin Kirchhoff. Masked language model scoring.
  In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2699–2712, Online, July
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.240. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.240.
Craig W. Schmidt, Varshini Reddy, Haoran Zhang, Alec Alameddine, Omri Uzan, Yuval Pinter, and
  Chris Tanner. Tokenization is more than compression, 2024.
Mike Schuster and Kaisuke Nakajima. Japanese and Korean voice search. In 2012 IEEE International
 Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5149–5152, 2012. doi:
 10.1109/ICASSP.2012.6289079.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with
  subword units. In Katrin Erk and Noah A. Smith (eds.), Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1715–1725, Berlin,
  Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-1162.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/P16-1162.
Xinying Song, Alex Salcianu, Yang Song, Dave Dopson, and Denny Zhou. Fast WordPiece
  tokenization. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau
  Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 2089–2103, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.160. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.160.
Omri Uzan, Craig W. Schmidt, Chris Tanner, and Yuval Pinter. Greed is all you need: An evaluation
 of tokenizer inference methods, 2024.
Bart van Merriënboer, Amartya Sanyal, Hugo Larochelle, and Yoshua Bengio. Multiscale sequence
  modeling with a learned dictionary, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.00762.
Tim Vieira, Ben LeBrun, Mario Giulianelli, Juan Luis Gastaldi, Brian DuSell, John Terilla, Timothy J.
  O’Donnell, and Ryan Cotterell. From Language Models over Tokens to Language Models over
  Characters, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03719.
Junxiong Wang, Tushaar Gangavarapu, Jing Nathan Yan, and Alexander M. Rush. MambaByte:
  Token-free Selective State Space Model, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13660.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Z. Chen, Quoc V. Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
  Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin Johnson,
  Xiaobing Liu, Lukasz Kaiser, Stephan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa, Keith
  Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason R. Smith, Jason Riesa, Alex
  Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Gregory S. Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. Google’s neural
  machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. ArXiv,
  abs/1609.08144, 2016. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3603249.
Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam
  Roberts, and Colin Raffel. ByT5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte
  models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:291–306, 2022. doi:
  10.1162/tacl_a_00461. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.17.
Vilém Zouhar, Clara Meister, Juan Gastaldi, Li Du, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Ryan Cotterell. To-
  kenization and the noiseless channel. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki
  Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5184–5207, Toronto, Canada, July 2023a. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.284. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.284.
Vilém Zouhar, Clara Meister, Juan Gastaldi, Li Du, Tim Vieira, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Ryan
  Cotterell. A formal perspective on byte-pair encoding. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber,
  and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
  2023, pp. 598–614, Toronto, Canada, July 2023b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.38. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.38.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8     A PPENDIX
8.1   P ROOFS

Lemma 3.1. Let {pn } be a sequence of probability distributions P over a countable set X that
converges pointwise to a probability distribution p. Then limn→∞ x∈X |pn (x) − p(x)| = 0.

Proof. Fatou’s lemma applied to X with the counting measure implies that for any sequence of
nonnegative functions {fn } on X,
                             X                             X
                                  lim inf fn (x) ≤ lim inf   fn (x).                     (2)
                                     n→∞                    n→∞
                              x∈X                                   x∈X

We will apply this to fn := pn + p − |pn − p|. First, note that since limn→∞ pn (x) = p(x), we
have lim inf n→∞ fn (x) = p(x) + p(x) − 0 = 2p(x) so the left hand side of equation 2 becomes
P
  x∈X 2p(x) = 2. Therefore,
                                X
                    2 ≤ lim inf    fn (x)                                                  (3a)
                           n→∞
                                   x∈X
                                   X
                       = lim inf         pn (x) + p(x) − |pn (x) − p(x)|                                   (3b)
                           n→∞
                                   x∈X
                                   X                 X              X
                       = lim inf         pn (x) +          p(x) −         |pn (x) − p(x)|                  (3c)
                           n→∞
                                   x∈X              x∈X             x∈X
                                                X
                       = lim inf 1 + 1 −            |pn (x) − p(x)|                                        (3d)
                           n→∞
                                            x∈X
                                         X
                       = 2 − lim sup            |pn (x) − p(x)|.                                           (3e)
                                 n→∞
                                         x∈X
                             P                                                 P
It follows that lim supn→∞       x∈X |pn (x) − p(x)| ≤ 0, so limn→∞             x∈X |pn (x) − p(x)| = 0.

Corollary 3.0.1. Let {pn } be a sequence of probability distributions over a countable set X that
converges pointwise to a probability distribution p. Then {pn } → p uniformly.

Proof. Since
         P the sum of nonnegative numbers is always greater than any particular term in the sum and
limn→∞ x∈X |pn (x) − p(x)| = 0, we can conclude that the sequence {pn } → p uniformly.
Lemma 3.2. Let f be a stochastic map from X to Y , and {pn } be an estimator for a probability
distribution p on X. Then f pn is an estimator for the probability distribution f p on Y .

         Py ∈ Y . We will show that {f pn (y)} → f p(y). By Lemma 3.1, we have that
Proof. Fix
limn→∞ x∈X |pn (x) − p (x)| = 0. Therefore,
                                                    X                          X
              lim |f pn (y) − f p(y)| = lim                f (y | x)pn (x) −         f (y | x)p(x)         (4a)
             n→∞                           n→∞
                                                    x∈X                        x∈X
                                                    X
                                         ≤ lim            f (y | x) |pn (x) − p (x)|                       (4b)
                                           n→∞
                                                    x∈X
                                                    X
                                         ≤ lim            |pn (x) − p (x)|                                 (4c)
                                           n→∞
                                                    x∈X
                                         = 0.                                                              (4d)


Theorem 3.1 (Fundamental Principle of Tokenization). Given a reference probability distribution
p⋆ over Σ∗ , a tokenizer T = (τ , κ) from Σ∗ to ∆∗ , and a consistent estimator {qn } of the image
reference distribution q ⋆ = τ p⋆ , the sequence {κqn } is a consistent estimator of p⋆ if and only if
κτ p⋆ = p⋆ .


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. By hypothesis, {qn } → q ⋆ and by definition q ⋆ = τ p⋆ . By Lemma 3.2, applying κ to both
sides, we have that {κqn } → κq ⋆ and so
                                                   {κqn } → κτ p⋆ .
Therefore, if κτ p⋆ = p⋆ we have {κqn } → p⋆ . Conversely, if {κqn } → p⋆ we have both {κqn } →
p⋆ and {κqn } → κτ p⋆ and so by the uniqueness of limits, κτ p⋆ = p⋆ .

Proposition 3.1. A tokenizer T = (τ , κ) from Σ∗ to ∆∗ is exact if and only if it is consistent with
respect to every probability distribution over Σ∗ .

Proof. Exact means κτ = idΣ∗ hence κτ p = p for every probability distribution p on Σ∗ . To prove
the other direction, suppose that κτ p = p for every p on Σ∗ . Fix an arbitrary σ ∈ Σ∗ . Let pσ be the
point mass distribution on Σ∗ concentrated on σ. So pσ (σ) = 1 and pσ (σ ′ ) = 0 for any σ ′ ̸= σ. By
hypothesis, pσ = κτ pσ . Apply to σ to get 1 = κτ pσ (σ). The right hand side, as the pushforward
of pσ via κτ , says 1 = pσ (κτ (σ)). Since pσ takes the value 1 at only one point, it follows that the
argument κτ (σ) = σ. Since σ was arbitrary, we conclude that κτ = idΣ∗ , i.e., the tokenizer (τ , κ)
is exact.

Proposition 3.2. Let T = (τ , κ) be an exact tokenizer from Σ∗ to ∆∗ . Then κ is deterministic on the
support of τ , i.e., κ is deterministic τ almost everywhere.

Proof. Assume (τ , κ) is exact, i.e., κτ = idΣ∗ , and let σ ∈ Σ∗ .
      P
Since δ∈∆∗ τ (δ | σ) = 1 and κτ (σ|σ) = idΣ∗ (σ | σ) = 1. We obtain:
                                  X
                           0=          τ (δ | σ) − κτ (σ|σ)                                                         (5a)
                                       δ∈∆∗
                                       X                          X
                                   =          τ (δ | σ) −                κ(σ | δ)τ (δ | σ)                         (5b)
                                       δ∈∆∗                      δ∈∆∗
                                       X
                                   =          τ (δ | σ) − κ(σ | δ)τ (δ | σ)                                         (5c)
                                       δ∈∆∗
                                       X
                                   =          τ (δ | σ)(1 − κ(σ | δ)).                                             (5d)
                                       δ∈∆∗

Since Eq. (5d) is a sum of nonnegative terms that equals zero, each terms must be zero. It follows that
if τ (δ | σ) > 0 for some δ (e.g.: δ is in the support of τ ) then then 1−κ(σ | δ) = 0 ⇔ κ(σ | δ) = 1.
From which it follows that
                                                     1 if σ ′ = σ

                                     κ(σ ′ | δ) =                      .
                                                     0 if σ ′ ̸= σ.


Proposition 5.1. Let T = (τ , κ) be a multiplicative tokenizer model whose decoder’s kernel is trivial.
For any δ ∈ ∆∗ , κ(δ) = σ =⇒ |δ| ≤ |σ|.

Proof. We can reason by induction. Let |δ| = m and |σ| = n. The property is true when m = 1
since 1 is the minimun length of any possible image of κ. Assume it is true for m = k and let
δ = δ 1 p . . . pδ k pδ k+1 . Then κ(δ) = κ(δ 1 p . . . pδ k )·κ(δ k+1 ) = σ 1 · . . . ·σ r ·σ r+1 · . . . ·σ r+s , where
κ(δ k+1 ) = σ r+1 · . . . ·σ r+s . Since r ≥ k and s ≥ 1, we have that r + s ≥ k + 1.

Proposition 5.2. If a function f : Γ∗ → B∗ is multiplicative then it has bounded variation.

Proof. Assume f is multiplicative and let k be given. Suppose γ, γ ′ ∈ Γ∗ satisfy ∥γ, γ ′ ∥ ≤ k. Let
                                   Ck =         max             {|f (γ ′′ )| + |f (γ ′′′ )|}.
                                             γ ′′ ,γ ′′′ ∈Γ∗
                                           |γ ′′ |+|γ ′′′ |≤k


                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Write γ and γ ′ as γ = γ ∧ γ ′ · γ ′′ and γ ′ = γ ∧ γ ′ · γ ′′′ . Notice that ∥γ ′′ , γ ′′′ ∥ = |γ ′′ | + |γ ′′′ | ≤ k,
and look at ∥f (γ), f (γ ′ )∥:
                        ∥f (γ), f (γ ′ )∥ = ∥f (γ ∧ γ ′ · γ ′′ ), f (γ ∧ γ ′ · γ ′′′ )∥                           (6a)
                                          = ∥f (γ ∧ γ ′ ) · f (γ ′′ ), f (γ ∧ γ ′ ) · f (γ ′′′ )∥                (6b)
                                          = ∥f (γ ′′ ), f (γ ′′′ )∥                                               (6c)
                                                   ′′            ′′′
                                          ≤ |f (γ )| + |f (γ )|                                                  (6d)
                                          ≤ Ck                                                                   (6e)



8.2    E XAMPLES

Example 8.1. Take, for instance, a bijective tokenizer such as BPE or WordPiece, with κ performing
concatenation of the token maps in the usual way. Let Σ = {t, h, e} and ∆ = {t, h, e, th, he}.
In this minimal configuration, it is easy to see that κ(tphpe) = κ(tphe) = κ(thpe) = t·h·e ∈ Σ∗ .
However, BPE or WordPiece being bijective tokenizers, τ can only map the value of κ to at most one
of the latter’s arguments, say τ (t·h·e) = thpe. We then have that τ (κ(tphe)) ̸= tphe (and likewise
for tphpe). If the estimator happens to place nonzero probability mass on any of the latter two token
sequences, the model will exhibit spurious ambiguity.
Example 8.2. Let Σ = ∆ = {0, 1}, and define Tunc = (τ unc , κunc ) as a deterministic model in the
following way:

            
             σp1, if σ describes a valid
            
                   Turing Machine followed by                                        ε, if δ ∈ ∆.
            
τ unc (σ) =                                                       κunc (δ) =
            
                  an input for which it halts.                                      σ, otherwise, where δ = σpδ.
            
              σp0, otherwise.

Significantly, Tunc is not only well-defined but also exact and therefore consistent for any language
model p over Σ∗ . However, τ unc is famously an uncomputable function, and hence Tunc is an
uncomputable tokenizer.

8.3    D EFINITIONS

Definition 8.1. A (left) sequential transducer is a 6-tuple (Q, Γ, B, i, ⋄, ∗),                               where:
 Q                    is a set of states
 Γ                    is an input alphabet
 B                    is an output alphabet
 i∈Q                  is an initial state
 ⋄: D ⊆ Q × Γ → Q     is an input or “next state” function
 ∗ : D ⊆ Q × Γ → B∗ is an output function.
Definition 8.2. A function f : Γ∗ → B∗ is sequential if it is realized by a sequential transducer, i.e.,
f (γ) = (i ∗ γ).
Definition 8.3. A (left) subsequential transducer is a 7-tuple (Q, Γ, B, i, ⋄, ∗, ρ), where:
 (Q, Γ, B, i, ⋄, ∗) is a sequential transducer
 ρ : Q → B∗         is a terminal function.
Definition 8.4. A function f : Γ∗ → B∗ is subsequential if it is realized by a subsequential transducer
(Q, Γ, B, i, ⋄, ∗, ρ), i.e., f (γ) = (i ∗ γ) · ρ(i ⋄ γ).


                                                          18
