Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           F OURIER S LICED -WASSERSTEIN E MBEDDING
                                     FOR
                          M ULTISETS AND M EASURES
 Tal Amir                                       Nadav Dym
 Faculty of Mathematics                         Faculty of Mathematics and Faculty of Computer Science
 Technion–Israel Institute of Technology        Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
 Haifa, Israel                                  Haifa, Israel
 talamir@technion.ac.il                         nadavdym@technion.ac.il



                                              A BSTRACT
            We present the Fourier Sliced-Wasserstein (FSW) embedding—a novel method to
            embed multisets and measures over Rd into Euclidean space.
            Our proposed embedding approximately preserves the sliced Wasserstein distance
            on distributions, thereby yielding geometrically meaningful representations that
            better capture the structure of the input. Moreover, it is injective on measures and
            bi-Lipschitz on multisets—a significant advantage over prevalent methods based
            on sum- or max-pooling, which are provably not bi-Lipschitz, and, in many cases,
            not even injective. The required output dimension for these guarantees is near-
            optimal: roughly 2N d, where N is the maximal input multiset size.
            Furthermore, we prove that it is impossible to embed distributions over Rd into
            Euclidean space in a bi-Lipschitz manner. Thus, the metric properties of our em-
            bedding are, in a sense, the best possible.
            Through numerical experiments, we demonstrate that our method yields supe-
            rior multiset representations that improve performance in practical learning tasks.
            Specifically, we show that (a) a simple combination of the FSW embedding with
            an MLP achieves state-of-the-art performance in learning the (non-sliced) Wasser-
            stein distance; and (b) replacing max-pooling with the FSW embedding makes
            PointNet significantly more robust to parameter reduction, with only minor per-
            formance degradation even after a 40-fold reduction.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Multisets are unordered collections of vectors that account for repetitions. They are the main math-
ematical tool for representing unordered data, with perhaps the most notable example being point
clouds. As such, there is growing interest in developing architectures suited for learning tasks on
multisets. To address this need, several permutation-invariant neural networks have been intro-
duced, with applications for point-cloud classification (Qi et al., 2017a), chemical property pre-
diction (Pozdnyakov & Ceriotti, 2023), and image deblurring (Aittala & Durand, 2018). Multiset
aggregation functions also serve as key components in more complex architectures, such as Mes-
sage Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) for graphs (Gilmer et al., 2017), or setups with multiple
permutation actions (Maron et al., 2020).
A central concept in the study of multiset functions, i.e. functions defined on multisets, is injectivity.
Its importance is highlighted by the following observation: An architecture that cannot separate two
distinct multisets X ̸= X ′ will not be able to approximate a target function f that distinguishes
between these multisets, i.e. f (X) ̸= f (X ′ ). Conversely, a model that maps multisets injectively
to vectors, composed with an MLP, can universally approximate all continuous multiset functions
(Zaheer et al., 2017; Dym & Gortler, 2024). This observation has inspired works to study the
injectivity of multiset architectures (Wagstaff et al., 2022; 2019; Tabaghi & Wang, 2024). Injectivity
on multisets also plays a key role in the development of expressive MPNNs (Xu et al., 2018).
    1
        Our code is available at https://github.com/tal-amir/FSW-embedding.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Common multiset architectures are typically based on simple building blocks of the form
                                                 n                        o
                    E ({x1 , . . . , xn }) = Pool F x(1) , . . . , F x(n) ,
where F is usually an MLP, and Pool is a simple pooling operation such as maximum, sum, or
mean. Xu et al. (2018) showed that multiset functions based on max- or mean-pooling are never
injective, but injectivity can be achieved using sum-pooling, under the assumption that the vectors
x(i) come from a discrete domain, and an appropriate function F is used. Then it was shown by
Zaheer et al. (2017); Maron et al. (2019) that injectivity over multisets with continuous elements
can be achieved using sum pooling with a polynomial F . The more common case, in which F is a
neural network, was studied in (Amir et al., 2023). There it was shown that injectivity on multisets
and measures over Rd can be achieved using F that is a shallow MLP with random parameters and
analytic, non-polynomial activations, such as Sigmoid or Softplus.
However, injectivity alone is not the strongest property one may desire for multiset functions. While
an injective multiset embedding E can separate pairs of distinct multisets X ̸= X ′ , this does not
ensure the quality of the separation. Ideally, if two multisets X, X ′ are far apart in terms of some
notion of distance, then one would expect E(X), E(X ′ ) ∈ Rm to also be far apart, and vice versa.
The standard mathematical notion used to guarantee this behaviour is bi-Lipschitzness.
Definition. Let E : D → Rm , where D is a collection of multisets or, more generally, distributions
over Rd . We say that E is bi-Lipschitz with respect to Wp , if there exist constants c, C > 0 such that
                  c · Wp (µ, µ̃) ≤ ∥E(µ) − E(µ̃)∥ ≤ C · Wp (µ, µ̃),      ∀µ, µ̃ ∈ D,                (1)
where Wp denotes the p-Wasserstein distance and ∥ · ∥ denotes the ℓ2 norm.

The Wasserstein distance, defined in the next section, serves as a standard notion of distance for
multisets and distributions. The ratio of the Lipschitz constants C/c in (1) represents a bound on the
maximal distortion incurred by the map E, analogous to the condition number of a matrix.
Bi-Lipschitz embeddings enable the application of metric-based learning methods, such as nearest-
neighbor search, data clustering, and multi-dimensional scaling, to non-Euclidean data types like
multisets and measures. These methods can be more readily applied to the embedded Euclidean
domain than to the original data domain, where metric computations are typically more expensive
(Indyk & Thaper, 2003). The bi-Lipschitzness of the embedding often provides correctness guaran-
tees for these applications, which depend on the Lipschitz constants c and C (Cahill et al., 2024).
Achieving bi-Lipschitzness is typically more challenging than injectivity and often requires different
theoretical tools. Recently, in (Amir et al., 2023), we proved that methods based on average- or
sum-pooling can never be bi-Lipschitz, while Xu et al. (2018) showed that methods based on max-
pooling cannot even be injective. Thus, a bi-Lipschitz embedding would constitute a substantial
improvement over the standard multiset embedding methods currently in use.
To date, two main approaches have been proposed for constructing bi-Lipschitz multiset embed-
dings: (1) sort embedding (Balan et al., 2022), which is based on sorting random projections of
the multiset elements, and (2) max filtering (Cahill et al., 2022), which is based on computations of
Wasserstein distances from ‘template multisets’, and is computationally expensive.
While sort-based methods have been used with some success (Zhang et al., 2019; 2018; Balan et al.,
2022), their popularity in practical applications remains limited, despite their bi-Lipschitzness guar-
antees. A likely explanation for this is that these methods can only handle multisets of fixed size,
and, to date, there is no known way to generalize them to multisets of varying size, let alone to dis-
tributions. This is a major limitation, since multisets of varying size arise naturally in many common
learning tasks, for example graph classification, where vertices may have neighbourhoods of differ-
ent sizes. This problem is often circumvented via ad-hoc solutions such as padding (Zhang et al.,
2018) or interpolation (Zhang et al., 2019), which do not preserve the original theoretical guarantees
of the method. Moreover, even in the restricted setting of fixed-size multisets, the bi-Lipschitzness
guarantees of these methods typically require prohibitively high embedding dimensions.
Our goal in this paper is to overcome these limitations by constructing a bi-Lipschitz embedding
for the collection of all multisets over Rd with at most N elements. We denote this collection
by S≤N Rd . Note that the assumption of bounded cardinality is necessary, as otherwise, even

injectivity is impossible; see (Amir et al., 2023, Theorem C.3). We are also interested in the larger


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


collection  of probability distributions over Rd supported on at most N points, which we denote by
P≤N Rd . This setting, in which the points may have non-uniform weights, can be particularly
relevant for attention-based methods on sets (Lee et al., 2019), as well as graph architectures such
as GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016) or GAT (Veličković et al., 2018), which use non-uniform weights
for vertex neighbourhoods. In summary, our main goal is:

Main goal For D = S≤N Rd and D = P≤N Rd , construct an embedding E : D → Rm that is

injective and, preferably, bi-Lipschitz.

Main results We propose an embedding method for multisets and distributions with finite support,
which is a non-trivial generalization of the sort embedding. We observe that the Euclidean distance
between the sort embeddings of two multisets can be interpreted as a finite Monte Carlo sampling of
their sliced Wasserstein distance (Bonneel et al., 2015): in the special case where the input consists
of multisets of fixed size, this sampling corresponds to the project-and-sort operations used in the
sort embedding. Based on this interpretation,   we extend
                                                         beyond fixed-size multisets and propose an
embedding method for both S≤N Rd and P≤N Rd . Our method essentially operates as follows:

(1) compute random one-dimensional projections (also called slices) of the input distribution; (2)
compute the quantile function of each projected distribution; and (3) sample each quantile function
at a random frequency in the Fourier domain. We name our method the Fourier       Sliced-Wasserstein
                                       FSW                   FSW
(FSW) embedding and denote it by Em        . The function Em       : P≤N Rd → Rm is of the form

                                                                     m
                                 FSW          FSW
                               Em    (µ) = Em      µ; v (k) , ξ (k)      .
                                                                 k=1

It maps multisets and distributions into R , and depends on parameters v (k) ∈ Rd , ξ (k) ∈ R, k ∈
                                          m

[m], representing projection vectors and frequencies respectively. It has the following properties:
                                                                          FSW
      1. Bi-Lipschitzness on multisets: For m ≥ 2N d+1, the map Em             : S≤N Rd → Rm is bi-

         Lipschitz (and,
                        m in particular, injective) for almost any choice of the embedding parameters
          v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 (Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 4.3).
                                                                                                FSW
      2. Injectivity  on distributions and measures: For m ≥ 2N d + 2N − 1, the map Em               :
         P≤N R → R is injective (but not bi-Lipschitz) for almost any choice of parameters
                  d       m

         (Theorem 4.1). Moreover, by adding one more output coordinate, the embedding can be ex-
         tended from distributions to measures with arbitrary total mass while preserving injectivity;
         see Appendix A.1. Furthermore, we  prove that it is impossible to construct a bi-Lipschitz
         Euclidean embedding for P≤N Rd (Theorem 4.4). This suggests that the metric proper-
         ties of our embedding are, in a sense, the best possible.
                                                                          FSW          FSW     2
      3. Sliced-Wasserstein approximation: The expectation of m    1
                                                                       Em     (µ) − Em     (µ̃) over
                           (k) (k) m
         the parameters v , ξ            , drawn  from our appropriately  defined distribution, is ex-

                                     k=1
         actly the squared sliced-Wasserstein
                                                distance between µ and   µ̃ (Corollary  3.3), with the
         standard error decreasing as O m .√1

                                         FSW
      4. Differentiability: The map Em        is continuous and piecewise smooth in both the input
                                         N                                              m
         measure parameters x , wi i=1 and the embedding parameters v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 (see e.g.
                                 (i)

         (25)). Thus, it is amenable to gradient-based learning, and its parameters can be trained.
                                                    FSW
      5. Complexity:         The embedding Em           (µ) can be computed efficiently in
         O(mN d + mN log N ) time—the same complexity (up to the logarithmic term) as
         the most efficient methods used in practice (Theorem A.2, Appendix A.2).

In Properties 1 and 2 above, the required embedding dimension m is near-optimal, essentially up to
a multiplicative factor of two.
Empirically, in Section 5, we demonstrate the practical promise of our method by evaluating it
on the task of learning the (non-sliced) 1-Wasserstein distance function. We show that a simple
composition of our embedding with an MLP outperforms the state-of-the-art while requiring shorter
training times. Moreover, we show that replacing max-pooling in PointNet with our embedding
significantly improves the architecture’s robustness in the low-parameter regime, with only minor
performance degradation even after a 40-fold parameter reduction.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     P ROBLEM SETTING
In this section, we describe the problem in detail and briefly review its theoretical background and
existing approaches.

2.1   T HEORETICAL BACKGROUND

We begin by defining the spaces of multisets and distributions of interest, along with the metrics we
use on these spaces.

Multisets and distributions Denote by P≤N (Ω) the collection of all probability distributions over
a measurable domain Ω ⊆ Rd , supported on at most N points. Any distribution µ ∈ P≤N (Ω) can
be parametrized by N points x(i) ∈ Ω and weights wi ≥ 0 such that
                                                         N
                                                         X
                                                µ=             wi δx(i) ,                                       (2)
                                                         i=1

where w = (w1 , . . . , wN ) is in the probability simplex ∆N ⊂ RN , and δx is Dirac’s delta function
at x. Distributions with fewer than N support points can be parameterized in this way by setting
some of the weights wi to zero and choosing the corresponding x(i) arbitrarily.
Similarly, let S≤N (Ω) be the collection of all multisets over Ω ⊆ Rd with at most N ele-
ments. To enable computation of Wasserstein distances, which are defined on distributions, we
modify the definition of S≤N (Ω) by excluding the empty multiset and identifying each multiset
              n
X = x(i) i=1 ∈ S≤N (Ω) with the distribution µ[X] ∈ P≤N (Ω) that assigns uniform weights


wi = n1 to all x(i) , taking their multiplicities into account.2 Throughout this work, our use of
S≤N (Ω) assumes this modification, and we regard S≤N (Ω) as a subset of P≤N (Ω).
Note that our embedding in its basic form, to be defined in the next section, will take input multi-
sets from S≤N (Ω). As such, it will not be defined on the empty multiset, and will not distinguish
between multisets of different sizes if their element proportions are identical.3 This can be easily
remedied by augmenting the embedding with an additional output coordinate that encodes the mul-
                                                             PN
tiset cardinality, or in the case of measures, the total mass i=1 wi ; see Appendix A.1 for details.
Throughout this work, we focus on Ω = Rd and only discuss finitely-supported multisets and distri-
butions. Nonetheless, our embedding can accommodate general distributions over Rd , while retain-
ing its sliced-Wasserstein approximation property. Thus, in principle, our method can be applied to
structures other than point clouds, for example, polygonal meshes and volumetric data.

Wasserstein distance As a distance measure on S≤N Rd and P≤N Rd , we use the aforemen-

tioned Wasserstein distance. Intuitively, this distance is the least amount of  work required to ‘trans-
port’ one distribution to another. For two distributions µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N Rd , parametrized by points
x(i) , x̃(j) and weights wi , w̃j as in (2), the p-Wasserstein distance between µ and µ̃ is defined by
                                                                                        1
                                                                                             p
                                               X                                     p
                                                                  (i)          (j)
                Wp (µ, µ̃) :=       inf                 πij x          − x̃                    p ∈ [1, ∞) ,
                                  π∈Π(µ,µ̃)
                                              i,j∈[N ]
                                                  n                                                  o
               W∞ (µ, µ̃) :=       inf      max       x(i) − x̃(j)               i, j ∈ [N ], πij > 0 ,
                                π∈Π(µ,µ̃)

where ∥ · ∥ is the Euclidean norm, and Π(µ, µ̃) is the set of all transport plans from µ to µ̃:
                                                                                              
                                                             X                 X              
     Π(µ, µ̃) := π ∈ RN ×N (∀i, j ∈ [N ]) πij ≥ 0 ∧                 πij = wi ∧       πij = w̃j .
                                                                                              
                                                                            j∈[N ]                 i∈[N ]

  2
    For example, the multiset X = {a, b, b} ∈ S≤3 (R) is identified with the distribution µ[X] = 31 δa + 32 δb ∈
P≤3 (R).
  3
    e.g., X = {a, b, b} and Y = {a, a, b, b, b, b} are considered identical in S≤6 (R), since µ[X] = µ[Y ].


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The numbers πij intuitively represent the amount of mass to be transported from point x(i) to x̃(j) .
Whenever p is omitted, we refer to Wp with p = 2. Similarly, ∥ · ∥ always denotes the ℓ2 norm.

Computation of Wasserstein The Wasserstein distance can be computed in O N 3 log N time

via a linear program (Altschuler et al., 2017; Orlin, 1988). Alternatively, one may use the Sinkhorn
approximation algorithm (Cuturi, 2013), which takes Õ N 2 ε−3 time, ε being the error tolerance


(Altschuler et al., 2017). This was improved to Õ min N 2.25 ε−1 , N 2 ε−2 in (Dvurechensky

et al., 2018). However, in the special case d = 1, it can be computed significantly faster.

Wasserstein in 1D In one dimension, the Wasserstein distance can be computed in only
O(N log N ) time. If x = (x1 , . . . , xn ), y = (y1 , . . . , yn ) are two vectors in Rn , then the dis-
tance between the two uniform distributions µ[x], µ[y] over the vector coordinates is given by
                                               1
                              W(µ[x], µ[y]) = √ ∥sort(x) − sort(y)∥,                                  (3)
                                                n
with sort : Rn → Rn being the function that returns the input coordinates sorted in increasing order.
For arbitrary distributions in P≤N (R), the Wasserstein distance can be computed sim-
ilarly via the quantile function.    For a distribution µ over R, the quantile func-
tion Qµ : [0, 1) → R is a continuous analogue of the sort function, defined by

             Qµ (t) := inf {x ∈ R | µ((−∞, x]) > t}.
                                                                                       {4,5,6}
Figure 1 depicts the quantile functions for three different multisets.    5
                                                                                        {3,4}
The quantile function enables an explicit formula for the Wasser-
stein distance between two distributions over R (see e.g. Bayraktar       3
& Guo (2021), Eq. 2.3 and the paragraph thereafter):
                                                                                       {1,2,3}
                         s
                           Z 1
              W(µ, µ̃) =
                                                  2
                                (Qµ (t) − Qµ̃ (t)) dt.          (4)       1
                               0
                                                                                  1        2
Note that when µ and µ̃ are generated by multisets of the same                    3        3        1
cardinality (like the two multisets of cardinality 3 in Figure 1), the
formulas (4) and (3) coincide.                                         Figure 1: Quantile functions for
                                                                          three different multisets
Sliced Wasserstein distance The sliced Wasserstein distance, proposed by Bonneel et al. (2015)
as a surrogate for the Wasserstein distance, exploits the efficient computation of the latter for d = 1 to
define a more computationally tractable distance for d > 1. It is defined as the average Wasserstein
distance between all one-dimensional projections (or slices) of the two input distributions. For a
formal definition, we first define the projection of a distribution.
                        PN
Definition. Let µ =       i=1 wi δx(i) ∈ P≤N R . The projection of µ in the direction v ∈ R ,
                                                   d
                                                                                                        d

denoted by v µ, is the one-dimensional distribution in P≤N (R) defined by
              T

                                                   N
                                                   X
                                        v T µ :=         wi δvT x(i) .
                                                   i=1


Using the above definition, the sliced Wasserstein distance between µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N Rd is defined by

                                             q
                               SW(µ, µ̃) := Ev [W 2 (v T µ, v T µ̃)],                         (5)

where W 2 ( · , · ) is the squared 2-Wasserstein distance, and the expectation Ev [ · ] is over the direc-
tion vector v ∼ Uniform Sd−1 , i.e. distributed uniformly over the unit sphere in Rd .

2.2   E XISTING EMBEDDING METHODS

We now return to our main goal of constructing an embedding E : P≤N Rd → Rm . In this

subsection, we discuss existing embedding methods and some straightforward ideas to extend them.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We first observe that, on the collection of multisets over R of fixed size n, it follows from (3) that
the map {x1 , . . . , xn } 7→ √1n · sort(x1 , . . . , xn ) is an isometry, i.e. (1) holds with C = c = 1.
To extend this idea to multisets in S≤N (R), a naive approach would be to represent each multiset in
S≤N (R) by a multiset of size N̂ , with N̂ being the least common multiple (LCM) of {1, 2, . . . , N }.
For example, for N = 3, LCM({1, 2, 3}) = 6, and thus multisets in S≤N (R) of sizes 1 {a}, 2
{a, b}, and 3 {a, b, c}, would be represented, respectively, by {a, a, a, a, a, a}, {a, a, a, b, b, b} and
{a, a, b, b, c, c}. At this point, a sorting approach can be applied. However, as N increases, this
method quickly becomes infeasible, both in terms of computation time as well as memory, since N̂
grows exponentially in N . Moreover, this method cannot handle arbitrary distributions in P≤N (R),
whose weights may be irrational.
One possible approach to embed general distributions µ ∈ P≤N (R) is to sample Qµ (t) at m points
t1 , . . . , tm ∈ [0, 1] equispaced or drawn uniformly at random. While this approach would indeed
approximately preserve the Wasserstein distance, as follows from (4), it is easy to show that for any
finite number of samples m, this embedding is not injective on P≤N (R). Moreover, it is discon-
tinuous with respect to the sampling points tk and input probabilities wi , and thus not amenable to
gradient-based learning methods. Our method, described in the next section, resolves these issues
by sampling the quantile function in the frequency domain rather than in the t-domain.
When considering P≤N Rd with d > 1, one natural idea is to take m one-dimensional projections

of the input distribution, and then embed each of the projections using one of the methods described
above for P≤N (R). In the case of multisets of fixed cardinality n, this corresponds to the mapping

                                                  1
                                                     · rowsort vkT xi k∈[m],i∈[n] .

                           {x1 , . . . , xn } 7→ √mn

This idea was discussed in (Balan et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2019; Dym & Gortler, 2024; Balan
& Tsoukanis, 2023b). In expectation over the directions vk , this method indeed gives a good ap-
proximation of the sliced Wasserstein distance. The relationship to the d-dimensional Wasserstein
distance is a priori less clear. Balan & Tsoukanis (2023a) showed that for m that is exponential in
n, this mapping bi-Lipschitz for almost any choice of v1 , . . . , vm . Later, Dym & Gortler (2024)
showed that m = 2nd + 1 is sufficient. In this paper, we combine this idea of using linear projec-
tions, with our idea of  Fourier sampling of quantile functions, to construct an embedding defined on
the whole of P≤N Rd while maintaining theoretical guarantees and practical efficiency.
In a related line of work, Kolouri et al. (2015); Naderializadeh et al. (2021); Lu et al. (2024) devel-
oped a method that embeds continuous distributions into an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space iso-
metrically with respect to the sliced Wasserstein distance. However, in practice, a finite-dimensional
discretization is used, which breaks the method’s injectivity, as we show empirically in Section 5.
In contrast, our method is provably injective with a finite and near-optimal embedding dimension of
≈ 2N d.
Lastly, Haviv et al. (2024) recently proposed a transformer-based architecture called Wasserstein
Wormhole, designed to compute Euclidean embeddings for multisets and distributions. This archi-
tecture can be trained to approximate the Wasserstein distance. However, its reliance on training is
a key limitation, as it does not guarantee Wasserstein distance preservation or even injectivity. This
concern becomes particularly significant when generalizing to out-of-distribution samples.


3    P ROPOSED METHOD

Our method for embedding a distribution µ essentially consists of computing random slices v T µ
and, for each slice, taking a single random sample of its quantile function QvT µ (t). However,
instead of sampling the function directly, we sample its cosine transform—a variant of the Fourier
transform. Since the Fourier transform is a linear isometry, integrating the squared difference of
these samples for two distributions µ, µ̃ yields the squared sliced Wasserstein distance SW 2 (µ, µ̃),
as we shall show next. We will also show that this sampling method guarantees injectivity, unlike
direct sampling of QvT µ (t). Lastly, since QvT µ (t) is a compactly supported step function, its
Fourier transform is smooth with respect to the frequencies, and thus so is our embedding. We now
discuss this in detail.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 3.1. Given a projection vector v ∈ Sd−1 and a number       ξ ≥ 0 denoting a frequency, we
define the one-sample embedding E FSW ( · ; v, ξ) : P≤N Rd → R by

                                                   Z 1
                      E FSW (µ; v, ξ) := 2(1 + ξ)      QvT µ (t) cos (2πξt)dt,                    (6)
                                                       0
which is the cosine transform of QvT µ (t), sampled at frequency ξ and multiplied by 1 + ξ; see Ap-
pendix B.1 for further discussion. Details on the practical computation of E FSW are in Appendix A.2.
Next, we define a probability distribution Dξ for the frequency ξ, given by the PDF
                                                       −2
                                   fξ (ξ) := (1 + ξ)        ,   ξ ≥ 0.
                     FSW
We now show that E        preserves the sliced Wasserstein distance in expectation over v, ξ.
Theorem 3.2. (Proof in Appendix B.2) Let µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N (BR ), with          BR ⊂ Rd being the closed
ℓ2 -norm ball of radius R, centered at zero. Let v ∼ Uniform Sd−1 , ξ ∼ Dξ . Then

                            h                                   2
                                                                  i
                        Ev,ξ E FSW (µ; v, ξ) − E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ)     = SW 2 (µ, µ̃),            (7)
                            h                                   2
                                                                  i
                     STDv,ξ E FSW (µ; v, ξ) − E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ)      ≤ 13 · R2 .                (8)

This result can be further stabilized by taking multiple    samples. Thus, we define the Fourier Sliced
                                    FSW
                                        : P≤N Rd → Rm by

Wasserstein (FSW) embedding Em

                     FSW
                   Em    (µ) := E FSW µ; v (1) , ξ (1) , . . . , E FSW µ; v (m) , ξ (m) ,            (9)
                     m
where v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 are drawn i.i.d. from Uniform Sd−1 × Dξ . Consequently, we have:


Corollary 3.3. Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.2,
                                h                                2
                                                                   i
                                        FSW          FSW
                            Ev,ξ m 1
                                      Em    (µ) − Em     (µ̃)        = SW 2 (µ, µ̃),               (10)
                                                                              2
                                h
                                        FSW          FSW         2
                                                                   i        R
                         STDv,ξ m  1
                                      Em    (µ) − Em     (µ̃)        ≤ 13 · √ .                    (11)
                                                                             m
Notably, the error bound in (11) is independent of the number of points N and the dimension d.
Thus, the estimation error does not suffer from the curse of dimensionality. By taking a sufficiently
high embedding dimension, one can embed distributions of arbitrarily high dimension with arbitrary
(and possibly infinite) support cardinality, while ensuring a bounded standard estimation error, as
long as the distributions are supported within a fixed ball of radius R.

4   T HEORETICAL RESULTS
In the previous section, we showed that our embedding approximately preserves the sliced Wasser-
stein distance in a probabilistic sense, with diminishing estimation error as the embedding dimension
grows. Here, we show that with a finite dimension, our embedding is guaranteed to be injective and
bi-Lipschitz, as outlined in the Main Results summary in Section 1.
First, we show that with a sufficiently high dimension m, our embedding is injective.
                                                    FSW
Theorem 4.1. (Proof in Appendix B.3) Let Em              : P≤N Rd → Rm be as in (9), with

               m
 v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 drawn i.i.d. from Uniform Sd−1 × Dξ . Then:


                                                       FSW

        1. If m ≥ 2N d + 1, then with probability 1, Em    is injective on S≤N Rd .
                                                              FSW

        2. If m ≥ 2N d + 2N − 1, then with probability 1, Em      is injective on P≤N Rd .
These bounds are optimal essentially up to a multiplicative factor of 2, since an embedding dimen-
sion m < N d precludes injectivity for any continuous embedding (Amir et al., 2023, Theorem C.3).
                                                                   FSW
Next, we show that in the case of S≤N Rd , the injectivity of Em        implies that it is, in fact, bi-

                                                FSW
Lipschitz. Our proof relies on the fact that Em is piecewise linear and homogeneous in the input
points, in a sense we shall now define. By a slight   abuse of notation, we denote the distribution
parametrized by the points X = x(1) , . . . , x(N ) and weights w = (w1 , . . . , wN ) as (X, w).


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition. Let E : D → Rm with D = P≤N Rd or S≤N Rd . We say that E is positively


homogeneous if for any α ≥ 0 and any distribution (X, w) ∈ D, E(αX, w) = αE(X, w).

The next theorem shows that any injective embedding of P≤N Rd that is positively homogeneous


and piecewise linear4 is bi-Lipschitz when restricted to distributions with fixed weights.
Theorem 4.2. (Proof in Appendix B.3) Let E : P≤N Rd → Rm be injective and positively


homogeneous. Let w, w̃ ∈ ∆N be fixed, and suppose that the functions E(X, w) and E(X, w̃)
are piecewise linear in X. Then there exist C, c > 0 such that for all X, X̃ ∈ Rd×N and p ∈ [1, ∞],

   c · Wp (X, w), X̃, w̃       ≤ E(X, w) − E X̃, w̃ ≤ C · Wp (X, w), X̃, w̃ . (12)

The restriction to fixed weights can easily be relaxed to weights from any finite set. Based on this
                                  FSW
observation, we now show that Em      is bi-Lipschitz on multisets.
                        FSW                                                                  FSW
Corollary 4.3. Let Em   be as in (9) with m ≥ 2N d + 1. Then with probability 1, Em               is
                         d
bi-Lipschitz on S≤N R .

Proof. Any µ ∈ S≤N Rd can be represented by a parameter of the form X, w(n) , where

                                                    n             −n
                                           z }| { z N}|                 {
                               w   (n)
                                         = n1 , . . . , n1 , 0, . . . , 0 ,   1 ≤ n ≤ N.           (13)
                                                                            FSW
For n, r ∈ [N ], let cnr , Cnr be the Lipschitz constants c, C of (12) for Em   with the weight
                                                                                               vectors
                                                             FSW
w = w , w̃ = w . Then, it follows directly that Em is bi-Lipschitz on S≤N Rd with the
         (n)           (r)

constants c = minn,r∈[N ] cnr > 0 and C = maxn,r∈[N ] Cnr < ∞.

Next, we explore whether
                         it is possible to further improve by finding a bi-Lipschitz embedding for
the whole of P≤N Rd . For the broader class of distributions N ∈N P≤N Rd , Naor & Schecht-
                                                                 S

man (2007) proved that no bi-Lipschitz embedding exists into L1 ([0, 1]), and thus not into any
finite-dimensional space. One may ask whether this impossibility can be circumvented by bounding
the number of support points and confining them to a fixed compact domain, namely, by restricting
to P≤N (Ω) for a compact Ω ⊂ Rd . The following theorem shows that even this restricted collection
still cannot be embedded in a bi-Lipschitz manner into any finite-dimensional Euclidean space.
Theorem 4.4. (Proof in Appendix B.3) Let E : P≤N (Ω) → Rm , where N ≥ 2 and Ω ⊆ Rd has a
nonempty interior. Then for all p ∈ [1, ∞], E is not bi-Lipschitz on P≤N (Ω) with respect to Wp .

5       N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we demonstrate how the theoretical strengths of our method manifest in practice.
Specifically, we show that our method produces embeddings with superior distance preservation
and improves performance in practical learning tasks.

Comparison with PSWE This experiment compares our method with PSWE (Naderializadeh
et al., 2021)—an embedding method developed with the same purpose of preserving the sliced
Wasserstein distance. As mentioned in Section 2.2, this method embeds continuous distributions into
an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space, and does so isometrically with respect to the sliced Wasser-
stein distance. Finite multisets and distributions are treated by this method as discretizations of
continuous distributions, which causes different finite distributions to be identified with the same
continuous distribution, consequently leading to a loss of injectivity.
To demonstrate this, we constructed a pair of multisets X1 , X2 ⊂ R3 , of sizes 5 and 200, respec-
tively, that PSWE identifies as the same continuous distribution, and thus fails to distinguish; see Ap-
pendix C.1 for details. Table 1 reports the normalized Euclidean distances √1m ∥E(X1 ) − E(X2 )∥,
where E : S≤N R3 → Rm is either FSW or PSWE, for various embedding dimensions m. As

shown in the table, PSWE fails to distinguish the two multisets for all tested values of m, whereas
FSW succeeds even when m = 1. Moreover, as m increases, the distances produced by FSW
converge to the sliced Wasserstein distance SW(X1 , X2 ), as promised by Corollary 3.3.
    4
        A definition of piecewise linearity appears in Definition B.12 Appendix B.3.


                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 1: Embedding distance vs. embedding dimension

                                    Embedding dimension                            Embedding distances between a
         Method
                        1          10          100      1000     10000             pair of multisets X1 , X2 ⊂ R3
                                                                                   distinguished by FSW but not by
           FSW        0.125      0.0326       0.0639    0.0733   0.0737
          PSWE        0.0        5.48e-8      1.47e-7   1.3e-7   1.44e-7           PSWE. Here |X1 | = 5, |X2 | =
                                                                                   200, and SW(X1 , X2 ) =
                                                                                   0.0734.



Learning to approximate the Wasserstein distance One possible approach to overcome the high
computation time of the Wasserstein distance for d > 1 is to try to estimate it using a neural network,
trained on pairs of point-clouds for which the distance is known. This approach was used in pre-
vious works (Chen & Wang, 2023; Kawano        et al.,  2020), which proposed architectures designed to
approximate functions F : S≤N Rd × S≤N Rd → R, such as the Wasserstein distance function.

These methods handle multisets using the traditional approach of sum- or average-pooling. Since
our embedding is bi-Lipschitz with respect to the Wasserstein distance, it is a priori likely to be a
more effective building block for architectures designed to learn it.
For this task, we used the following architecture: First, an FSW embedding E1 : P≤N Rd →

R is applied to each of the two input distributions µ, µ̃. Then, a second FSW embedding E2 :
  m1

S≤2 (Rm1 ) → Rm2 is applied to the multiset {E1 (µ), E1 (µ̃)}. The output of E2 is then fed to an
MLP Φ : Rm2 → R+ ; see Appendix C.2 for dimensions and technical details. Our full architecture
is described by the formula
                                F (µ, µ̃) := Φ(E2 ({E1 (µ), E1 (µ̃)})).
This formulation ensures that F is symmetric with respect to swapping µ and µ̃. In addition, we
used leaky-ReLU activations and no biases in Φ, which renders F scale-equivariant by design, i.e.

                    F (αX, w), (αX̃, w̃ ) = αF (X, w), (X̃, w̃) ∀α > 0,
as is the Wasserstein distance function, which F is designed to approximate.
The experimental setting was replicated from (Chen & Wang, 2023). The objective is to approxi-
mate the 1-Wasserstein distance W1 . The following evaluation datasets, kindly provided to us by
the authors, were used: Three synthetic datasets noisy-sphere-3, noisy-sphere-6 and
uniform, with random point-clouds in R3 , R6 and R2 ; two real datasets ModelNet-small and
ModelNet-large, with 3D point-clouds sampled from ModelNet40 objects (Wu et al., 2015);
and the gene-expression dataset RNAseq (Yao et al., 2021), with multisets in R2000 .
We compared our architecture to the following methods: (a) NSDeepSets , a DeepSets-like architecture
trained to compute W1 -preserving embeddings, and NProductNet , which further processes the sum
of the two embeddings through an MLP (Chen & Wang, 2023); (b) a Siamese autoencoder called
Wasserstein Point-Cloud Embedding network (WPCE) (Kawano et al., 2020); and (c) the Sinkhorn
approximation algorithm (Cuturi, 2013). We also evaluated the PSWE embedding by employing it
in our architecture instead of E1 .
                                Table 2: 1-Wasserstein approximation: Relative error

         Dataset            d      set size      Ours    PSWE     NProductNet   WPCE     NSDeepSets   Sinkhorn
     noisy-sphere-3       3       100–299       1.4 %    2.2 %         4.6 %    34.1 %      36.2 %      18.7 %
     noisy-sphere-6       6       100–299       1.3 %    1.4 %         1.5 %    26.9 %      29.1 %      13.7 %
     uniform              2         256         2.4 %    2.1 %         9.7 %    12.0 %      12.3 %       7.3 %
     ModelNet-small       3        20–199       2.9 %    5.7 %         8.4 %     7.7 %      10.5 %      10.1 %
     ModelNet-large       3         2047        2.6 %    2.4 %        14.0 %    15.9 %      16.6 %      14.8 %
     RNAseq              2000      20–199       1.1 %    1.2 %         1.2 %    47.7 %      48.2 %       4.0 %

            Mean relative error in approximating the 1-Wasserstein distance between point sets.



As seen in Table 2, our architecture achieves the best accuracy on most evaluation datasets. Training
times are in Table 3. Further details appear in Appendix C.2.

                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 3: 1-Wasserstein approximation: Training time

                   Dataset          Ours       PSWE         NProductNet     WPCE          NSDeepSets
                noisy-sphere-3     2.2 min        33 min         6 min     1 h 46 min          9 min
                noisy-sphere-6       4 min            1h        12 min      4 h 6 min     1 h 38 min
                uniform              3 min        51 min         7 min     3 h 36 min     1 h 27 min
                ModelNet-small       3 min        48 min         7 min     1 h 23 min         12 min
                ModelNet-large    14.2 min    1 h 19 min         8 min      3 h 5 min         40 min
                RNAseq               4 min        50 min        15 min    14 h 26 min      3 h 1 min

                                 Training times for the different architectures.



Robustness to parameter reduction Next, we evaluate our em-                        100%
bedding on the ModelNet40 object classification benchmark (Wu
                                                                                   80%
et al., 2015). This dataset consists of 3D point clouds representing
objects coming from 40 different classes.                                          60%

To demonstrate the improved representational power of our method,        40%
we used a simple   architecture of the form F (µ) = Φ(E(µ)), where                                Ours
                                                                         20%
E : S≤N Rd → Rm is the FSW embedding, Φ : Rm → RC is

                                                                                                PointNet
an MLP and C = 40 is the number of classes. We compared this              0%
                                                                                  104    105     106
architecture with PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a), which applies an MLP
                                                                                 Number of parameters
elementwise, followed by max pooling and another MLP. We eval-
uated different sizes of both architectures to assess their robustness Figure 2: ModelNet40 classifica-
to parameter reduction.                                                tion accuracy
With 300 k parameters or more, the two methods perform comparably: our model achieves 85.7 %–
86.8 % accuracy and PointNet5 achieves 84.4 %–85.6 %. However, our model is considerably more
robust with fewer parameters, as shown in Figure 2. For example, with 31 k parameters, our model
achieves 83.5 % accuracy, whereas PointNet achieves only 54.1 % with 35 k parameters.
We note that simple methods such as PointNet and ours do not achieve the best results on Mod-
elNet40. More complex methods achieve superior results by applying PointNet-based embeddings
to local neighborhoods of each point. For example, PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b) achieved 90.7 %
accuracy, and (Mohammadi et al., 2021) achieved an impressive 95.4 %. Based on our preliminary
results, we believe that combining our embedding with such methods, by employing it in their mul-
tiset aggregation steps, may enhance robustness to parameter reduction. This property can be crucial
in practical applications.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced the first injective embedding for multisets and measures that is provably
bi-Lipschitz on multisets. Our embedding is computationally efficient, and both theoretical and
empirical results indicate that it better preserves the original geometry of the data, consequently
leading to improved performance in practical learning tasks.
Our embedding has already shown promising results in subsequent work (Sverdlov et al., 2024),
where it was used to construct the first graph neural network with bi-Lipschitz Weisfeiler–Leman
(WL) separation power.
Future research directions include further exploration of the FSW embedding as a building block for
learning tasks involving non-Euclidean data, as well as extensions to broader notions of distance,
such as partial or unbalanced optimal transport.

Reproducibility Statement All experiments in this paper are fully reproducible. The code for
training and evaluation, along with the datasets and actual numerical results presented in this paper,
    5
      These results were obtained using a standard PyTorch implementation of PointNet (Xia, 2019). The origi-
nal result of PointNet’s TensorFlow implementation is 89.2 % accuracy.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


are available at the URL https://github.com/tal-amir/FSW-embedding. While we
did not use fixed random seeds for our experiments, the results are consistent across multiple runs.
Appendix C provides further technical details regarding our experiments.

Acknowledgements The authors are partially funded by ISF grant 272/23. We thank Samantha
Chen for her assistance in reproducing the experiments from (Chen & Wang, 2023).


R EFERENCES
Miika Aittala and Fredo Durand. Burst image deblurring using permutation invariant convolutional
 neural networks. In The European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), September 2018.

Jason Altschuler, Jonathan Niles-Weed, and Philippe Rigollet. Near-linear time approximation al-
  gorithms for optimal transport via Sinkhorn iteration. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.

Tal Amir, Steven Gortler, Ilai Avni, Ravina Ravina, and Nadav Dym. Neural injective functions
  for multisets, measures and graphs via a finite witness theorem. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:42516–42551, 2023.

Radu Balan and Efstratios Tsoukanis. G-invariant representations using coorbits: Bi-Lipschitz prop-
  erties, 2023a.

Radu Balan and Efstratos Tsoukanis. Relationships between the phase retrieval problem and per-
  mutation invariant embeddings. In 2023 International Conference on Sampling Theory and Ap-
  plications (SampTA), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2023b.

Radu Balan, Naveed Haghani, and Maneesh Singh. Permutation invariant representations with ap-
  plications to graph deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07546, 2022.

Erhan Bayraktar and Gaoyue Guo. Strong equivalence between metrics of Wasserstein type, 2021.

Mary L Boas. Mathematical methods in the physical sciences. John Wiley & Sons, 2006.

Nicolas Bonneel, Julien Rabin, Gabriel Peyré, and Hanspeter Pfister. Sliced and Radon Wasserstein
  barycenters of measures. Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision, 51:22–45, 2015.

Jameson Cahill, Joseph W Iverson, Dustin G Mixon, and Daniel Packer. Group-invariant max
  filtering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14039, 2022.

Jameson Cahill, Joseph W. Iverson, and Dustin G. Mixon. Towards a bilipschitz invariant theory,
  2024.

Samantha Chen and Yusu Wang. Neural approximation of Wasserstein distance via a universal archi-
  tecture for symmetric and factorwise group invariant functions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:9506–9517, 2023.

Marco Cuturi.   Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport.  In
 C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2013. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2013/
 file/af21d0c97db2e27e13572cbf59eb343d-Paper.pdf.

Pavel Dvurechensky, Alexander Gasnikov, and Alexey Kroshnin. Computational optimal transport:
  Complexity by accelerated gradient descent is better than by Sinkhorn’s algorithm. In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 1367–1376. PMLR, 2018.

Nadav Dym and Steven J Gortler. Low-dimensional invariant embeddings for universal geometric
  learning. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, pp. 1–41, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rémi Flamary, Nicolas Courty, Alexandre Gramfort, Mokhtar Z. Alaya, Aurélie Boisbunon, Stanis-
  las Chambon, Laetitia Chapel, Adrien Corenflos, Kilian Fatras, Nemo Fournier, Léo Gautheron,
  Nathalie T.H. Gayraud, Hicham Janati, Alain Rakotomamonjy, Ievgen Redko, Antoine Rolet,
  Antony Schutz, Vivien Seguy, Danica J. Sutherland, Romain Tavenard, Alexander Tong, and
  Titouan Vayer. Pot: Python optimal transport. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(78):
  1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-451.html.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neu-
  ral message passing for quantum chemistry. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1263–1272. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v70/gilmer17a.html.
Branko Grünbaum. Convex Polytopes, volume 221. Springer Science & Business Media, 2003.
Doron Haviv, Russell Zhang Kunes, Thomas Dougherty, Cassandra Burdziak, Tal Nawy, Anna
  Gilbert, and Dana Pe’Er. Wasserstein wormhole: Scalable optimal transport distance with trans-
  formers. ArXiv, 2024.
Piotr Indyk and Nitin Thaper. Fast image retrieval via embeddings. ICCV ’03: Proceedings of the
  3rd International Workshop on Statistical and Computational Theories of Vision, 2003.
Frank Jones. Lebesgue integration on Euclidean space. Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2001.
Keisuke Kawano, Satoshi Koide, and Takuro Kutsuna. Learning Wasserstein isometric embedding
  for point clouds. In 2020 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 473–482. IEEE, 2020.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
  works. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Soheil Kolouri, Se Rim Park, and Gustavo K Rohde. The Radon cumulative distribution transform
  and its application to image classification. IEEE transactions on image processing, 25(2):920–
  934, 2015.
Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam Kosiorek, Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh. Set
  transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 3744–3753. PMLR, 2019.
Yuzhe Lu, Xinran Liu, Andrea Soltoggio, and Soheil Kolouri. Slosh: Set locality sensitive hash-
  ing via sliced-Wasserstein embeddings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
  Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 2566–2576, 2024.
Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Hadar Serviansky, and Yaron Lipman. Provably powerful graph
  networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Haggai Maron, Or Litany, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. On learning sets of symmetric elements.
  In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6734–6744.
  PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/maron20a.
  html.
Seyed Saber Mohammadi, Yiming Wang, and Alessio Del Bue. Pointview-gcn: 3d shape classifica-
  tion with multi-view point clouds. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing
  (ICIP), pp. 3103–3107. IEEE, 2021.
Navid Naderializadeh, Joseph F Comer, Reed Andrews, Heiko Hoffmann, and Soheil Kolouri. Pool-
  ing by sliced-Wasserstein embedding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  3389–3400, 2021.
Assaf Naor and Gideon Schechtman. Planar earthmover is not in L1 . SIAM Journal on Computing,
  37(3):804–826, 2007.
James Orlin. A faster strongly polynomial minimum cost flow algorithm. In Proceedings of the
  Twentieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 377–387, 1988.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sergey Pozdnyakov and Michele Ceriotti.       Smooth, exact rotational symmetriza-
  tion for deep learning on point clouds.   In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson,
  K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 36, pp. 79469–79501. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  fb4a7e3522363907b26a86cc5be627ac-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Charles R. Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J. Guibas. PointNet: Deep learning on point
  sets for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2017a.

Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. PointNet++: Deep hierarchical fea-
  ture learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017b.

Yonatan Sverdlov, Yair Davidson, Nadav Dym, and Tal Amir. FSW-GNN: A bi-Lipschitz WL-
  equivalent graph neural network, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.09118.

Puoya Tabaghi and Yusu Wang. Universal representation of permutation-invariant functions on vec-
  tors and tensors. In Claire Vernade and Daniel Hsu (eds.), Proceedings of The 35th International
  Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, volume 237 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1134–1187. PMLR, 25–28 Feb 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v237/tabaghi24a.html.

Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.

Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2008.

Edward Wagstaff, Fabian Fuchs, Martin Engelcke, Ingmar Posner, and Michael A Osborne. On the
  limitations of representing functions on sets. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 6487–6494. PMLR, 2019.

Edward Wagstaff, Fabian B Fuchs, Martin Engelcke, Michael A Osborne, and Ingmar Posner. Uni-
  versal approximation of functions on sets. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(151):1–56,
  2022.

Larry Wasserman. All of statistics: A concise course in statistical inference, volume 26. Springer,
  2004.

Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Linguang Zhang, Xiaoou Tang, and Jianxiong
  Xiao. 3d shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1912–1920, 2015.

Fei Xia. PointNet.pytorch. https://github.com/fxia22/pointnet.pytorch, 2019.

Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Zizhen Yao, Cindy TJ Van Velthoven, Thuc Nghi Nguyen, Jeff Goldy, Adriana E Sedeno-Cortes,
  Fahimeh Baftizadeh, Darren Bertagnolli, Tamara Casper, Megan Chiang, Kirsten Crichton, et al.
  A taxonomy of transcriptomic cell types across the isocortex and hippocampal formation. Cell,
  184(12):3222–3241, 2021.

Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbhakhsh, Barnabás Póczos, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural
 Information Processing Systems, NIPS’17, pp. 3394–3404, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017. Curran
 Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510860964.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Muhan Zhang, Zhicheng Cui, Marion Neumann, and Yixin Chen. An end-to-end deep learning
 architecture for graph classification. In Sheila A. McIlraith and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Pro-
 ceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th
 innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium on Ed-
 ucational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, Febru-
 ary 2-7, 2018, pp. 4438–4445. AAAI Press, 2018. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.V32I1.11782. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11782.
Yan Zhang, Jonathon Hare, and Adam Prügel-Bennett. FSPool: Learning set representations with
  featurewise sort pooling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02795, 2019.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The appendices are organized as follows: Appendix A provides additional details on the FSW em-
bedding beyond those covered in the main text. Appendix B provides proofs for our theoretical
results. Appendix C presents technical details of our numerical experiments.

A       F URTHER DETAILS ON THE FSW EMBEDDING
In this appendix, we discuss additional aspects of the FSW embedding. In Appendix A.1, we extend
  FSW
Em     from probability distributions to measures of arbitrary total mass while retaining injectivity. In
Appendix A.2, we present explicit formulas for practical computation and analyze the computational
complexity of the embedding.

A.1     E XTENSION TO MEASURES WITH ARBITRARY TOTAL MASS

Here, we extend the definition of the FSW embedding to measures that are not necessarily probabil-
ity measures—that is, measures whose weights do not sum to 1—while maintaining injectivity. This
extension is crucial for distinguishing multisets of different sizes when their element proportions
are identical (as in footnote 3, Page 4), as well as for ensuring continuity when handling the empty
multiset as input.
This is particularly important when using the embedding as a message aggregation function in graph
neural networks, since (1) in graph-learning tasks, vertex neighborhoods of different sizes but with
the same neighbor proportions are typically treated as distinct, and (2) isolated vertices must aggre-
gate messages over the empty multiset. In common graph architectures that require weight normal-
ization, this issue is usually addressed by adding self-loops to ensure that no vertex has an empty
neighborhood. The solution presented here eliminates the need for such modifications to the graph
structure.
Denote by M≤N (Ω) the collection of all measures with at most N support points over a measurable
domain Ω ⊆ Rd . Any measure µ ∈ M≤N (Ω) can be represented by points x(1) , . . . , x(N ) ∈ Ω
and corresponding weights w1 , . . . , wN ≥ 0 as a weighted sum of Dirac’s delta functions
                                                    N
                                                    X
                                              µ=          wi δx(i) .                                        (14)
                                                    i=1

Definition. Let µ be as in (14). The total mass of µ is defined as
                                                          N
                                                          X
                                               µ(Ω) =           wi .
                                                          i=1


A first step towards extending E FSW from P≤N (Ω) to M≤N (Ω) while maintaining injectivity is
to simply add an extra output coordinate that encodes the total mass of the input measure. Define
  FSW
Êm    : M≤N (Ω) \ 0 → Rm for an input µ as in (14) by
                                   FSW                 FSW
                                                                                             (15)

                                 Êm   (µ) := µ(Ω), Em−1    (µ̂) ,
where µ̂ is the measure µ normalized to have a total mass of 1:
                                              N
                                                             !
                                      µ     X          wi
                              µ̂ :=       =         PN          δx(i) .                                     (16)
                                    µ(Ω)     i=1      j=1 wj

                                                                                                    FSW
It is easy to verify that with
                              the above definition, by Theorem 4.1, if m ≥ 2N       d + 2N then Êm
is injective on M≤N R \ 0, i.e., the collection of all measures in M≤N R excluding the zero
                          d                                                      d

measure µ = 0, for which µ̂ is not defined.6 Moreover, it further follows from the theorem that
                                        FSW
m ≥ 2N d + 2 suffices to ensure that Êm    distinguishes between distinct pairs of input multisets of
size ≤ N , even if their element proportions are identical and they differ only in their cardinality.
                                                                                                         m−1
    6
     Strictly speaking, it is injective for almost any choice of the embedding parameters v (k) , ξ (k)      , as
                                                                                                         k=1
in the statement of Theorem 4.1. We ignore this here for brevity.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   FSW
One limitation of the definition in (15) is that Êm   is not defined at the zero measure µ = 0 and,
moreover, has a jump discontinuity there. This issue can be remedied by padding input measures
whose total mass is below a chosen threshold, assigning the complementary mass to the zero vector
in Rd . The result is then normalized to a probability distribution, as before.
Namely, we choose a threshold ρ > 0 and define the regularized measure µρ for µ ∈ M≤N Rd by


                                     ( µ
                                       µ(Ω)                   µ(Ω) ≥ ρ,
                              µρ :=           µ(Ω)

                                                          µ                                     (17)
                                         1 − ρ δ0 + ρ µ(Ω) < ρ,

                                                                     FSW
where δ0 is Dirac’s delta function at 0 ∈ Rd . We then redefine Êm       to use µρ rather than µ̂:
                                     FSW                   FSW
                                                                                                    (18)

                                  Êm    (µ) := µ(Ω), Em−1      (µρ ) .
                               FSW
With the definition in (18), Êm    is well-defined on the whole of M≤N Rd . Moreover, it is con-

tinuous and has finite directional derivatives everywhere, including the zero measure. As discussed
                                     FSW
above, if m ≥ 2N d + 2N , then Êm        is injective, and for injectivity on multisets, m ≥ 2N d + 2
suffices.
Note that ρ does not have to be small. In fact, very small values of ρ lead to large gradients of
  FSW
Êm    near the zero measure. In our experiments with a message-passing neural network based on
the FSW embedding (Sverdlov et al., 2024), we found that values in the range 0.1 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 work
well in practice.

Maintaining homogeneity In some settings, it is desirable to have an embedding that is positively
homogeneous with respect to the input points7 while still encoding the input multiset size. This
property is particularly useful in architectures designed to approximate multiset functions that are
known to be homogeneous, yet required to distinguish multisets of different sizes and accommodate
the empty multiset.
Note that this necessitates a slight compromise of the injectivity, as any such embedding inevitably
maps all measures supported on the zero vector 0 ∈ Rd to the zero vector 0 ∈ Rm , regardless of
their total mass.
To achieve this homogeneity, a straightforward solution is to use a slight modification of (18) and
                                                                            FSW
multiply the first coordinate µ(Ω) by the norm of the internal embedding Em−1   (µρ ):

                            FSW            FSW                  FSW
                          Êm   (µ) := Em−1    (µρ ) · µ(Ω), Em−1   (µρ ) .                    (19)

                                                          FSW                 FSW
With the formulation (19), the positive homogeneity of Em−1    implies that Êm   is also positively
                                                   FSW
homogeneous. Moreover, it can be verified that Êm with this formulation still distinguishes be-
tween any pair of distinct input measures, except for the case that both measures are supported at
0 ∈ Rd .

A.2      P RACTICAL COMPUTATION

Here we present formulas that facilitate the practical computation of E FSW , and then analyze its
computational complexity.
We start by introducing notation that shall be used to express quantile functions of distributions in
P≤N (R).
Definition A.1. For a vector x = (x1 , . . . , xN ) ∈ RN , the order statistics x(1) , . . . , x(N ) are the
coordinates of x sorted in increasing order: x(1) ≤ . . . ≤ x(N ) . We define the sorting permutation
                                     σ(x) = (σ1 (x), . . . , σN (x)) ∈ SN
to be a permutation that satisfies xσi (x) = x(i) for all i ∈ [N ], with ties broken arbitrarily.
   7
       See definition in Section 4


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now show how Qµ (t) can be expressed explicitly in terms of the order statistics of the support
of µ. Let
                                     XN
                                µ=       wi xi ∈ P≤N (R)
                                               i=1
and denote x = (x1 , . . . , xN ), w = (w1 , . . . , wN ). Then for all t ∈ [0, 1), it can be shown that
                                        Qµ (t) = x(kmin (σ(x),w,t)) ,                                           (20)
where kmin (σ, w, t) is defined for σ = (σ1 , . . . , σN ) ∈ SN by
                     kmin (σ, w, t) := min {k ∈ [N ] | wσ1 + · · · + wσk > t}.                                  (21)
It can be seen in (20) and (21) that Qµ (t) is monotone increasing with respect to t. Moreover,
                        Qµ (0) = ess min (µ) and               lim Qµ (t) = ess max (µ),
                                                               t↗1

with ess min (µ) and ess max (µ) denoting the essential minimum and maximum of the distribution
µ. We thus augment the definition of Qµ to [0, 1] by setting Qµ (1) = ess max (µ).
Note. With the above definition, Qµ (t) is right-continuous on [0, 1], is continuous at both end points,
and since it is monotone increasing, it only has jump discontinuities.
Using the identity (20), E(µ; v, ξ) can be expressed as
                                             Pk
                                       N Z
                                      X       i=1 wσi (v T X )
               E(µ; v, ξ) =2(1 + ξ)                            QvT µ (t) cos (2πξt)dt
                                              P       k−1
                                        k=1    t=     i=1 wσi (v T X )

                                        N
                                        X     Z Pk   i=1 wσi (v T X )
                                                                          v T X (k) cos (2πξt)dt                (22)

                            =2(1 + ξ)
                                               t= k−1
                                                 P
                                        k=1       i=1 wσ (v T X )
                                                                i

                                     N                                     Pk
                                 1+ξ X                                       i=1 wσ (v T X )
                                              v T X (k) [sin (2πξt)]t=Pk−1 iw

                            =2                                                                         ,
                                 2πξ                                            i=1      σi (v T X )
                                       k=1
                   P0
under the notion     i=1 wσi (v T X) = 0. Rearranging terms gives us the alternative formula
                              N            k
                                                          !
                        1+ξ X             X                h                        i
                                                             v T X (k) − v T X (k+1) ,                          (23)

         E(µ; v, ξ) = 2          sin 2πξ       wσi (vT X)
                         2πξ              i=1
                             k=1

with the definition of v X (k) extended to k = N + 1 by
                        T


                                      v T X (N +1) := 0.


To prevent numerical instability for values of ξ near zero, the explicit division by 2πξ can be avoided
by replacing the sine function in (23) with the normalized sinc function
                                               (
                                                  sin (πx)
                                   sinc(x) :=        πx , x ̸= 0,
                                                  0,         x = 0,
which is implemented in a numerically stable way in most standard numerical libraries.
This yields the alternative formulas to (22) and (23):
                                         N                                 k    P
                                                                           i=1 wσ (v T X )
                                         X
                                                v T X (k) [t · sinc(2ξt)]t=Pk−1 iw                              (24)

                E(µ; v, ξ) = 2(1 + ξ)                                                                       ,
                                                                                        i=1   σi (v T X )
                                         k=1
and
                         N k
                                               !                k
                                                                                   !
                         X X                                    X                   h                           i
                                     wσi (vT X) sinc 2ξ                                  v T X (k) − v T X (k+1) .

E(µ; v, ξ) = 2(1 + ξ)                                                 wσi (vT X)
                         k=1   i=1                              i=1
                                                                                                                (25)

Using  the above formulas,
                            the following theorem specifies the complexity of computing
 FSW       (k) (k) m
                          .

Em µ; v , ξ         k=1


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                  m
                           FSW

Theorem A.2. The function Em     µ; v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 : P≤N Rd → Rm can be computed in
O(mN d + mN log N ) time.
                                            m
                     FSW
Proof. Computing Em        µ; v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 consists of the computation of E FSW µ; v (k) , ξ (k)


independently for k = 1, . . . , m. In (23) it can be seen that the most expensive operations in each
such computation are: (1) the computation of N inner products in Rd , and (2) finding the sorting
permutation of these inner products. Therefore, each such computation takes O(N d + N log N )
time.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B       P ROOFS

This appendix contains proofs for the theoretical results presented in the main text. Appendix B.2
provides proofs for our probabilistic results Theorem 3.2 and Corollary 3.3, which rely on prop-
erties of the cosine transform discussed in Appendix B.1. Readers interested only in injectivity
and bi-Lipschitzness may skip directly to Appendix B.3, which contains proofs for the results from
Section 4.

B.1     T HE COSINE TRANSFORM

The cosine transform takes a major role in our proofs. We now define it and present some of its
properties. The results in this subsection appear in standard textbooks such as (Jones, 2001; Boas,
2006). We include them here for completeness.
In the following discussion, Lp denotes the space Lp (R), defined by
                Lp (R) := {f : R → R | f is Lebesgue measurable and ∥f ∥Lp < ∞},
with                                      ( R
                                                          p  1/p
                                                   |f (t)| dt        p ∈ [1, ∞)
                              ∥f ∥Lp :=         R
                                              ess supt∈R |f (t)|     p = ∞.
Definition B.1. Let f ∈ L1 such that f (t) = 0 for all t < 0. Define the cosine transform of f is
                                           Z ∞
                               f“(ξ) := 2       f (t) cos (2πξt)dt                              (26)
                                                    0

for ξ ≥ 0.

Note that if f ∈ L1 , then
                                               f“        ≤ 2∥f ∥L1                                 (27)
                                                    L∞
since                         Z ∞                                    Z ∞
                  f“(ξ) ≤ 2         |f (t)| · |cos (2πξt)|dt ≤ 2           |f (t)|dt = 2∥f ∥L1 .   (28)
                              0                                      0

Thus, if f ∈ L1 , then f“ ∈ L∞ . The following lemma proves a better bound as ξ → ∞ if f is
monotonous, and shows that the cosine transform preserves the L2 -norm.
Lemma B.2 (Properties of the cosine transform). Let f ∈ L1 such that f (t) = 0 for all t < 0.
Then:

        1. If f ∈ L1 ∩ L2 then           Z ∞                  Z ∞              2
                                                         2
                                               (f (t)) dt =              f“(t) dt.                 (29)
                                          0                    0

        2. Suppose that f ∈ L1 ∩ L∞ , and that f is monotonous on an interval I = (0, T ) and
           vanishes almost everywhere outside of I. Then for any ξ > 0,
                                                            3
                                                    f“(ξ) ≤    ∥f ∥L∞ .                            (30)
                                                            πξ

Proof. We start from part 1. Throughout the proof, we consider the natural extension of f“(ξ) to
negative values of ξ according to (26), namely

                                               f“(−ξ) = f“(ξ).

Let fe (t) be the even component of f ,
                                  fe (t) := 21 (f (t) + f (−t)) = 12 f (|t|).


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then
                   Z ∞                                  Z ∞
                                                  (a)
       V



       fe (ξ) :=          fe (t)e−2πiξt dt =                      fe (t) cos (−2πξt)dt
                    −∞                                       −∞
                   Z ∞
                          1
             =            2 (f (t) + f (−t)) cos (−2πξt)dt
                    −∞
                    Z 0                                                               Z ∞
             = 12            (f (t) + f (−t)) cos (−2πξt)dt + 21                               (f (t) + f (−t)) cos (−2πξt)dt
                     −∞                                                                0
                    Z 0                                               Z ∞
             = 12            f (−t) cos (−2πξt)dt + 21                       f (t) cos (−2πξt)dt
                     −∞                                                 0
                    Z 0                                               Z ∞
         ===== 21   f (r) cos (2πξr)(−dr) + 12                               f (t) cos (2πξt)dt
          r=−t    ∞                                0
                Z ∞
            =       f (t) cos (2πξt)dt = 12 f“(ξ),
                    0

with (a) holding since the Fourier transform of a real even function is real. Hence,
                                                                  V



                                                  f“(ξ) = 2fe (ξ),                ξ ∈ R.                                        (31)

Now,
                        Z ∞              2              Z ∞                  2
                                f“(ξ)        dξ = 12               f“(ξ)         dξ
                         0                               −∞
                                                          2  (a)       (b)        2
                                                                                 2 (c)
                                                                            V

                                                                                       2
                                                  = 12 f“ 2 = 2 fe 2 = 2∥fe ∥L2 = ∥f ∥L2
                                                         L           L
                                                     Z ∞              Z ∞
                                                                 2                2
                                                  =      (f (t)) dt =      (f (t)) dt,
                                                        −∞                             0

where (a) is by (31), (b) holds by the Plancherel theorem, and (c) holds since
                                Z ∞                   Z ∞
                          2                   2               1
                                                                                  2
                    ∥fe ∥L2 =         (fe (t)) dt =           2 (f (t) + f (−t)) dt
                                  −∞                    −∞
                                Z ∞h                                                i
                                       1         2   1                 1          2
                             =         4 (f (t))   + 2 f (t)f (−t)  +  4 (f (−t))     dt
                                  −∞
                                  Z ∞h                           i
                                                 2             2
                             = 14        (f (t)) + (f (−t)) dt
                                              −∞
                                            Z ∞                             Z 0
                                                              2                                    2
                                  = 41             (f (t)) dt + 41                    (f (−t)) dt
                                              0                              −∞
                                            Z ∞                             Z ∞
                                                              2                                2              2
                                  = 21             (f (t)) dt = 21                    (f (t)) dt = 12 ∥f ∥L2 ,
                                              0                              −∞

and thus part 1 holds. We now prove part 2.
Suppose first that f is differentiable on I. Using integration by parts, we have
                            Z T
                 f“(ξ) = 2       f (t) cos (2πξt)dt
                                  0
                                                        A1
                                        z               }|              {                              A2
                                        "                         #T                   z
                                                                                       Z T
                                                                                                       }|         {
                               1                                              1
                             =    · f (t) sin (2πξt)                        −    ·             f ′ (t) sin (2πξt)dt .
                               πξ                                             πξ           0
                                                                      t=0

Let us now bound the terms A1 and A2 .
                          |A1 | = |f (T ) sin (2πξT ) − f (0) · 0| ≤ |f (T )| ≤ ∥f ∥L∞ ,


                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and
                                            Z T
                                |A2 | =           f ′ (t) sin (2πξt)dt
                                             0
                                            Z T
                                        ≤         |f ′ (t)| · |sin (2πξt)|dt
                                             0
                                            Z T                          Z T
                                                                   (a)
                                        ≤         |f ′ (t)|dt =                f ′ (t)dt
                                             0                            0

                                        = |f (T ) − f (0)| ≤ 2∥f ∥L∞ ,
with (a) holding since f does not change sign on (0, T ) due to the monotonicity of f .
                         ′

In conclusion, we have
                                        1                    3
                                f“(ξ) ≤    (|A1 | + |A2 |) ≤    ∥f ∥L∞ .                         (32)
                                        πξ                   πξ
To remove the differentiability assumption on f , we use the technique of mollification, and replace
f by a sequence of smooth functions that converges to f in L1 ; see Chapter 7, Section C.3 of (Jones,
2001).
For the smooth functions to be monotonous, we first define a modified function f˜ : R → R
                                          +
                                         f (0 ) t ≤ 0
                                 f˜(t) := f (t)      t ∈ (0, T )                                 (33)
                                           f (T − ) t ≥ T,
                                         

where f (0+ ) and f (T − ) are the one-sided limits of f (t) as t approaches 0, T respectively from
within the interval (0, T ). Note that the monotonicity of f , combined with the fact that f ∈ L∞ ,
implies that both limits must be finite.
Now, f˜ coincides with f on I, is monotonous on R, and by construction,

                                                 f˜        = ∥f ∥L∞ .
                                                      L∞

Let ϕε : R → R for ε > 0 be the mollifying function defined in (Jones, 2001), page 176. We now
list a few properties of ϕε .

      1. ϕε is infinitely differentiable and compactly supported.
      2. ϕε is radial, i.e. ϕε (t) = ϕε (−t).
      3. ϕε (t) ≥ 0 for all t, and ϕε (t) > 0 iff |t| < ε.
      4. R ϕε (t)dt = 1.
         R


Let fε : R → R for ε > 0 be defined by
                                Z                          Z
                fε (t) := χI (t) f (r)ϕε (t − r)dr = χI (t) f˜(t + r)ϕε (r)dr,
                                  ˜                                                              (34)
                                    R                                            R
with χI denoting the characteristic function of I. From the rightmost part of (34), it is evident that
the monotonicity of f˜ implies that fε is monotonous on I.
Also note that
                                                       Z
                                 |fε (t)| ≤ χI (t)             f˜(t + r) ϕε (r)dr
                                                           R
                                                           Z
                                            ≤ f˜                   ϕε (r)dr                      (35)
                                                      L∞       R

                                            = f˜           = ∥f ∥L∞ .
                                                      L∞


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus,
                            ∥fε ∥L1 ≤ T ∥f ∥L∞ ,        ∥fε ∥L∞ ≤ ∥f ∥L∞ ,                       (36)
and hence fε ∈ L1 ∩ L∞ .
From the discussion in (Jones, 2001), fε satisfies:

        1. fε ∈ C ∞ (I)
        2. limε→0 ∥fε − f ∥L1 = 0

So far we have shown that for any ε > 0, fε is in L1 ∩ L∞ , is monotonous and smooth on I, and
vanishes outside of I. Therefore its cosine transform satisfies
                                        (a) 3          (b) 3
                                f“ε (ξ) ≤      ∥fε ∥L∞ ≤      ∥f ∥L∞ ,                    (37)
                                            πξ             πξ
where (a) is by (32) and (b) is by (36). Thus,
                                            Z T
                        1 “         “
                        2 fε (ξ) − f (ξ) =      (fε (t) − f (t)) cos (2πξt)dt
                                               0

                                           ≤∥fε − f ∥L1 ∥cos (2πξt)∥L∞
                                           ≤∥fε − f ∥L1 −→ 0.
                                                          ε→0

In conclusion,
                                   3         (37)
                                      ∥f ∥L∞ ≥ f“ε (ξ) −→ f“(ξ)
                                   πξ                  ε→0
and therefore
                                                  3
                                          f“(ξ) ≤    ∥f ∥L∞ .
                                                  πξ


B.2     P ROBABILISTIC PROPERTIES

In this subsection, we prove our probabilistic claims on E FSW . First, we show that E FSW (µ; v, ξ)
is uniformly bounded for all embedding parameters (v, ξ) and input distributions µ ∈ P≤N (Ω),
assuming that Ω ⊂ Rd is bounded. We then proceed to prove Theorem 3.2.
For the discussion below, we extend the definition of quantile functions Qµ : [0, 1) → R to functions
on the whole interval Qµ : R → R, using the convention Qµ (t) = 0 for t ∈       / [0, 1], and defining
Qµ (1) to be the limit limt↗1 Qµ (t), which is known to exist, since Qµ is bounded and monotonous.
Let us start by defining the notation
                          ∆(µ, µ̃; v, ξ) := E FSW (µ; v, ξ) − E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ) .                 (38)

We define a pseudonorm for distributions in P≤N Rd :


                                 ∥µ∥Wp := Wp (µ, δ0 ),      p ∈ [1, ∞],                          (39)

where δ0 denotes Dirac’s delta function in 0 ∈ Rd , that is, the distribution
                                                                             that assigns a mass of 1
to the point 0 ∈ Rd . Note that ∥ · ∥Wp is not a true norm, since P≤N Rd is not a vector space.
The following claim provides useful bounds on the distance between two distributions and on the
quantile function of a projected distribution, in terms of the above pseudonorm.

Claim B.3. For any µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N Rd and v ∈ Sd−1 , 0 ≤ t ≤ 1,
                            SW(µ, µ̃) ≤ W(µ, µ̃) ≤ ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ ,                              (40)

                                         QvT µ (t) ≤ ∥µ∥W∞ .                                     (41)


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. The left inequality in (40) is a well-known property of the sliced Wasserstein distance; see
e.g. Eq. (3.2) of (Bayraktar & Guo, 2021). The right inequality is easy to verify by considering
the transport plans that transport each of the distributions µ, µ̃ to δ0 and using the triangle for the
Wasserstein distance.
Inequality (41) can be proved by showing that the quantile function QvT µ only admits values that
are support points of the projected distribution v T µ, and any such point y ∈ R is an inner product
y = v T x of v with some x ∈ Rd that is a support point of µ.

The following lemma shows that E FSW (µ; v, ξ) is indeed bounded, as mentioned above, and lays
the groundwork for proving Theorem 3.2.

Lemma B.4. Let µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N Rd and v ∈ Sd−1 . Then
                               E FSW (µ; v, ξ) ≤ 3∥µ∥W∞     ∀ξ ≥ 0,                                (42)
                                                                                                   (43)
                               2                   2  T   T

                        Eξ∼Dξ ∆ (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) = W v µ, v µ̃ ,
                      STDξ∼Dξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) ≤ 3 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ W v T µ, v T µ̃ .                (44)



Proof. By the definitions of E FSW and the cosine transform in (6), (26) respectively,
                                     E FSW (µ; v, ξ) = (1 + ξ)Q
                                                              “ vT µ (ξ),                          (45)
where Q“ vT µ is the cosine transform of the quantile function QvT µ . Since QvT µ (t) is monotonous
and vanishes outside of q ∈ [0, 1], by part 2 of Lemma B.2, we have that
                                                       (41)
                                “ vT µ (ξ) ≤ 3 QvT µ ∞ ≤ 3 ∥µ∥
                                Q                                                                  (46)
                                                     L         W∞ .
                                             πξ             πξ

By (28),
                                                        (a)
                           “ vT µ (ξ) ≤ 2 QvT µ 1 ≤ 2 QvT µ ∞ ≤ 2∥µ∥
                           Q                                         W∞ ,
                                                                                                   (47)
                                                L           L

with (a) holding since QvT µ is supported on [0, 1]. Thus, by (46) and (47),

                                 “                      3
                                 QvT µ (ξ) ≤ min 2,          ∥µ∥W∞ .
                                                       πξ
Combined with (45), the above implies
                                                           (a)

               FSW                              3                3
           E         (µ; v, ξ) ≤ (1 + ξ) min 2,      ∥µ∥W∞ ≤ 2 +    ∥µ∥W∞ ≤ 3∥µ∥W∞ ,
                                                πξ               π
where (a) can be verified by simple analysis. Thus, (42) holds. Note that since E FSW (µ; v, ξ) is
bounded as a function of ξ, so is ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ), and therefore both have finite moments of all orders
with respect to ξ.
Now,
                                          h                                 2 i
               Eξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) = Eξ E FSW (µ; v, ξ) − E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ)

                                        Z ∞                                              2
                                                 1
                                                                  2 “          “
                                    =                 2 (1 + ξ) Qv T µ (ξ) − Qv T µ̃ (ξ)     dξ
                                         0   (1 + ξ)
                                        Z ∞                             2
                                    =         Q“ vT µ (ξ) − Q
                                                            “ vT µ̃ (ξ) dξ
                                        Z0 ∞
                                    (a)                                2
                                    =         QvT µ (t) − QvT µ̃ (t) dt
                                          0
                                         Z 1
                                                                      2
                                   =           QvT µ (t) − QvT µ̃ (t) dt
                                          0
                                   (b)
                                   = W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃ ,



                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with (a) following from part 1 of Lemma B.2 and the linearity of the cosine transform, and (b)
holding by the identity (4). Thus, (43) holds.
To bound the variance of ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ), note that
                           h                   2 i                         2
Varξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) = Eξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ)        − Eξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ)


                      (43)                                         2
                       = Eξ ∆4 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) − W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃

                           h                                   2                 i
                       = Eξ E FSW (µ; v, ξ) − E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ) · ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) − W 4 v T µ, v T µ̃

                           h                                       2               i
                       ≤ Eξ E FSW (µ; v, ξ) + E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ) · ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) − W 4 v T µ, v T µ̃


                      (42) h                          2                  i
                       ≤ Eξ 3∥µ∥W∞ + 3∥µ̃∥W∞ · ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) − W 4 v T µ, v T µ̃


                                                 2
                       = 9 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ · Eξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) − W 4 v T µ, v T µ̃


                      (43)                       2
                       = 9 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ · W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃ − W 4 v T µ, v T µ̃

                                                 2
                       ≤ 9 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ · W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃ ,


and thus (44) holds.
This concludes the proof of Lemma B.4.

Let us now prove Theorem 3.2.
Theorem 3.2. (Statement in Section 3) Let µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N (BR ), with                   d
                                                                        BR ⊂ R being the closed
ℓ2 -norm ball of radius R, centered at zero. Let v ∼ Uniform S    d−1
                                                                       , ξ ∼ Dξ . Then
                            h                                   2
                                                                  i
                        Ev,ξ E FSW (µ; v, ξ) − E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ)     = SW 2 (µ, µ̃),         (7)
                            h                                   2
                                                                  i
                     STDv,ξ E FSW (µ; v, ξ) − E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ)      ≤ 13 · R2 .             (8)

Proof. Eq. (7) holds since
                        Ev,ξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) = Ev Eξ|v ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ)


                                              (43)
                                               = Ev W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃


                                              (5)
                                              = SW 2 (µ, µ̃).
We now prove (8).
                         (a)
Varv,ξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) = Ev Varξ|v ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) + Varv Eξ|v ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ)


                        (43)
                         = Ev Varξ|v ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) + Varv W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃


                        (44)  h                       2               i
                         ≤ Ev 9 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ · W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃ + Varv W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃


                                                 2
                          = 9 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ · Ev W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃ + Varv W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃


                         (5)                     2
                         = 9 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ · SW 2 (µ, µ̃) + Varv W 2 v T µ, v T µ̃

                                                 2
                          ≤ 9 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ · SW 2 (µ, µ̃) + Ev W 4 v T µ, v T µ̃


                        (40)                     2                     2        h                4 i
                         ≤ 9 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ · ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ + Ev ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞
                                                  4
                          = 10 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞ ,
where (a) is by (Wasserman, 2004, Theorem 3.27, pg. 55). Now, since
                                      ∥µ∥W∞ , ∥µ̃∥W∞ ≤ R,


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we have
                                                                 4
                    Varv,ξ ∆2 (µ, µ̃; v, ξ) ≤ 10 ∥µ∥W∞ + ∥µ̃∥W∞


                                                        4
                                            ≤ 10 · (2R) = 160 · R4 ≤ 132 · R4
and therefore (8) holds.

B.3   I NJECTIVITY AND BI -L IPSCHITZNESS
                                                   FSW
Theorem 4.1. (Statement in Section 4) Let Em                             → Rm be as in (9), with

                                                       : P≤N Rd
                m
 v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 drawn i.i.d. from Uniform Sd−1 × Dξ . Then:


                                                    FSW

      1. If m ≥ 2N d + 1, then with probability 1, Em   is injective on S≤N Rd .
                                                         FSW

      2. If m ≥ 2N d + 2N − 1, then with probability 1, Em   is injective on P≤N Rd .

Proof. Our proof relies on the theory of σ-subanalytic functions, introduced in (Amir et al., 2023).
This theory defines and studies a class of sets called σ-subanalytic sets and a corresponding class
of functions called σ-subanalytic functions. These definitions are technically involved and require
an elaborate construction, which we do not include here. However, our proof is self-contained, and
we state the relevant properties of these constructs. For a more detailed exposition, we refer the
interested reader to (Amir et al., 2023, Appendix A).
The main result of this theory, which plays a central role in our proof, is the Finite Witness Theorem
(Amir et al., 2023, Theorem A.2). This theorem is a powerful tool for proving the injectivity of
parametric functions. Essentially, it enables reducing an infinite family of equality constraints to a
finite subfamily chosen randomly, while maintaining equivalence with probability 1.
We begin by stating the full version of the Finite Witness Theorem. The new concepts introduced in
the theorem statement will be explained below.
Theorem B.5 (Finite Witness Theorem). Let M ⊆ Rp and W ⊆ Rq be σ-subanalytic sets of
dimensions D and Dθ respectively. Let F : M × W → R be a σ-subanalytic function. Define the
set
                            N := {z ∈ M | F (z; θ) = 0, ∀θ ∈ W}.
Suppose that for all z ∈ M \ N ,
                                  dim {θ ∈ W | F (z; θ) = 0} ≤ Dθ − 1.                           (48)

Then for generic θ (1) , . . . , θ (D+1) ∈ WD+1 ,
                               n                                       o
                     N = z ∈ M F z; θ (i) = 0, ∀i = 1, . . . , D + 1 .

Moreover, if W is an open and connected subset of Rq , and F (z; θ) is analytic as a function of θ
for all fixed z ∈ M, then condition (48) is not required, as it is automatically satisfied.

The function F (z; θ) in the theorem can be regarded as representing a parametric family of con-
straints on z, parametrized by θ: a point z ∈ M belongs to the feasible set N if it satisfies the
constraints F (z; θ) = 0 for all parameter vectors θ ∈ W. The vectors θ are called witness vectors.
The theorem essentially states that, if one draws a sufficiently large number of witness vectors from
W at random, then with probability 1, that set of vectors is sufficient to fully determine N .
The number of required vectors depends on the dimension of M. The notion of dimension used in
the theorem is the Hausdorff dimension, which coincides with the standard notion of dimension for
vector spaces and smooth manifolds. The condition (48) is called the dimension deficiency condition.
Our next step is to show how Theorem 4.1 follows from Theorem B.5, assuming the latter’s assump-
tions are satisfied. We then establish that these assumptions indeed hold. First, we prove part 2 of
Theorem 4.1. To this end, we must choose the appropriate M, W and F . First, set
                                M = Rd×N × Rd×N × ∆N × ∆N ,


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ∆N is the probability simplex in  RN . Namely, M is the set of parameters required to describe
pairs of distributions µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N Rd :
                             n                                              o
                      M=        X, X̃, w, w̃   X, X̃ ∈ Rd×N , w, w̃ ∈ ∆N .
Throughout our proof, we use the convention
                                       N
                                       X                              N
                                                                      X
                                  µ=         wi δx(i) ,        µ̃ =         w̃i δx̃(i) .
                                       i=1                            i=1
Since dim ∆N = N − 1, the dimension of M is
                                dim M = 2N d + 2N − 2.                                                 (49)

Second, set W to be the space of embedding parameters
                             W = (v, ξ) v ∈ Sd−1 , ξ ∈ (0, ∞) .


Now, define the function F : M × W → R,

               F X, X̃, w, w̃; v, ξ := E FSW (X, w; v, ξ) − E FSW X̃, w̃; v, ξ ,               (50)

where, by abuse of notation, E FSW (X, w; v, ξ) denotes E FSW (µ; v, ξ) and E FSW X̃, w̃; v, ξ de-
notes E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ), with µ, µ̃ being the measures defined by (X, w) and (X̃, w̃), respectively.

Essentially, F X, X̃, w, w̃; v, ξ compares the two input distributions µ, µ̃ by consider-
                                      FSW
ing  their one-sample
                      embeddings E        ( · ; v, ξ) with the parameters v, ξ.     Specifically,
F X, X̃, w, w̃; v, ξ equals zero if and only if both distributions µ and µ̃ "appear identical" to
E FSW with the embedding parameters v, ξ.
                                                  m                                               m
                         FSW
The full embedding Em          · ; v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 uses m pairs of parameters v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 drawn
independently at random. Recall that part 2 of the theorem, which we wish to prove, assumes that
                                             m ≥ 2N d + 2N − 1.
Combined with (49), the above implies that
                                        m ≥ dim M + 1 = D + 1,
and thus m is a sufficient number of witness vectors as required by Theorem B.5. Therefore, pro-
vided that the rest of the assumptions of Theorem B.5 are satisfied, the theorem states that, with
                                                                    m
probability 1 on the embedding parameters v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 , the following holds: for any pair of
                                                                          m
                                                  FSW
input distributions µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N Rd , if Em              · ; v (k) , ξ (k) k=1 does not distinguish between µ


and µ̃, then
                                      E FSW (µ; v, ξ) = E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ)
for all parameters (v, ξ) ∈ W. This, combined with (7), implies  that SW(µ, µ̃) = 0, and therefore
                                         FSW
µ = µ̃. Hence, with probability 1, Em           is injective on P≤N Rd .
To prove part 1 of the theorem, namely,         injectivity on S≤N Rd , we restrict M to parameters that


describe pairs of multisets in S≤N Rd . That is,

                    n                                                       n                oo
              M=       X, X̃, w, w̃          X, X̃ ∈ Rd×N , w, w̃ ∈ w(1) , . . . , w(N ) ,
where each w(n) for n ∈ [N ] is a uniform weight vector corresponding to a multiset of size n, as
defined in (13). Note that with this definition, M is a finite union of affine spaces of dimension 2N d,
and thus
                                             dim M = 2N d.
Recall that part 1 assumes that
                                     m ≥ 2N d + 1 = dim M + 1,
and the rest of the proof follows as for part 2.
It is now left for us to show that F indeed satisfies the remaining assumptions of Theorem B.5. We
begin by stating the formal definition of σ-subanalytic functions.


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition B.6. A function f : A → B, with A ⊆ Rm , B ⊆ Rn , is said to be σ-subanalytic, if A
and B are σ-subanalytic sets, and the graph of f , defined by
                            Graph(f ) := {(x, f (x)) | x ∈ A} ⊆ A × B
is a σ-subanalytic subset of Rm × Rn .

The following proposition presents several properties of σ-subanalytic sets and functions that will
be used in our proof. These results are established in (Amir et al., 2023, Appendix A), with each
property accompanied by a reference to its corresponding statement in that paper.
Proposition B.7 (Properties of σ-subanalytic sets and functions).

      1. Finite unions, intersections, and Cartesian products of σ-subanalytic sets are σ-subanalytic
         (Proposition A.11).
      2. Finite sums, products, compositions and concatenations of σ-subanalytic functions are σ-
         subanalytic (Proposition A.15).
      3. Semialgebraic functions, and in particular, piecewise-linear functions, are σ-subanalytic
         (see Figure 3 therein).
      4. Analytic functions defined on open domains are σ-subanalytic (Lemma A.14).
      5. Any σ-subanalytic set A can be presented as a countable union
                                                       ∞
                                                       [
                                                 A=          Ci ,
                                                       i=1

         where each Ci is a C ∞ manifold. In particular,
                                            dim A = max dim Ci
                                                       i∈N

         (Propositions A.11 and A.16).

An additional property required for our proof is that the preimage of a σ-subanalytic set under a
σ-subanalytic function is σ-subanalytic. We now prove this.
Proposition B.8. Let f : A → B be a σ-subanalytic function, and let C ⊆ B be a σ-subanalytic
set. Then the set
                             f −1 (C) := {a ∈ A | f (a) ∈ C}
is σ-subanalytic.

Proof. The set f −1 (C) can be presented as
                                f −1 (C) = π Graph(f ) ∩ (A × C) ,


with π : Rm × Rn → Rm being the orthogonal projection operator
                                           π((x, y)) = x.
Thus, it follows from Proposition B.7 that f −1 (C) is σ-subanalytic.

Now, we argue that M and W are σ-subanalytic sets. The reason is that both sets are semialgebraic,
which is easy to verify, and any semialgebraic set is σ-subanalytic; see (Amir et al., 2023, Figure 3).
Next, we want to show that F is a σ-subanalytic function. For this, we need to show that
E FSW (X, w; v, ξ) is σ-subanalytic as a function of (X, w, v, ξ). To see this, note that by (23),
E FSW (X, w; v, ξ) is the sum of terms of the form
                                     k
                                                   !
                    1+ξ             X               h                         i
                                                      v T X (k) − v T X (k+1) ,               (51)

                  2        sin 2πξ      wσi (vT X)
                     2πξ            i=1


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with the sum taken overh k ∈ [N ]. The product         i v X is semialgebraic, and thus is σ-
                                                           T

subanalytic. Each term v X (k) − v X (k+1) is piecewise linear in v T X and thus σ-
                             T
                                              T

                    Pk
subanalytic. Each      i=1 wσi (v T X) is semialgebraic and thus is also  σ-analytic. The product
    Pk                                                                       Pk
2πξ i=1 wσi (vT X) , composition with the analytic sine function sin 2πξ i=1 wσi (vT X) , and
                             Pk
again product 2 1+ξ
                2πξ sin 2πξ     i=1 wσi (v T X) is also σ-subanalytic. Finally, the product (51) and
the finite sum of such over k ∈ [N ] is σ-subanalytic. Therefore, F is σ-subanalytic, as it the differ-
ence of two σ-subanalytic functions.

Since F is not generally analytic as a function of (v, ξ) for fixed X, X̃, w, w̃ , we need to ex-
plicitly show that F satisfies the dimension deficiency condition. Let µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N Rd be two fixed

distributions and suppose that µ ̸= µ̃. Let A ⊆ W be the set
                A := (v, ξ) ∈ Sd−1 × (0, ∞) E FSW (µ; v, ξ) = E FSW (µ̃; v, ξ) .


We need to show that A is dimension deficient; that is, dim A < dim W.
It is sufficient to show that A is a set of measure zero in W. By measure, we mean that we consider
W = Sd−1 × (0, ∞) endowed with the product measure, where Sd−1 is equipped with the uniform
measure and (0, ∞) with the Lebesgue measure.
The reason is as follows: A is σ-subanalytic
                                             since
                                                   it is the preimage of the σ-subanalytic set {0}
under the σ-subanalytic function F X, X̃, w, w̃; · . If dim A = dim W, then by Proposition B.7,
A contains some C ∞ manifold Ci such that dim Ci = dim W. Any such manifold is a nonempty
subset of W that is open in the product topology on Sd−1 × (0, ∞). Since Ci is open and nonempty,
it has positive measure, and thus so does A.
To finish the proof, we now show that A indeed has measure zero in W, namely that almost any
(v, ξ) ∈ W is not in A. First, note that for almost any v ∈ Sd−1 , the inner product ⟨v, · ⟩ : Rd → R
maps the finite number of support points of µ and µ̃ injectively to R. For all such v, the obtained
one-dimensional projected measures will be distinct, that is, v T µ ̸= v T µ̃, and therefore, so will be
their quantile functions,
                                            QvT µ ̸= QvT µ̃ .

Once v is also fixed, F X, X̃, w, w̃; v, ξ is analytic as a function of ξ. Thus it must be nonzero
almost everywhere. Otherwise, it would be zero at all points ξ, which would contradict the fact that
QvT µ ̸= QvT µ̃ and the cosine transform is an isometry.
Thus, we have shown that F satisfies the dimension deficiency condition. This concludes our proof.


Let us now prove Theorem 4.4.
Theorem 4.4. (Statement in Section 4) Let E : P≤N (Ω) → Rm , where N ≥ 2 and Ω ⊆ Rd has a
nonempty interior. Then for all p ∈ [1, ∞], E is not bi-Lipschitz on P≤N (Ω) with respect to Wp .

Before proving the theorem, we note that it implies that most practical embeddings of P≤N (Ω) are
likely to fail in lower-Lipschitzness, since it is reasonable to expect such embeddings to be upper
Lipschitz. This is formulated in the following corollary.
Corollary B.9. Under the assumptions of Theorem 4.4, if E : P≤N (Ω) → Rm is upper-Lipschitz
with respect to W1 , then it is not lower-Lipschitz with respect to any Wp with p ∈ [1, ∞].

Proof. First, note that it is a well-known fact in optimal transport theory (Villani et al., 2008, Re-
mark 6.6) that Wp (µ, µ̃) is monotone increasing in p, that is,
                            Wp (µ, µ̃) ≤ Wq (µ, µ̃),      1 ≤ p ≤ q ≤ ∞.                           (52)

Now, if E is upper-Lipschitz w.r.t. W1 , then by Theorem 4.4 it is not lower-Lipschitz w.r.t. W1 .
Therefore, since Wp (µ, µ̃) ≥ W1 (µ, µ̃) for any p ≥ 1, E is thus not lower-Lipschitz w.r.t. Wp .


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Theorem 4.4. Our proof consists of three steps. First, in Lemma B.10 below, we prove the
theorem for the special case that E is positively homogeneous and Ω is an open ball centered at
zero. Then, in Lemma B.11, we release the homogeneity assumption by considering a homogenized
version of E. Finally, we generalize to arbitrary Ω with a nonempty interior in a straightforward
manner.
For convenience of notation, before proceeding with the proof, we introduce an alternative scalar
multiplication operation for distributions in P≤N (Ω).
                       PN
Definition. For  µ = i=1 wi δx(i) ∈ P≤N Rd and a scalar α ∈ R, we define the distribution


αµ ∈ P≤N Rd by
                                                N
                                                X
                                         αµ :=     wi δαx(i) .
                                                i=1

Note that this definition is not the same as the standard scalar multiplication operation for measures
used in Appendix A.1 (e.g., equation (16)), which scales the measure weights rather than the support
points. We will use this alternative notation throughout, and only within, this section.
Let us begin with the special case of a positively homogeneous E.
Lemma B.10. Let E : P≤N (Ω) → Rm , with Ω ⊆ Rd being an open ball centered at zero, N ≥ 2
and m ≥ 1. Suppose that E is positively homogeneous, i.e. E(αµ) = αE(µ) for any µ ∈ P≤N (Ω),
α ≥ 0. Then for all p ∈ [1, ∞], E is not bi-Lipschitz with respect to Wp .

Proof. In our proof we use the pseudonorm ∥ · ∥Wp , defined in (39) for distributions in P≤N Rd .


Note that this pseudonorm is positively homogeneous, namely, for all µ ∈ P≤N Rd , α ≥ 0 and


p ∈ [1, ∞],
                                      ∥αµ∥Wp = α∥µ∥Wp .
        ∞
Let {θt }t=1 be a sequence of real numbers such that
                                   0 < θt+1 ≤ 12 θt ≤ 1      ∀t ≥ 1.                               (53)

By assumption, the set Ω contains a ball Br (0) of radius r > 0 centered at zero. Choose x ̸= 0 in
that ball. For θ ∈ [0, 1], we define the distribution
                                      µ(θ) = (1 − θ)δ0 + θδx ,
where δ0 is Dirac’s delta function at 0 ∈ Rd . That is, µ(θ) assigns weights of 1 − θ and θ to the
points 0 and x in Rd respectively. It is straightforward to verify that for 1 ≤ p < ∞

                                                     p 1/p
                                                            p
                                                            p
                           Wp (µ(θt ), δ0 ) = [θt ∥x∥ ]    = θt ∥x∥.
                                                √
This holds for p = ∞ too, with the convention x = 1 for x > 0. Therefore, for all t ∈ N,
                                                ∞



                  E(µ(θt )) − E(δ0 )    1 E(µ(θt )) − E(δ0 )    1 E(µ(θt ))
                                     =          √ p          =      √
                                                                    p       ,                      (54)
                   Wp (µ(θt ), δ0 )    ∥x∥          θt         ∥x∥    θt
where the last equality follows from the homogeneity of E, which implies that E(δ0 ) = 0.
We can assume that E in upper-Lipschitz, since otherwise there is nothing to prove. Under this
assumption, the norm of the expression in (54) is uniformly upper-bounded for all t ∈ N, which
implies that there exists a subsequence of θt for which this expression converges. Replacing θt
with this subsequence, it can be verified that the new subsequence still satisfies (53), and that for an
appropriate vector L ∈ Rm ,
                                               E(µ(θt ))
                                         lim      √
                                                  p      = L.
                                        t→∞         θt
Now, consider the sequence of distributions
                                       s
                                        p  θt
                                µ̃t :=         · µ(θt−1 ),     t ≥ 2.
                                          θt−1

                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since                                     s                    r
                                           p     θt             p   1
                                                           ≤          < 1,
                                                θt−1                2
and x ∈ Br (0) ⊆ Ω, the distribution µ̃t indeed belongs to P≤N (Ω). We wish to lower-bound the
p-Wasserstein distance from µ(θt ) to µ̃t for t ≥ 2. Note that both distributions divide their mass
between
     q zero and an additional vector: the distribution µ̃t assigns a mass of θt−1 to the nonzero
point   p
            θt−1 x, whereas the other distribution µ(θt ) assigns a smaller mass of θt to the nonzero
             θt

point x, with the complementary masses assigned toq
                                                  zero. Therefore, transporting µ̃t to µ(θt )
requires transporting at least a mass of θt−1 − θt from p θt−1
                                                           θt
                                                               x to 0, so that for all 1 ≤ p < ∞
                                                               q
                             Wpp (µ(θt ), µ̃t ) ≥ (θt−1 − θt )∥ p θt−1
                                                                   θt
                                                                       x − 0∥p
                                                                 θt
                                                = θt (1 −            )∥x∥p
                                                                θt−1
                                                     1
                                                ≥      θt ∥x∥p .
                                                     2
We obtained that for p < ∞,                                         p
                                                                                                        (55)
                                                                    p
                                     Wp (µ(θt ), µ̃t ) ≥                θt /2∥x∥,
and the same argument can be used to verify that this is the case for p = ∞ as well. We conclude
that

                                                q                       q
                                                 p    1                    θt
                    ∥E(µ(θt )) − E(µ̃t )∥ (a)         θt   E(µ(θt )) − p θt−1 E(µ(θt−1 ))
                                            ≤                      p
                      Wp (µ(θt ), µ̃t )                             p
                                                                      1/2∥x∥
                       q                    q
                       p 1                       1
                          θt E(µ(θ  t ))  −  p
                                               θt−1 E(µ(θt−1 ))
                    =                   p
                                        p
                                                                →0
                                          1/2∥x∥

where (a) is by (55) and the homogeniety of E, and the convergence to zero is because both ex-
pressions in the numerator converge to the same limit L. This shows that E is not lower-Lipschitz,
which concludes the proof of Lemma B.10.

The following lemma shows that the homogeneity assumption on E can be released.
Lemma B.11. Let E : P≤N (Ω) → Rm , with Ω ⊆ Rd being an open ball centered at zero, N ≥ 2
and m ≥ 1. Then for all p ∈ [1, ∞], E is not bi-Lipschitz with respect to Wp .

Proof. Let p ∈ [1, ∞] and suppose by contradiction that E is bi-Lipschitz with constants 0 < c ≤
C < ∞,
               c · Wp (µ, µ̃) ≤ ∥E(µ) − E(µ̃)∥ ≤ C · Wp (µ, µ̃),                    ∀µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N (Ω).   (56)

We can assume without loss of generality that E(δ0 ) = 0, since otherwise, let

                                        Ẽ(µ) := E(µ) − E(δ0 ),

then E satisfies (56) if and only if Ẽ satisfies (56).
We first prove an auxiliary claim.
Claim. For any µ, µ̃ ∈ P≤N (Ω) with ∥µ∥Wp = 1 and 0 < ∥µ̃∥Wp ≤ 1,
                             !
                         µ̃
                 E             − E(µ̃) ≤ C · 1 − ∥µ̃∥Wp ≤ C · Wp (µ, µ̃).                               (57)
                      ∥µ̃∥Wp


                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. By (56),                                 !                                            !
                                       µ̃                                            µ̃
                                  E                  − E(µ̃) ≤ C · Wp                    , µ̃ .
                                    ∥µ̃∥Wp                                        ∥µ̃∥Wp
We shall now show that                                       !
                                                     µ̃
                                           Wp            , µ̃ ≤ 1 − ∥µ̃∥Wp .
                                                  ∥µ̃∥Wp
               PN
Let µ̃ =        i=1 wi δx̃i be a parametrization of µ̃. Consider the transport plan π = (πij )i,j∈[N ] from
µ̃ to ∥µ̃∥µ̃    given by
           Wp

                                                                  wi    i=j
                                                    πij =
                                                                  0     i ̸= j.

                               µ̃
By definition, Wp           ∥µ̃∥Wp , µ̃   is smaller or equal to the cost of transporting µ̃ to ∥µ̃∥µ̃    according
                                                                                                     Wp

to π. Thus, for p < ∞,
                                  !   N                           N
                                                          p                          p
                          µ̃         X                           X
               Wpp            , µ̃ ≤           1
                                         wi ∥µ̃∥ x̃i − x̃i =               1
                                                                     wi ∥µ̃∥ − 1 x̃i
                       ∥µ̃∥Wp        i=1
                                                Wp
                                                                 i=1
                                                                            Wp


                                                    N
                                                  p X                          p
                                         1                     p       1           p
                                    = ∥µ̃∥ − 1        wi ∥x̃i ∥ = ∥µ̃∥ − 1 ∥µ̃∥Wp
                                                Wp                                       Wp
                                                                  i=1
                                                          p
                                      = 1 − ∥µ̃∥Wp            ,

and thus                                                   !
                                                   µ̃
                                          Wp           , µ̃ ≤ 1 − ∥µ̃∥Wp .
                                                ∥µ̃∥Wp
Both sides of the above inequality are continuous in p, including at the limit p → ∞. Thus, the
above inequality also holds for p = ∞. Now, to show that
                                                1 − ∥µ̃∥Wp ≤ Wp (µ, µ̃),

note that
                     1 − ∥µ̃∥Wp = ∥µ∥Wp − ∥µ̃∥Wp = Wp (µ, 0) − Wp (µ̃, 0) ≤ Wp (µ, µ̃),

where the last inequality is the reverse triangle inequality, since Wp ( · , · ) is a metric. Thus, (57)
holds.

Now we define the homogenized function Ê : P≤N (Ω) → Rm+1 by
                     
                     Ê(µ) := ∥µ∥ , ∥µ∥ E            µ
                                                             , µ ̸= δ0
                                     Wp      Wp     ∥µ∥Wp                                                      (58)
                       0                                       µ = δ0 .
                     

It is straightforward to verify that Ê is well-defined and positively homogeneous. By Lemma B.10,
Ê it is not bi-Lipschitz with respect to Wp , and thus there exist two sequences of distributions
µt , µ̃t ∈ P≤N (Ω), t ≥ 1, such that

                                                Ê(µt ) − Ê(µ̃t )
                                                                         −−−→ L,                               (59)
                                                  Wp (µt , µ̃t )          t→∞


with L = 0 or L = ∞. Since Ê is positively homogeneous, we can assume without loss of generality
that
                            1 = ∥µt ∥Wp ≥ ∥µ̃t ∥Wp for all t ≥ 1.


                                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                   n                  o
This can be seen by dividing each µt and µ̃t by max ∥µt ∥Wp , ∥µ̃t ∥Wp and swapping µt and µ̃t
for all t for which ∥µt ∥Wp < ∥µ̃t ∥Wp .
If µ̃t = δ0 for an infinite subset of indices t, then redefine µt and µ̃t to be the corresponding
subsequences with those indices, and now (59) implies that

                            ∥E(µt ) − E(δ0 )∥ (a) Ê(µt ) − Ê(δ0 )
                                              =                     −−−→ L,
                              Wp (µt , δ0 )         Wp (µt , δ0 )    t→∞

with (a) holding since ∥µ̃t ∥Wp = 1. This contradicts the bi-Lipschitzness of E. Thus, we can
assume that µ̃t = δ0 at most at a finite subset of indices t. By skipping those indices in µt and µ̃t ,
we can assume without loss of generality that
                               1 = ∥µt ∥Wp ≥ ∥µ̃t ∥Wp > 0         for all t ≥ 1.                           (60)

Let us first handle the case L = ∞. The first coordinate of Ê(µt ) − Ê(µ̃t ) is bounded by
                            ∥µt ∥Wp − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp = 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp ≤ Wp (µt , µ̃t )
according to (57). Thus, the violation of bi-Lipschitzness must come from the last m coordinates of
Ê(µt ) − Ê(µ̃t ). That is, (59) with L = ∞, combined with the fact that ∥µ̃t ∥Wp > 0 ∀t, implies that

                                        µt                     µ̃t
                        ∥µt ∥Wp E ∥µt ∥        − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E ∥µ̃t ∥
                                          Wp                       Wp
                                                                        −−−→ ∞.                   (61)
                                           Wp (µt , µ̃t )                t→∞

On the other hand,
                             !                    !                                    !
                 µt                         µ̃t     (a)                         µ̃t
     ∥µt ∥Wp E           − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E               = E(µt ) − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E
               ∥µt ∥Wp                  ∥µ̃t ∥Wp                             ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                !                !                          !
 (b)                                    µ̃t                µ̃t                        µ̃t
 ≤ ∥E(µt ) − E(µ̃t )∥ + E(µ̃t ) − E               + E              − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E                ,
                                     ∥µ̃t ∥Wp           ∥µ̃t ∥Wp                   ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                                                            (62)
where (a) holds since ∥µt ∥Wp = 1 and (b) is by the triangle inequality. We shall now upper-bound
the three above terms.
First, by (56),
                                   ∥E(µt ) − E(µ̃t )∥ ≤ C · Wp (µt , µ̃t ).                                (63)
Second,
                                                          !
                                                µ̃t
                                 E(µ̃t ) − E                  ≤ C · Wp (µt , µ̃t )                         (64)
                                             ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
by (57). Lastly,
                   !                           !                                            !
         µ̃t                           µ̃t                                        µ̃t
    E                  − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E                = 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp          · E                  −0
      ∥µ̃t ∥Wp                      ∥µ̃t ∥Wp                                   ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                                                            !
                                                                                  µ̃t
                                                   = 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp          · E                  − E(δ0 )
                                                                               ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                                                                     !
                                                   (a)                                  µ̃t                (65)

                                                   ≤ 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp · C · Wp                    , δ0
                                                                                     ∥µ̃t ∥Wp

                                                   (b)
                                                                                    µ̃t
                                                   = 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp · C ·
                                                                                 ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                                                            Wp
                                                                       (c)
                                                   = C · 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp ≤ C · Wp (µt , µ̃t ),


                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where (a) is by (56), (b) is by the definition of ∥ · ∥Wp , and (c) is by (57). Incorporating (63)-(65)
into (62) yields
                                      !                                 !
                            µt                            µ̃t
                ∥µt ∥Wp E                 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E                      ≤ 3C · Wp (µt , µ̃t ),
                          ∥µt ∥Wp                      ∥µ̃t ∥Wp

which contradicts (61).
Let us now handle the case L = 0. For two sequences of numbers at , bt ∈ R, t ≥ 1, we say that

                                                at = o(bt )

if
                                                     at
                                               lim         = 0.
                                              t→∞ bt


Denote

                                           dt := Wp (µt , µ̃t ).


According to (59) with L = 0, the first component of Ê(µt ) − Ê(µ̃t ), which equals ∥µt ∥Wp −
∥µ̃t ∥Wp , satisfies


                                     ∥µt ∥Wp − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                              −−−→ 0,
                                          Wp (µt , µ̃t )          t→∞



and thus

                              1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp = ∥µt ∥Wp − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp = o(dt ).                              (66)


By the triangle inequality,

                           ∥E(µt ) − E(µ̃t )∥ ≤
                                            !                           !              !
                                      µ̃t                         µ̃t            µ̃t
            E(µt ) − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E               + ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E                −E
                                   ∥µ̃t ∥Wp                    ∥µ̃t ∥Wp       ∥µ̃t ∥Wp                 (67)
                                                               !
                                                         µ̃t
                                              + E                 − E(µ̃t ) .
                                                      ∥µ̃t ∥Wp


We shall show that each of the three above terms is o(dt ).
First, since ∥µt ∥Wp = 1,

                                       !
                                 µ̃t
         E(µt ) − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E              =
                              ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                             !                       !                                                 (68)
                        µt                     µ̃t     (a)                                 (59)
         ∥µt ∥Wp E             − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E            ≤ Ê(µt ) − Ê(µ̃t )                = o(dt ),
                     ∥µt ∥Wp                ∥µ̃t ∥Wp


                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with inequality (a) holding since the argument of the norm on the left consists the last m coordinates
of Ê(µt ) − Ê(µ̃t ). Thus, the first term in (67) is o(dt ). For the second term,
                                                         !                      !
                                                   µ̃t                   µ̃t
                                   ∥µ̃t ∥Wp E                −E
                                                ∥µ̃t ∥Wp              ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                                      !
                                                              µ̃t
                              = 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp · E
                                                          ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                                      !
                                                              µ̃t
                              = 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp · E                        − E(δ0 )
                                                          ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                                              !                   (69)
                              (a)                                 µ̃t
                              ≤ 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp · C · W                     , δ0
                                                              ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                               µ̃t
                            = 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp · C ·
                                                            ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
                                                                        Wp
                                                     (b)

                            = 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp C = o(dt ),
where (a) is by (56) and (b) is by (66).
Finally, by (57),
                                    !
                            µ̃t
                       E                − E(µ̃t ) ≤ C · 1 − ∥µ̃t ∥Wp = o(dt ).                   (70)
                         ∥µ̃t ∥Wp
Therefore, by (68)-(70) and (67), we have that
                                    ∥E(µt ) − E(µ̃t )∥ = o(dt ),
and thus E is not lower-Lipschitz. This concludes the proof of Lemma B.11.

To finish the proof of Theorem 4.4, suppose that Ω ⊆ Rd is an arbitrary set with a nonempty interior.
Let Ω0 ⊆ Ω be an open ball contained in Ω, and let x0 be the center of Ω0 . Then Ω0 − x0 is an open
ball centered at zero.
Given E : P≤N (Ω) → Rm , define Ẽ : P≤N (Ω0 − x0 ) → Rm by
                                        Ẽ(µ) := E(µ + x0 ),
where µ + x0 is the distribution µ shifted by x0 :
                                                     N
                                                     X
                                        µ + x0 :=           wi δx(i) +x0 .
                                                     i=1

Then Ẽ satisfies the assumptions of Lemma B.11, and thus there exist two sequences of distributions
µt , µ̃t ∈ P≤N (Ω0 − x0 ) such that
                                        Ẽ(µt ) − Ẽ(µ̃t )
                                                                −−−→ L,
                                           Wp (µt , µ̃t )       t→∞

with L = 0 or L = ∞. Note that the sequences of shifted distributions {µt + x0 }t≥1 and
{µ̃t + x0 }t≥1 are in P≤N (Ω0 ) and thus in P≤N (Ω). Since
                               Wp (µt + x0 , µ̃t + x0 ) = Wp (µt , µ̃t ),
we have that
                    ∥E(µt + x0 ) − E(µ̃t + x0 )∥   ∥E(µt + x0 ) − E(µ̃t + x0 )∥
                                                 =
                      Wp (µt + x0 , µ̃t + x0 )            Wp (µt , µ̃t )
                                           Ẽ(µt ) − Ẽ(µ̃t )
                                    =                   −−−→ L,
                                         Wp (µt , µ̃t )  t→∞

which implies that E is not bi-Lipschitz on P≤N (Ω0 ), and thus not on P≤N (Ω).


                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now prove Theorem 4.2. Before proceeding with the proof, we first recall the precise definition
of piecewise linearity.
Definition B.12. A function f : Rm → Rn is piecewise linear if there exists a finite collection of
polyhedra8 {Pi }ki=1 that partition Rm (i.e., their union covers Rm and their interiors are disjoint)
such that f is linear on each Pi . That is, for each i, there exist a matrix Ai ∈ Rn×m and a vector
bi ∈ Rn such that
                                  f (x) = Ai x + bi , for all x ∈ Pi .
Theorem 4.2. (Statement in Section 4) Let E : P≤N Rd → Rm be injective and positively


homogeneous. Let w, w̃ ∈ ∆N be fixed, and suppose that the functions E(X, w) and E(X, w̃)
are piecewise linear in X. Then there exist C, c > 0 such that for all X, X̃ ∈ Rd×N and p ∈ [1, ∞],

   c · Wp (X, w), X̃, w̃        ≤ E(X, w) − E X̃, w̃ ≤ C · Wp (X, w), X̃, w̃ . (12)

Proof. The proof is outlined as follows: First we show that there exist constants c̃, C̃ > 0 for which
(12) holds in the special case p = 1. Then we show that for any fixed w, w̃ ∈ ∆N there exists a
constant β > 0 such that for all X, X̃ ∈ Rd×N ,

                     W1 (X, w), X̃, w̃ ≥ β · W∞ (X, w), X̃, w̃ .                                  (71)

This will imply that for the given pair w, w̃, (12) holds for all p ∈ [1, ∞] with the constants c = c̃β
and C = C̃. To see this, note that by the monotonicity of Wp with respect to p (Eq. (52)),

         W1 (X, w), X̃, w̃         ≤ Wp (X, w), X̃, w̃ ≤ W∞ (X, w), X̃, w̃ .                       (72)

Therefore, Eq. (12) with p = 1 and constants C̃, c̃ and Equations (71) and (72) imply that

   E(X, w) − E X̃, w̃ ≥ c̃ · W1 (X, w), X̃, w̃ ≥ c̃β · W∞ (X, w), X̃, w̃
                                                                                                  (73)
                             ≥ c̃ · Wp (X, w), X̃, w̃

and

   E(X, w) − E X̃, w̃ ≤ C̃ · W1 (X, w), X̃, w̃ ≤ C̃β · Wp (X, w), X̃, w̃ . (74)

Let us begin by proving that (12) holds
                                       for p = 1. The 1-Wasserstein distance between two distri-
butions parametrized by (X, w) and X̃, w̃ can be expressed by
                                                       X
                  W1 (X, w), X̃, w̃        = min           πij x(i) − x̃(j) ,              (75)
                                                       π∈Π(w,w̃)
                                                                   i,j∈[N ]

where the set Π(w, w̃) of transport plans from (X, w) to X̃, w̃ is given by
                                                                                    
                                                N                        N          
                               N ×N
                                                 X          ^            X
      Π(w, w̃) = π ∈ [0, 1]            ∀i ∈ [N ]    πij = wi ∀j ∈ [N ]      πij = w̃j .
                                                                                    
                                                           j=1                      i=1


In particular, Π(w, w̃) depends only on w and w̃ and not on the points X, X̃.
Let W
    f1 be a modified 1-Wasserstein distance that uses the ℓ1 -norm rather than ℓ2 as its basic cost
function:                                              X
               W
               f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃        := min                πij x(i) − x̃(j) .               (76)
                                                      π∈Π(w,w̃)                           1
                                                                   i,j∈[N ]

Note that since                                        √
                                    ∥x∥2 ≤ ∥x∥1 ≤       d∥x∥2           ∀x ∈ Rd ,                 (77)
   8
       A polyhedron is a finite intersection of closed half-spaces.


                                                          35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we have                                           √
       W1 (X, w), X̃, w̃    ≤W
                             f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃   ≤ d · W1 (X, w), X̃, w̃ .                                   (78)

Thus, it suffices to prove an analogue of (12) in which W1 is replaced by W f1 and ∥ · ∥ by ∥ · ∥ ;
                                                                                                 1
namely, that for fixed w, w̃, there exist constants C, c > 0 such that

  c·Wf1 (X, w), X̃, w̃ ≤ E(X, w) − E X̃, w̃                    ≤C ·W   f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃ . (79)
                                                                          1

To this end, we define the function f : Rd×N × Rd×N → R2 ,
                                                                
                                            E(X, w) − E X̃, w̃
                           f X, X̃ :=                            1  .
                                            W
                                            f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃

Since both E and Wf1 are positively homogeneous with respect to X, X̃ , then so is f . Namely,

                            f αX, αX̃ = αf X, X̃ ,           ∀α ≥ 0.                       (80)
In addition to being positively homogeneous, f is also piecewise linear, as we will show below. We
then prove that these two properties together imply that E is bi-Lipschitz with respect to W    f1 .

Let us now show that f is piecewise linear in X, X̃ .                      The first component of f ,

  E(X, w) − E X̃, w̃         , is clearly piecewise linear, as it is the composition of the ℓ1 -norm with
                           1
a piecewise-linear function. We shall now show that the second component W      f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃
is also piecewise linear. For any fixed X and X̃, the optimization problem in (76) is a linear pro-
gram in π, with the set of feasible solutions being the compact polyhedron Π(w, w̃). Thus, the
optimal solution must be attained at one of the vertices of Π(w, w̃). As any polyhedron has a finite
                    9
number of vertices
                 , let  π , . . . , π
                           (1)        (K)
                                          be the vertices of Π(w, w̃), and recall that these vertices do
not depend on X, X̃ . Therefore, (76) can be reformulated as
                                                   X (k)
                W
                f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃        = min          πij x(i) − x̃(j)                   .                 (81)
                                                       k∈[K]                           1
                                                               i,j∈[N ]

From (81) it can be seen that W f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃        is piecewise linear in X, X̃ , as it is the
minimum of a finite number of piecewise-linear functions.      Since
                                                                   the concatenation of piecewise-
linear functions is also piecewise linear, we have that f X, X̃ is piecewise linear.

Now, let A ⊆ R2 be the image of f :
                                   n                                     o
                            A := f X, X̃                     X, X̃ ∈ Rd×N .
Since f is piecewise linear, it maps the space Rd×N × Rd×N to a finite union of closed polyhedra
(some of which may be unbounded). Hence, A is a finite union of closed sets, and thus is closed.
Denote the two coordinates of f by

                            f1 X, X̃ = E(X, w) − E X̃, w̃                 ,
                                                                        1
                            f2 X, X̃ = W    f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃ .

Since E is injective by assumption, if f1 X, X̃ = 0 then f2 X, X̃ = 0. Thus, A does not

contain the point (0, 1). Conversely, if f2 X, X̃ = 0, then (X, w) and X̃, w̃ represent the
same distribution, that is,
                                    XN              X N
                                         wi δx(i) =     w̃i δx̃(i) ,
                                           i=1               i=1
   9
       See (Grünbaum, 2003), Theorem 3, page 32, and the definition of polyhedral sets on page 26 therein.


                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and since E(X, w) : P≤N Rd                            depends
                                                            only on the input distribution and not on its
                                                    m
                                                 → R
particular representation, we have that f1 X, X̃ = 0. Hence, A does not contain the point (1, 0).

Now, suppose by contradiction that there do not exist constants C, c > 0 for which
                                                                                   (79) holds. Then,
there exist two sequences Xt , X̃t ∈ Rd×N such that both coordinates of f Xt , X̃t are nonzero
for all t ∈ N, and their ratio satisfies

                                         f1 Xt , X̃t
                                                       → L,                                     (82)
                                         f2 Xt , X̃t
where the limit L is either 0 or ∞.
Suppose
       that L  = ∞. By the positive homogeneity of E and W1 , we can divide both Xt and X̃t
                                                             f
by f1 Xt , X̃t while still satisfying (82) with L = ∞. With these new sequences, we obtain

                                    f1 Xt , X̃t = 1 ∀t ∈ N,

                                    f2 Xt , X̃t −→ 0.
                                                                       t→∞

It follows that there exists a sequence in A that converges to the point (1, 0). Since A is closed, we
conclude that (1, 0) ∈ A, contradicting our assumption.
By a similar argument, if L = 0, then (0, 1) ∈ A, leading to the same contradiction.
To finish the proof, it is left to show that (71) holds with some constant β > 0 assuming that w and
                                                     2
w̃ are fixed. To this end, define the sets Ik ⊆ [N ] for k ∈ [K], with K as in (71),
                                          n                         o
                                                        2     (k)
                                    Ik := (i, j) ∈ [N ]     πij > 0 .

By the definition of Π(w, w̃), for all k ∈ [K], Ik is nonempty. Let
                                                                       (k)
                                                 ϵk := min πij ,                 k ∈ [K].                                       (83)
                                                        (i,j)∈Ik

                                                            (k)
That is, ϵk is the smallest positive entry of πij , and by the above, indeed ϵk > 0. Let
                                                    ϵmin := min ϵk > 0.                                                         (84)
                                                                  k∈[K]

Thus, for all X, X̃ ∈ Rd×N ,
                 √                          (78)
                   d · W1 (X, w), X̃, w̃     ≥ W f1 (X, w), X̃, w̃

             (81)                                                      (77)
                                        (k)                                                        (k)
                             X                                                          X
              = min                    πij       x(i) − x̃(j)           ≥ min                     πij    x(i) − x̃(j)
                    k∈[K]                                          1           k∈[K]                                    2
                            i,j∈[N ]                                                   i,j∈[N ]

              (a)                                                       (83)
                                         (k)
                              X                                                          X
              = min                    πij        x(i) − x̃(j)          ≥ min                      ϵk x(i) − x̃(j)
                    k∈[K]                                          2           k∈[K]                                    2
                            (i,j)∈Ik                                                   (i,j)∈Ik
             (84)             X
              ≥ min                    ϵmin x(i) − x̃(j)                ≥ min max ϵmin x(i) − x̃(j)
                    k∈[K]                                          2           k∈[K] (i,j)∈Ik                               2
                            (i,j)∈Ik
              (b)
                                             n                                                   o
                                                                                           (k)
              = ϵmin · min max                    x(i) − x̃(j)                 ij ∈ [N ], πij > 0
                            k∈[K]                              2
              (c)
                                                      n                                                  o
              = ϵmin ·         min               max x(i) − x̃(j)                      ij ∈ [N ], πij > 0
                                       [K]                                       2
                            π∈{π (k) }
                                       k=1

              (d)                                   n                                                       o
              ≥ ϵmin ·   min max x(i) − x̃(j)                                        ij ∈ [N ], πij > 0
                       π∈Π(w,w̃)              2
              (e)

              = ϵmin · W∞ (X, w), X̃, w̃ .


                                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (k)
where (a) is since πij    = 0 whenever (i, j) ∈/ Ik ; (b) is by the definition of Ik ; (c) is a simple
                                                                                        [K]
reformulation; (d) is since the minimum is taken over a larger set Π(w, w̃) ⊇ π (k) k=1 ; and (e) is


by the definition of W∞ . Hence, (71) holds with β = ϵ√ min
                                                         d
                                                            and the theorem is proven.


                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     E XPERIMENT DETAILS
Hardware     All experiments were conducted on a single Nvidia A40 GPU.

C.1   C OMPARISON WITH PSWE

In
n our comparison
        on           with PSWE, shown in Table 1, we used pairs of multisets of the form X =
    i
  n+1 1       for two different values of n, denoted n1 , n2 , where 1 ∈ Rd is the vector whose entries
          i=1
all equal 1. For example, one could choose
                                   X1 = 31 , 23 , X2 = 41 , 24 , 34 .


Despite the fact that these multisets are distinct, the interpolation used by PSWE (see e.g., Naderial-
izadeh et al. (2021)) identifies these two multisets with the same continuous distribution, and hence
assigns them the same embedding. In Table 1 we used d = 3 and n1 = 5 and n2 = 200, and found,
as expected, that PSWE assigns the same value to both multisets, up to numerical error, regardless
of the embedding dimension m. In contrast, our method successfully separates X1 and X2 even
with m = 1, and yields a good approximation of the sliced Wasserstein distance as m increases.
Similar results to those shown in the table were obtained for other choices of d, n1 , n2 .
Note that computing the sliced Wasserstein distance between such pairs is straightforward, since,
for any two multisets X1 , X2 in Rd with all points belonging to the same line, it can be shown that
                                                   1
                                SW(X1 , X2 ) = √ W(X1 , X2 ),
                                                     d
and W(X1 , X2 ) can be computed using a linear programming solver.
The PSWE method takes two input parameters—the number of slices L and embedding dimension
N , which, unlike our method, need not be identical. We set both parameters to the embedding
dimension m.

C.2   L EARNING TO APPROXIMATE THE WASSERSTEIN DISTANCE

In this experiment we used embedding dimensions m1 = m2 = 1000. The MLP consisted of
three layers with a hidden dimension of 1000. With this choice of hyperparameters, our model has
roughly 3 million learnable parameters and 5 million parameters in total. These hyperparameters
were picked manually. The performance of our architecture did not exhibit high sensitivity to the
choice of hyperparameters: on most datasets, similar results were obtained with MLPs consisting of
2 to 8 layers, and with hidden dimensions of 500, 1000, 2000 and 4000.
We used fixed parameters for the first embedding E1 and learnable parameters for the second em-
bedding E2 . This choice was made since E1 is, in most cases, supposed to handle arbitrary input
point clouds, whereas the input to E2 is more specific, in that it is always a set of two vectors that
are outputs of E1 . Thus, in principle the architecture may benefit from tuning E2 to its particular
input structure. In practice, using fixed parameters in both embeddings did not significantly impair
performance.
Remarkably, applying an MLP to the input points prior to embedding them via E1 (i.e. adding a
feature transform), as well as applying an MLP to the two outputs of E1 prior to embedding them via
E2 , impaired rather than improved the performance. This indicates that our embedding is expressive
enough to encode all the required information from the input multisets in a way that facilitates
processing by the MLP Φ, thus making additional processing at intermediate steps unnecessary.
Inference times for one pair of multisets were less than half a second for the ModelNet-large
dataset, and less than 0.2 seconds for the rest of the datasets. The training times of the competing
models appear in Table 3.
Training was performed on an Nvidia A40 GPU, whereas the rest of the methods were trained over
an Nvidia RTX A6000 GPU, both of which have similar performance on 32-bit floating point (37.4
and 38.7 TFLOPS).
Exact computation of the 1-Wasserstein distance using the ot.emd2() function of the Python
Optimal Transport package (Flamary et al., 2021) was up to 2.5 times slower than our method (2 to


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5 ms vs 1.9 ms) on small multisets (less than 300 elements) and 150 times slower (640 ms vs 4.2 ms)
on large multisets (ModelNet-large).

C.3   ROBUSTNESS TO PARAMETER REDUCTION

In both architectures, the input and output dimension of each MLP, as well as that of the FSW
embedding, were multiplied by a scaling factor to obtain the desired number of parameters. Training
our model in all problem instances took between 60 to 65 minutes. Training PointNet took between
4:43 hours to 5 hours, and was done using the original code of (Xia, 2019).


                                                40
