Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONSTRUCTING C ONFIDENCE I NTERVALS FOR
AVERAGE T REATMENT E FFECTS FROM M ULTIPLE
DATASETS
 Yuxin Wang, Maresa Schröder, Dennis Frauen, Jonas Schweisthal,
 Konstantin Hess & Stefan Feuerriegel
 LMU Munich
 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
 Yuxin.Wang1@lmu.de



                                            A BSTRACT
         Constructing confidence intervals (CIs) for the average treatment effect (ATE)
         from patient records is crucial to assess the effectiveness and safety of drugs.
         However, patient records typically come from different hospitals, thus raising the
         question of how multiple observational/experimental datasets can be effectively
         combined for this purpose. In our paper, we propose a new method that estimates
         the ATE from multiple observational/experimental datasets and provides valid CIs.
         Our method makes little assumptions about the observational datasets and is thus
         widely applicable in medical practice. The key idea of our method is that we lever-
         age prediction-powered inferences and thereby essentially ‘shrink’ the CIs so that
         we offer more precise uncertainty quantification as compared to naı̈ve approaches.
         We further prove the unbiasedness of our method and the validity of our CIs. We
         confirm our theoretical results through various numerical experiments.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Estimating the average treatment effect (ATE) together with confidence intervals (CIs) is relevant
in many fields, such as medicine, where the ATE is used to assess the effectiveness and safety
of drugs (Glass et al., 2013; Feuerriegel et al., 2024). Nowadays, there is a growing interest in
using observational datasets for this purpose, for example, electronic health records (EHRs) and
clinical registries (Johnson et al., 2016; Corrigan-Curay et al., 2018; Hong, 2021). Importantly, such
observational datasets typically originate from different hospitals, different health providers, or even
different countries (Colnet et al., 2024), thus raising the question of how to construct CIs for ATE
estimation from multiple observational datasets.
Motivating example: During the COVID-19 pandemic, the effectiveness and safety of potential
drugs and vaccines were often assessed from electronic health records that originated from different
hospitals to rapidly generate new evidence with treatment guidelines (Tacconelli et al., 2022). For
example, one study (Wong et al., 2024) estimated the effect of nirmatrelvir/ritonavir (also known
under the commercial name “paxlovid”) in patients with COVID-19 diagnosis on 28-day all-cause
hospitalizations from data obtained through a retrospective, multi-center study. The study eventually
reported not only the ATE but also the corresponding CIs to allow for uncertainty quantification,
which is standard in medicine (Kneib et al., 2023). However, the question of how one could combine
the predictions and confidence intervals from multiple studies to provide better estimates remains.
Existing works for estimating ATEs from multiple datasets can be loosely categorized by (a) which
datasets are used and (b) the underlying objective as follows (see Fig. 1): (a) The underlying patient
data can come either from experimental datasets (i.e., randomized controlled trials; RCTs) and/or
observational datasets (Feuerriegel et al., 2024). Both require tailored methods as the propensity
score is known in RCTs but not in observational data and must thus be estimated (Rubin, 1974). We
later focus on a setting where the ATE is estimated from multiple observational datasets, but we also
provide an extension for combinations of RCT and observational datasets. (b) Much of the literature
focused on estimating ATEs from multiple datasets focuses on point estimates (Kallus et al., 2018;
John et al., 2019; Yang & Ding, 2020; Guo et al., 2022; Hatt et al., 2022; Demirel et al., 2024),


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


but not uncertainty quantification. However, valid CIs are needed in medicine to ensure reliable
decision-making, because of which the existing methods are not applicable for medical applications.
Our method: In this paper, we propose a novel method to construct valid CIs for ATE estimation
from multiple observational datasets. Specifically, we consider the following setting: we have one
(potentially small) unbiased observational dataset D1 for which we assume unconfoundedness (i.e.,
all confounders observed) and another large-scale observational dataset D2 for which we allow
for unobserved confounders. Then, the key idea of our method is that we tailor prediction-powered
inference to our task so that we can essentially ‘shrink’ the CI and thus offer more precise uncertainty
quantification as compared to a naı̈ve approach. We further present an extension of our method
where we ‘shrink’ CIs in settings with a combination of RCT and observational data.
Why are naı̈ve approaches precluded? One may think that one can simply concatenate both datasets
to compute a pooled ATE, yet this is not possible as the second dataset D2 may be confounded and,
hence, the overall ATE estimate would be biased. A different, naı̈ve approach is to simply construct
finite-sample CIs from D1 to obtain an unbiased ATE with valid CIs. Yet, the additional power of
the second dataset D2 (e.g., the information about the treatment assignment and thus the propensity
score) would be ignored so that the CIs are too conservative (Aronow et al., 2021).
Intuition behind our method: Even though the second dataset D2 is large and employing it in
addition to D1 may help shrink the estimation variance, it may be confounded, leading to biases in
the downstream estimation. Therefore, using the second dataset D2 directly for inference could lead
to biased CATE estimates. As a remedy, we derive a prediction-powered inference estimator where
we decompose the variance of the population-level estimate of the CATE into two parts: one part
comes from the estimation variance of the CATE on dataset D2 , while the second part is due to the
difference in estimators of ATEs across both datasets D1 and D2 . The estimation variance of the
first part can be significantly decreased with access to a large-scale dataset D2 . Interestingly, the
second part allows us to account for potential confounding bias in D2 and thus still derives valid CIs
(→ Theorem 4.2).1
Our main contributions are three-fold:2 (1) We propose a new method to construct CIs for the ATE
from multiple observational datasets. We further extend our method to combinations of RCTs and
observational datasets. (2) We prove that our method is a consistent estimator and gives valid CIs.
(3) We perform experiments with medical data to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

2    R ELATED W ORK
We give an overview of three literature streams relevant to our work: (i) methods for constructing
CIs for the ATE that solely rely on a single dataset; (ii) methods that estimate the ATE from multiple
datasets; and (iii) prediction-powered inference.
Estimating CIs for the ATE: Several works         Methods           Dataset setting      Uncertainty quantification
focus on constructing CIs for the ATE                  Kallus et al. (2018), Hatt et al. (2022),
                                                                       RCT + Obs.
(Bang & Robins, 2005; van der Laan &                            Demiral et al. (2024)

                                                                       Obs. + Obs.
                                                        Yang et al. (2020), Guo et al. (2021)
Rubin, 2006). One literature stream ad-
dresses asymptotically
                    √ normal data, which
                                                                       RCT + Obs.
                                                             van der Laan et al. (2024)


typically results in n-consistent, asymptoti-      Ours         Obs. + Obs. (RCT + Obs.)
cally unbiased, normally distributed estima-           Constrained to ATE estimators based on TMLE, while we focus on arbitrary ATE estimators.

tors. Another literature stream focuses on Figure 1: Key works aimed at ATE estimation from
finite-sample settings, yet these works im- multiple datasets.
pose strong assumptions, such as that the data
come from an RCT (Aronow et al., 2021) or assume unconfoundedness with relaxed overlap as-
sumptions (Armstrong & Kolesár, 2021). However, this literature stream focuses on ATE estimation
from a single dataset, which is unlike our work.


    1
      We refer to Barnard (1949) and refer to a confidence interval as “valid” when the interval achieves its stated
coverage probability. For example, a 95% confidence interval is valid if, under repeated sampling, it contains
the true parameter value approximately 95% of the time. Validity ensures the interval accurately reflects the
level of uncertainty about the estimate.
    2
      Code and data are available via https://github.com/Yuxin217/causalppi


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ATE estimation from multiple datasets:3 Existing methods can be grouped by (a) the underlying
dataset setting and (b) the objective, that is, whether the method provides point estimates or uncer-
tainty quantification (see Fig. 1): (a) Some methods focus on settings with RCT + observational data
(e.g, Kallus et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021; Hatt et al., 2022; Demirel et al., 2024).4 Other methods
focus on multiple observational datasets (e.g., Yang & Ding, 2020; Guo et al., 2022), which is also
our focus. The former is typically easier because the propensity score is known. In contrast, in
the latter, the propensity score is unknown and must be estimated to account for the covariate shift
across treated and non-treated patients. (b) Most works focus on only point estimation (e..g, Kallus
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021; Hatt et al., 2022; Yang & Ding, 2020; Guo et al., 2022; Demirel et al.,
2024), but not uncertainty quantification.
Closest to our method is the work by van der Laan et al. (2024). Yet, there are crucial differences:
the method focuses on (i) RCT+observational data, (ii) has a different ATE estimation process that
can lead to numerical instabilities, and (ii) has limited flexibility in how D2 is leveraged (e.g.,
the estimators for D1 and D2 must be identical, despite that different estimators may be beneficial
due to the different size and nature of the datasets). We discuss the differences to our method in
Appendix H.
Prediction-powered inference (PPI): Angelopoulos et al. (2023a;b) proposed the PPI framework
for performing valid statistical inference from a given dataset when the dataset is supplemented with
predictions from a machine-learning model (a brief overview is in Section C). Several extensions
have been proposed recently (e.g., Fisch et al., 2024; Zrnic & Candès, 2024). So far, PPI was derived
mostly for traditional statistical quantities (e.g., mean, median, quantile). For example, Demirel
et al. (2024) propose a method based on PPI to generalize point estimates of causal effects from one
population to a target population. However, they do not provide uncertainty quantification. To the
best of our knowledge, there is no work that has tailored PPI to construct CIs for ATE estimation,
which is our novelty.


3    P ROBLEM S ETUP
We consider the standard setting for ATE estimation from observational data (e.g., Imbens, 2004;
Rubin, 2006; Shalit et al., 2017; Hatt et al., 2022), which we extend to multiple datasets.
Setting: We consider a setting with a small observational dataset D1 = {(x1i , a1i , yi1 )}ni=1 and a
                                                             ′
large-scale observational dataset D2 = {(x2j , a2j , yj2 )}N
                                                           j=1 (see left part in Fig. 2). We use a discrete
variable d ∈ D = {1, 2} to refer to the datasets and thus indicate from which dataset variables
are (e.g., X d ∈ Dd for Dd ∈ {D1 , D2 }). We omit the superscripts for xdi and use xi and xj (in
color) instead to denote that patients belong to D1 and D2 , respectively, in order to avoid misunder-
standings with squared values. Furthermore, we use n and N ′ to denote the size of the datasets D1
and D2 , respectively, with n ≪ N ′ . Without loss of generality, it is straightforward to extend our
method to more than two datasets simply by concatenating them into D2 .
Both datasets have patient information about treatments, outcomes (e.g., tumor size, length of hospi-
tal stay), and covariates (e.g., the age or sex of a patient). Formally, both datasets consist of assigned
treatments adi ∈ A = {0, 1}, outcomes yid ∈ Y ⊆ R, and covariates xdi ∈ X ⊆ Rq for dataset
d ∈ {1, 2} and with i = 1 . . . n (for d = 1) and j = 1 . . . N ′ (for d = 2). We denote random
variables by capital letters X d with realizations xd . Later, we use sample splitting, and let N denote
the sample size of one half of D2 , i.e., N = 21 N ′ . Our setting is relevant for a variety of practical
applications in medicine where electronic health records are collected from different environments,
such as from different hospitals or different countries.

    3
      Several methods have also aimed at estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs) from multiple
datasets (e.g., Johansson et al., 2016; Schweisthal et al., 2024). However, estimating HTEs is more challenging
than estimating the ATE because of the variation across subpopulations and the larger risk of overlap violations.
Importantly, using HTEs for computing ATEs is suboptimal, which is well-established in efficiency theory for
ATE estimation (Kennedy, 2016) and would lead to so-called plug-in bias (Curth & Van der Schaar, 2021).
Hence, methods for HTE estimation are orthogonal to our work.
    4
      There are further specialized settings, yet which are different from ours. For example, some works estimate
long-term outcomes by combining RCT+observational data (Athey et al., 2020; Ghassami et al., 2022; Imbens
et al., 2024). Even others aim to increase the efficiency of trial analyses (Schuler et al., 2022; Liao et al., 2023).


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We assume that datasets are sampled i.i.d. from populations (X, A, Y, D) ∼ P and (X d , Ad , Y d ) =
(X, A, Y | D = d) ∼ Pd with d ∈ {1, 2}, but with the same marginal distribution of X d , i.e.,
P1X = P2X and X = X 1 = X 2 in P. We later also generalize our theory to settings with distribution
shifts and finite populations in Appendix B.1 and Appendix B.2, respectively. Given that we focus
on observational datasets, the treatment assignment rule may   vary, and we thus define the dataset-
specific propensity score via π d (x) = P Ad = 1 | X d = x , d ∈ {1, 2}. Formally, we assume that
the propensity score may differ across the two datasets (i.e., π 1 ̸= π 2 ). This is common in medical
practice, where different hospitals or countries have different treatment guidelines.
Target estimand: We adopt the potential outcomes framework (Neyman, 1923; Rubin, 2005) to
formalize our causal inference task. Let Y d (a) ∈ Y, d ∈ {1, 2} denote the potential outcome
in different distribution Pd for treatment intervention Ad = a. In this paper, we are interested in
estimating the ATE  on the target population
                                              (i.e., where the small dataset is sampled from), which
is given by τ = E Y 1 (1) − Y 1 (0) , and then constructing corresponding CIs for τ .
Assumptions: We make the following assumptions necessary for ATE identification and estimation.
Of note, the following assumptions are standard in ATE estimation (Imbens, 2004; Rubin, 2005;
Shalit et al., 2017). We distinguish the assumptions for the small dataset D1 and the large dataset
D2 .
Assumption 3.1. For dataset D1 , it holds: (i) (Consistency) A1 = a ⇒ Y 1 = Y 1 (a); (ii) (Overlap)
0 < π 1 (x) < 1, ∀x ∈ X ; (iii) (Unconfoundedness) Y 1 (0), Y 1 (1) ⊥⊥ A1 | X 1 .
Assumption 3.2. For dataset D2 , it holds: (i) (Consistency) A2 = a ⇒ Y 2 = Y 2 (a); (ii) (Overlap)
0 < π 2 (x) < 1, ∀x ∈ X .

The above assumptions are the standard assumptions for estimating ATEs from observational data
and are widely used for any underlying estimation method (Imbens, 2004; Rubin, 2006; Shalit et al.,
2017). Consistency usually holds as long as health information is accurately and systematically
recorded. Overlap can be ensured through preprocessing (e.g., clipping). Unconfoundedness is
plausible in digital health settings due to the growing availability of rich electronic health records.5
The above assumptions are consistent with the literature studying multiple observational datasets
(Yang & Ding, 2020; Guo et al., 2022). Note that the assumptions for dataset D2 are weaker as
compared to dataset D1 . • For D1 , we assume that there is no unobserved confounding, but the
propensity score is unknown. This is often the case in specialized medical facilities where patients
receive close supervision and where thus all critical health measurements are reported, which is typ-
ically the case in cancer care (Castellanos et al., 2024) and in intensive care units (Johnson et al.,
2016). Needless to say, our assumption is still considerably weaker than assuming an RCT be-
cause we allow that the treatment assignment mechanism varies greatly across subpopulations, is
unknown, and must thus be estimated. Nevertheless, RCTs are a special case of the setting consid-
ered in our general framework in which the propensity score π 1 is known. • For D2 , we do not make
the latter assumption but instead allow for unobserved confounding. This is often the case when data
are recorded by general practitioners where the need for documentation is typically not as strictly
enforced as in other medical facilities.
⇒ In sum, D1 would naturally lead to unbiased ATE estimation but suffers from a large estimation
variance due to the small sample size. In contrast, D2 has a larger size and thus more statistical
power but could lead to biased estimates due to unobserved confounding.

4    O UR METHOD FOR ATE ESTIMATION FROM MULTIPLE DATASETS
Overview: The general idea of our approach is shown in Fig. 2. A Measure of fit: We first use
sample splitting to compute a measure of fit, mθ , to estimate the ATE on the large, observational
dataset D2 . Here, we use a state-of-the-art method based on the DR-learner (Wager, 2024). We
refer to the estimate as τ̂2 (x), where τ2 (x) = E[Y 2 (1) − Y 2 (0) | X 2 = x]. Yet, τ̂2 (x) can be
biased due to unobserved confounding, because of which we later need to adjust for this via the
so-called rectifier (see below). B Influence function estimation: We compute the non-centered
     5
       Furthermore, advances in sensitivity analysis (Frauen et al., 2024; Oprescu et al., 2023) and partial iden-
tification (Duarte et al., 2024) offer complementary pathways to relax this assumption. The existing works
from Fig. 1 for causal inference from multiple datasets generally make this assumption. In that sense, our work
makes weaker assumptions that are more realistic as we allow for unobserved confounders in D2 .


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Population
                                                          Nuisance Parametes
                X            : Small but unconfounded
                                                                                Step B : Influence function estimation


                                                                                                                    Step C : Rectifier
                A          Consistency          Overlap
                                 Unconfoundedness
                                                                                                                                                        Step D : Constructing CIs for ATE in


                X                : Large but confounded
                                                               DR-Learner                                                Step A : Measure of fit
                                                             S-Learner
                A                                                   T-Learner
                                                             AIPW
                            Consistency        Overlap         RA-Learner
                U


Figure 2: Overview of our method. To construct CIs for the ATE with two observational datasets from the
same population but with different assumptions, we leverage prediction-powered inferences: we decompose
our task into computing a measure of fit (i.e., estimating the ATE on the large dataset D2 via the DR-learner,
                                  ˆ τ (i.e., that measures the differences in ATE estimates across both datasets
given by τ̂2 (x)) and a rectifier ∆
D1 and D2 ). However, finding a rectifier for our task is non-trivial and requires a careful derivation in order to
ensure asymptotically valid CIs (→ our Theorem 4.2).

influence function score Ỹη̂ (x) for the observational dataset D1 . This is later used in the rectifier.
                                                                                                       1
 C Rectifier: We compute the rectifier ∆τ , which we use to adjust for the bias between datasets D
      2
and D . This allows us to transform the biased estimates τ̂2 (x) into unbiased estimates of the ATE
in population. D Constructing CIs: Eventually, we compute the CIs CαPP for significance level α.
Why is the above task challenging? First, there is an information gap between the datasets D1
and D2 . This means that different datasets come from different distributions, and we do not have
any prior knowledge of the relationship between the datasets, except that the marginal distributions
of X d are the same. In particular, there can be a distribution shift due to various reasons, such as
unobserved effect modifiers (i.e., variables that change the treatment effect even if they are no con-
founders) and different treatment assignment mechanisms, because of which the propensity scores
may be different across both datasets. We later propose a rectifier that accounts for such distribution
shifts through an augmented inverse-propensity (AIPW) based estimation. Further, the propensity
scores must be estimated, which introduces another source of uncertainty. Second, due to the fun-
damental problem of causal inference (Rubin, 1974), the ATEs are not directly observed but must
be estimated while considering the aforementioned distribution shift. Further, such estimates must
be asymptotically valid so that we can later derive CIs that are also asymptotically valid (→ see our
Theorem 4.2).
Below, we describe the steps A – D in detail. Pseuocode is in Algorithm 1.
Step A : Measure of fit. The first step is to use sample splitting and estimate the conditional average
treatment effect (CATE) τ2 (x) = E[Y 2 (1) − Y 2 (0) | X 2 = x] on the half of the large-scale dataset
D2 of size N (after sample splitting). Let τ̂2 (x) denote an arbitrary CATE estimator (which may be
biased due to, e.g., unobserved confounding). For example, we could choose the DR-learner due to
its fast convergence rate and several favorable theoretical properties (Kennedy, 2023). Needless to
say, our method is also applicable to other estimators. Formally, we train τ̂2 (x) and then yield the
                                  PN
measure of fit on D2 via τ̂2 = N1 j=1 τ̂2 (xj ) by sample splitting.
Step B : Influence function estimation. For our proposed rectifier, we later need the non-centered
influence function (IF) score on D1 . Ideally, one would directly compute the difference in ATEs
across both datasets for the rectifier, but this is impossible since the ATEs are not directly observed
but rather need to be estimated. The estimation needs to be both valid and unbiased to later yield
valid CIs.
We observe that the average of the non-centered IF score of the AIPW estimator is an unbiased
estimation of ATE and is asymptotically normally distributed. This is beneficial for two reasons:
(i) we get an unbiased estimate, which allows us to later obtain an unbiased ATE in population, and
(ii) the estimate is asymptotically normal so that we later can derive valid CIs.
Formally, the non-centered IF score of the AIPW estimator (Robins & Rotnitzky, 1995) is given by
                       a1i       1 − a1i                                                   a1i − π̂ 1 (xi )

                                                                         yi1 −                                                                     1 − π̂ 1 (xi ) µ̂1 (xi ) + π̂ 1 (xi )µ̂0 (xi ) ,

 Ỹη̂ (xi ) =         1
                             −
                    π̂ (xi )   1 − π̂ 1 (xi )                                          π̂ (xi ) (1 − π̂ (xi ))
                                                                                         1              1

                                                                                                                                                                                                 (1)

where the nuisance functions η̂(x) = µ̂0 (x), µ̂1 (x), π̂ (x) are plug-in estimators from D1 , while                           1

µ̂a (x) are estimated response functions for µa (x) = E[Y 1 | X 1 = x, A1 = a] from D1 . Then,


                                                                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                   Pn
the AIPW estimator is τ̂ AIPW = n1                     i=1 Ỹη̂ (xi ). Leveraging results from causal inference literature
                                                                                                   √                   N
(Wager, 2024),
                 we have that τ̂ AIPW is asymptotically normally distributed with                          AIPW
                                                                                                                         n τ̂             − τ −→
      AIPW
 0, V        , where
                                                         "                              2 #        "                                   2 #
                                                                        1
        AIPW                                                      1Y        − µ1 (X)                            1 Y 1 − µ0 (X)
    V          = Var [µ1 (X) − µ0 (X)] + E                   A                                +E         (1 − A )                            .6
                                                                            π 1 (X)                                1 − π 1 (X)
Hence, the above procedure allows us to estimate the ATE for D1 and construct the corresponding
CI with non-centered influence function scores, which we then use in the rectifier to assess the bias
between both datasets D1 and D2 .
Step C : Rectifier. We now introduce our proposed rectifier to quantify the difference in ATE across
both datasets. Formally, we define the rectifier ∆τ as the expectation of the difference between
Ỹη̂ (x) and τ̂2 (x) on D1 . For individual observations i, we write ∆   ˆ i = Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ). Note
that our rectifier is carefully tailored to our task and is non-trivial because, due to the fundamental
problem of causal inference (Rubin, 1974), the ATEs are never observed, but we need to leverage
the influence functions score to be able to compute a valid and unbiased estimate. Formally, we have
                  n h                             n
                                                           a1i        1 − a1i

           ˆτ =1                               1X
                 X                          i
           ∆          Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ) =                    −                  yi1                                                          (2)
               n i=1                           n i=1   π̂ 1 (xi )   1 − π̂ 1 (xi )
                                        a1i − π̂ 1 (xi )

                                                                       1                          1
                              −                                 1 − π̂   (xi )   µ̂ 1 (x i ) + π̂   (x i )µ̂ 0 (xi )   − τ̂ 2 (x i )  .
                                  π̂ 1 (xi ) (1 − π̂ 1 (xi ))
We now present Lemma 4.1, where we leverage results from the causal inference literature (Cher-
nozhukov et al., 2018; Wager, 2024).
Lemma 4.1 (follows from Wager (2024)). Let D1 and D2 be sampled i.i.d under the assumptions
                                                                                        2
above. Assume that we have estimated CATE estimator τ̂2 (x) with sample
                                                                    1
                                                                          splitting on D , and have
consistent estimated nuisance functions η̂(x) = µ̂0 (x), µ̂1 (x), π̂ (x) trained using cross-fitting
                                                                                  p
with converge rate O(n−αµ ) and O(n−απ ) on D1 , i.e., n−αµ (µ̂a (x) − µa (x)) −  → 0, a = 0, 1 and
                              p
n−απ (1/π̂ 1 (x) − 1/π 1 (x)) −
                              → 0. Then, we have that
                                               √
                                                n ∆ˆ τ − τ + E[τ2 ] → N 0, σ∆
                                                                            2
                                                                                .                                                                 (3)
Proof. See Appendix A.1.
Then, the prediction-powered estimate of the ATE on D1 is computed via
                                        n          N                 n                              N
                 ˆ τ + τ̂2 =         1Xˆ        1 X               1 Xh                        i  1 X
          τ̂ PP =∆                         ∆i +       τ̂2 (xj ) =       Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ) +       τ̂2 (xj )                                  (4)
                                     n i=1      N j=1             n i=1                          N j=1
                       N                 n
                                                  a1i        1 − a1i

                    1 X               1X
                =         τ̂2 (xj ) +                    −                  yi1                                                                   (5)
                    N j=1             n i=1   π̂ 1 (xi )   1 − π̂ 1 (xi )

                              a1i − π̂ 1 (xi )

                                                             1                         1
                    −                                 1 − π̂   (x i )  µ̂ 1 (xi ) + π̂   (xi )µ̂ 0 (xi )   − τ̂2 (x i )   .
                        π̂ 1 (xi ) (1 − π̂ 1 (xi ))
Step D : Constructing CIs. We now use the above PPI-based ATE estimate to construct our CIs.
Let σ̂τ22 denote the empirical variance of τ̂2 (x), and let σ̂∆
                                                              2                                  ˆτ.
                                                                denote the empirical variance of ∆
Then, for significance level α ∈ (0, 1), our prediction-powered confidence interval is
                                                                                 r               !
                                                                                       2  σ̂τ2
                                                                                     σ̂∆
                                                CαPP =      τ̂   PP
                                                                      ± z1− α2           + 2         ,                                            (6)
                                                                                      n    N
                        Pn                            2                 PN
                                                  ˆ                                            2
        2
where σ̂∆ = n1       i=1 Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ) − ∆τ    , and σ̂τ22 = N1 j=1 (τ̂2 (xj ) − τ̂2 ) .                                         We show
theoretically that CαPP is asymptotically valid in Theorem 4.2.
Equation 6 has several implications for how our method ‘shrinks’ CIs. (i) The width of the CIs
depends on the size of the different datasets (which we later evaluate empirically as part of our
    6
      Strong double robustness holds here due to the following reason. We use that the estimated nuisance
functions are both consistent and that the RMSE of µ̂a (x) and π̂ 1 (x) decays fast enough. Then, the AIPW
estimation is asymptotically normal around the oracle ATE.


                                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sensitivity analyses). Hence, the width shrinks with a larger dataset D1 and/or a larger dataset D2 .
(ii) The width of the CIs depends on the estimation variance σ̂τ22 from the dataset D2 . This is desired
because our method is particularly designed for using large-scale but confounded datasets D2 , so this
term should shrink the CIs. (iii) The CIs further depend on the estimation variance of the rectifier
  2
σ̂∆ . This term becomes smaller the less confounding the observational dataset D2 has.
Theorem 4.2 (Validity of our prediction-powered CIs). Let D1 and D2 are sampled i.i.d. un-
der the assumptions from above. Further, assume that we have consistent and cross-fitted esti-
mated nuisance functions η̂(x) = (µ̂0 (x), µ̂1 (x), π̂ 1 (x)) with converge rates O(n−αµ ), O(n−απ )
                                       p                                                       p
on D1 , i.e., n−αµ (µ̂a (x) − µa (x)) −→ 0, a = 0, 1 and n−απ (1/π̂ 1 (x) − 1/π 1 (x)) −      → 0 and
αµ + απ ≥ 1/2. We further assume a CATE estimator           τ̂2 (x) trained on D2 .  For some p ∈ [0, 1],
                                                                       q
              n                                                          σ̂ 2  σ̂ 2
limn,N →∞ N     = p. Fix α ∈ (0, 1), and let CαPP = τ̂ PP ± z1−α/2 n∆ + Nτ2 . Then, it holds that
lim supn,N →∞ P (τ ∈ CαPP ) ≥ 1 − α.
Proof. See Appendix A.2 where we leverage Lemma 4.1.
Why is our method better than using the unconfounded dataset only? As
                                                                    qshown in Equation 6,
                                                                                          τ2    σ̂ 2   σ̂ 2
the width of our proposed CIs is mainly determined by the variance term             n + N . When the
                                                                                     ∆


                                                                               ˆ ≈ 0. Then, the variance
τ̂2 (x) is sufficiently accurate, the rectifier is almost equal to zero, i.e., ∆
of the rectifier is significantly smaller than the variance of estimated non-centered IF scores, i.e.,
  2
σ̂∆   ≤ σ̂τ22 . Given the large size of D2 , the variance of the estimated CATE goes to zero since the
estimated variance should be divided by the sample size of D2 , i.e., N (after sample splitting). As a
result, the variance (and thus the CI width) is smaller when using our method than when using only
the unconfounded dataset, which means that our CIs are more narrow than such a naı̈ve baseline.
The above theorem is crucial because it ensures that our PPI-based CIs are asymptotically valid.
Further, note that the above theorem is our contribution: it does not directly follow from the PPI-
based framework. Rather, we must carefully leverage theoretical guarantees for the estimand of
interest and the chosen rectifier, which is one of our contributions.

5       E XTENSION OF OUR METHOD FOR RCT + OBSERVATIONAL DATASETS
We now extend our PPI-based method to combinations of RCT+observational data. Using an RCT
dataset is a special case of D1 . As a result, the propensity score is known, which simplifies the
underlying task. Yet, the information gap between the datasets remains in that both come from
different distributions (e.g., different populations X , different effect modifiers, etc.).
A straightforward way to extend our method would be to apply our AIPW-based method directly
with the known propensities. However, this may have disadvantages as it still requires the estimation
of nuisance functions (response functions). Below, we describe the alternative method based on the
inverse-propensity weighting (IPW) estimator, which makes necessary changes for the steps A – D .
Note that we no longer need the step estimating the influence functions because the propensity score
is known, meaning that we can directly estimate τ1 via the IPW estimator.
Step A : Measure of fit. First, we compute the CATEs analogous to the above approach by using
                                                                                      PN
sample splitting to train τ̂2 on D2 . We thus yield the measure of fit, i.e., τ̂2 = N1 j=1 τ̂2 (xj ).
Step B : IPW estimator. Given the RCT dataset D1 and known propensity scores, we can compute
the inverse-propensity weighted estimation of ATE
                                                  via
                                        n                  n
                                                                 a1i yi1    (1 − a1i )yi1

                                     1X                 1X
                             τ̂1 =         Ỹπ1 (xi ) =                   −                 ,                 (7)
                                     n i=1              n i=1   π 1 (xi )     π 1 (xi )
which we later use in the rectifier (instead of the influence function score as in our method for
multiple observational datasets).
Remark 5.1. Let τ̂1 denote the IPW estimator for the ATE of the RCT dataset (D1 ), τ̂1 is asymp-
                                     √              d                              Pn
                                                   → N 0, σ̂12 , where τ̂1 = n1 i=1 Ỹπ1 (xi ),

totically normally distributed, i.e., n (τ̂1 − τ ) −
         Pn                    2
σ̂12 = n1 i=1 Ỹπ1 (xi ) − τ̂1 .7
    7
        The proof is standard and follows from, e.g., Wager (2024).


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The above Remark 5.1 ensures that the estimate is asymptotically normal, which allows us to later
obtain valid CIs.
Step C : Rectifier. We now introduce our rectifier ∆τ , which denotes the average difference be-
tween Ỹπ1 (x) and τ̂2 (x) on D1 . Here, τ̂2 (x)h is trained CATEi estimators on D2 based on sample
splitting. Our rectifier then given by ∆τ = E Ỹπ1 (x) − τ2 (x) .
Then, the prediction-powered estimate of the ATE on D1 is computed via
                                                                                   N                 n          N                 n
                                                                                1 X               1Xˆ        1 X               1X
                                                       τ̂ PP =                        τ̂2 (xj ) +       ∆i =       τ̂2 (xj ) +      Ỹ 1 (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ).                                    (8)
                                                                                N j=1             n i=1      N j=1             n i=1 π
Step D : Constructing CIs. We now use the above PPI-based ATE estimate to construct our CIs.
Let σ̂τ22 denote the empirical variance of τ̂2 (x), and let σ̂∆
                                                              2
                                                                 denotes empirical variance of rectifier.
Then, for significance level α ∈ (0, 1), our prediction-powered CI is given by
                                                        r               !
                                                            2
                                                          σ̂∆     σ̂τ22
                                    PP      PP
                                  Cα = τ̂ ± z1− α2             +          ,                              (9)
                                                           n       N

          ˆ τ = 1 Pn ∆        ˆ     2      1
                                             Pn       ˆ     ˆ                    1
                                                                                   PN                 2
where ∆             n     i=1 i , σ̂∆ = n       i=1 ∆i − ∆τ , and τ̂2 = N            j=1 τ̂2 (xj ), σ̂τ2 =
 1
   P  N
N     j=1 (τ̂2 (xj ) − τ̂2 ). The following theorem shows that our above prediction-powered CI is
valid.
Theorem 5.2 (Validity of our prediction-powered CIs in RCT+observational setting). Let D1
                                                                                                  n
and D2 are sampled i.i.d. under the assumptions from above, and limn,N →∞ N                            = p
for some p ∈ [0, 1]. Then,          the prediction-powered    confidence    interval has valid    coverage:
lim inf n,N →∞ P τ ∈ CαPP ≥ 1 − α.
Proof. See Appendix A.3 where we leverage Remark 5.1.
6                       E XPERIMENTS
We now evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method by examining the faithfulness and width
of the constructed CIs. To this end, we follow prior research and perform experiments with both
synthetic and medical data (e.g., Schröder et al., 2024; Schweisthal et al., 2024). Synthetic data has
the advantage that we have access to the ground-truth CATEs and thereby can make comparisons
against oracle estimates. Further, medical data allows us to demonstrate both the applicability and
relevance of our method in practice.
6.1                      S YNTHETIC DATA
                                                                                                                            Scenario 1             Scenario 2             Scenario 3
                 Scenario 1
                                                      Data: Inspired by Demirel et al. (2024), we
                                               Scenario 2                 Scenario 3                               1.00
                                                                                                  N = 5000


                                                                                                                   0.75
                                                                                                           Width


                                                                                                                   0.50
                                                      simulate samples from a data-generating pro-                 0.25
= 0.05


                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                                                                                          200           400      200         400        200          400

                                                      cess with a confounder X d ∈ [−1, 1] and an                  1.00
                                                                                                                                    n                    n                     n
                                                                                                  n/N = 1/50


                                                                                                                   0.75

                                                      unobserved confounder U 2 ∈ U ⊆ [−1, 1], a
                                                                                                           Width


         0          1         2         0          1        2      0.5    1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5                    0.50
                                                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                   0.00

                                                      binary treatment Ad ∈ {0, 1}, and a real-valued              1.00
                                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                        400      200
                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                             400        200
                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                     400
= 0.1


                                                                                                                   0.75

                                                      outcome Y d ∈ R for d ∈ {1, 2}. We generate
                                                                                                  n = 200
                                                                                                           Width


                                                                                                                   0.50
                                                                                                                   0.25


                                                      the potential outcomes Y d (a), d ∈ {1, 2} con-
                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                                                                                          2000          4000    2000         4000      2000        4000
         0          1         2        0           1        2       0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5                                     N                    N                     N
             PP (Ours)            AIPW ( 1 only)        AIPW ( 2 only)            (True in 1)                                    PP (Ours)     AIPW ( 1 only)       AIPW ( 2 only)


                                                      ditioned on X d = x and U d = u by sampling
                                                                                                  2
Figure 3: Performance for synthetic data. from a Gaussian process GP : [−1, 1] → R
Left: We show the estimated CIs for five random with mean function m(x, u) = 0 and kernel
                                                                            ′     ′
seeds. The red line is the oracle ATE. Ideally, the function k ((x, u) , (x , u )). We choose a com-
CIs should be narrow but still overlap with the or- posite kernel by adding a squared-exponential
acle ATE. Right: Shows in the width of the CIs av- (SE) kernel to model the local variation and a
eraged over five different seeds (α = 0.05). Here, linear kernel to model trends in the outcome.
                                                                                    ′   ′             ′
we vary the size of the different datasets given by We thus have hk ((x, u) , (x , u )) i= αx xx +
      1             2                AIPW     2                               ′           ′
n (D ) and N (D ). Note that τ̂            (D only) αu uu′ + exp − (x−x     2
                                                                                )
                                                                                  − (u−u2
                                                                                            )
                                                                                              , with con-
                                                                          2lx         2lu
is shown in intentionally shown in gray: it is not
faithful as seen in the left plot and therefore not a figuration parameters θ = {αx , αu , lx , lu } ∈
                                                        4
valid baseline. ⇒ Our method yields faithful CIs,     R + .  We  can simulate different confounding
and CIs are shorter as desired.                       strengths by varying the value of θ.
We generate the covariates of observational datasets D1 and D2 by sampling X d , U 2 ∼
Uniform[−1, 1] for d ∈ {1, 2} independently. For each patient, treatments assignments are sam-
pled via Ai ∼ Bernoulli(P (A = 1 | xi , ui )), where the probability of treatment assignment is


                                                                                                                                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


generated similarly to Equation 6.1 via a logit function Lπ (x, u) sampled from GP θπ (x, u), where
θπ = {αxπ , αuπ , lxπ , luπ }. A larger value of αu and a smaller value of lu implies stronger confounding.
The observed outcomes are computed via Y = (1 − A) · GP θ0 (x, u) + A · GP θ1 (x, u).
We generate n = 200 (D1 ) and N = 5000 (D2 ) samples. For D1 , we set αu = 0 and lu = 106
to prevent confounding. For D2 , we use different values of θ to generate different confounding
scenarios: • Scenario 1: little confounding (αu = 0, lu = 106 ). • Scenario 2: medium confounding
(αu = 0, lu = 0.5). • Scenario 3: heavy confounding (αu = 10, lu = 0.5). Further details and
illustrations about the data-generation process are given in Appendix F.1. Altogether, we generate
over 60 different datasets under varying configurations for the evaluations below.
Baselines: We compare our PPI-based method τ̂ PP for constructing CIs against the following base-
line: (1) we estimate the ATE via the AIPW estimator τ̂ AIPW only on the small dataset, named τ̂ AIPW
(D1 only) which is the naı̈ve baseline; (2) we estimate the ATE via the AIPW estimator on the large,
confounded dataset, named τ̂ AIPW (D2 only); and (3) we report the oracle value for τ in D1 .
Main results: Fig. 3 (left). We observe the following: (1) The CIs from our method overlap with
the oracle ATE (in red), which shows that our method is faithful. (2) In contrast, the baseline τ̂ AIPW
(D2 only) rarely covers the oracle ATE and is thus not faithful. This can be expected since the
dataset computes the CIs based on the confounded dataset and, hence, yields biased estimates. The
unfaithfulness becomes especially evident in Scenario 3 where data under large confounding is gen-
erated. (3) Our method generates CIs that are more narrow as compared to the naı̈ve baseline τ̂ AIPW
(D1 only) . For example, in the left plot, our CIs are, on average, smaller by 49.99% (Scenario 1),
55.37% (Scenario 2), and 55.35% (Scenario 3). ⇒ Takeaway: Our PPI-based method yields faithful
CIs but where the width of the CIs is clearly shorter. Hence, our method performs the best.
Sensitivity to dataset size: Fig. 3 (right) compares the sensitivity across different dataset sizes.
(1) Our method generates CIs that are again more narrow and, therefore, superior. We observe that
our method performs better in terms of widths of CIs than the naı̈ve baseline. (2) The advantages of
our method become pronounced for setting where N ≫ n as expected (see right plot, top row).
6.2 M EDICAL DATA
Dataset: We now provide a case study that demonstrates the applicability of our method to medi-
cal datasets. We chose two common datasets: the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al., 2016) and a
Brazilian COVID-19 dataset (Baqui et al., 2020). • MIMIC-III contains health records from pa-
tients admitted to intensive care units at large hospitals. We aim to estimate the average red blood
cell count of all patients after being treated with mechanical ventilation. Our estimation is based on
8 confounders from medical practice (e.g., respiratory rate, hematocrit). • The COVID-19 dataset
contains health records of hospitalizations in Brazil across different regions and from patients with
different socio-economic backgrounds. We are interested in predicting the effect of comorbidities
on the mortality of COVID-19 patients. We created two different splits of the original dataset into
D1 and D2 : (i) we split by regions of the hospitals in Brazil (i.e., North and Central-South) and
(ii) by ethnicity of participants (i.e., White and others). Further details are in Appendix F.2.
Table 1: Results for different medical datasets. Results: The results are in Table 1. We again
We report the RMSE of the ATE estimator and compare the CIs of our estimator against the
the width of the CIs. The results for τ̂ AIPW (D2 baselines from above. We further report the root
only) are shown in gray because the estimator is means squared error for the factual outcomes.
not faithful and therefore also not a viable base- We find: (1) Our method achieves the smallest
line. Reported is the average performance over 5 RMSE, which indicates that underlying patterns
random seeds.                                                                  in the data are well captured. (2) Our method
  Dataset            MIMIC-III    COVID-19 (by region) COVID-19 (by ethnicity)
                                                                               obtains  the smallest yet valid CIs. Compared to
                   RMSE Width RMSE           Width     RMSE        Width       τ̂ AIPW (D1 only), our methods leads a ∼3.5x re-
  AIPW
  τ̂
  AIPW
         1
        (D only) 0.057
         2
                           0.077   7.591     8.479     39.970      0.081       duction in the width of CIs. (3) τ̂ AIPW (D2 only)
  τ̂    (D only) 0.058     0.003 17.125      0.311     39.999      0.004
  PP
  τ̂ (Ours)        0.057   0.023   7.131     2.341     39.968      0.026       is  known to be biased. This explains why the
     Smaller is better. Best value in bold.                                    RMSE is sometimes considerably larger than the
RMSE for the other methods, which again corroborates our findings that τ̂ AIPW is not faithful.
⇒ Takeaway: Our PPI-based method is effective for medical data.
6.3 R ESULTS FOR RCT+ OBSERVATIONAL DATA
Data: We use the same data-generating process from above. However, we now mimic an RCT for
D1 by setting the unobserved confounder U to zero and corresponding α = 0 and lu = 106 . Details
are in Appendix F.1.


                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Baselines: We now report our method based on IPW (instead of AIPW). We additionally implement
the method by van der Laan et al. (2024), which allows to estimate the ATE from both datasets. We
refer to this method by τ̂ ATMLE . However, we note that the method is often unstable: their method
involves a matrix inversion, yet where the matrix is often singular, so that no CIs can be computed
(see Appendix H for a detailed explanation). This later explains the fairly noisy performance of the
baseline. For a fair comparison, we simply set the output in these cases to D1 .
Results: Fig. 4 (left) shows the results. We find: (1) The CIs from our method cover the oracle ATE
(in red), which shows that our method is faithful for the RCT+observational dataset. (2) τ̂ ATMLE
is faithful in the settings with little and medium confounding (Scenarios 2 and 3), but it fails in
Scenario 3 where it is not faithful. (3) Our method generates CIs that are consistently more narrow
compared to the baselines. ⇒ Takeaway: Our method performs best.
Sensitivity to dataset size: In Fig. 4 (right), we analyze the role of dataset sizes. The results confirm
our findings from above: Compared to τ̂ ATMLE , our method is much more stable. Further, our method
generates CIs that are consistently more narrow and thus superior.

6.4 A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
                                                           Scenario 1                        Scenario 2                    Scenario 3
We provide further experiments to                                                                                                                                             1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          Scenario 1                    Scenario 2                Scenario 3


                                                                                                                                                             N = 5000
                                                                                                                                                                              0.75

corroborate our above takeaways in


                                                                                                                                                                      Width
                                                                                                                                                                              0.50
                                            = 0.05


                                                                                                                                                                              0.25
                                                                                                                                                                              0.00
(Appendix. G).                                                                                                                                                                1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                     400              200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 400            200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              400


                                                                                                                                                             n/N = 1/50
                                                                                                                                                                              0.75


                                                                                                                                                                      Width
                                                     0         1             2         0           1          2      0.5    1.0    1.5   2.0                                  0.50
• Variations of our method: (1) We                                                                                                                                            0.25
                                                                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                        200          400              200        400            200           400
performed experiments where we in-                                                                                                                                                               n                           n                            n
                                            = 0.1


                                                                                                                                                                              1.00
                                                                                                                                                                              0.75


                                                                                                                                                             n = 200
stantiated our method using neu-


                                                                                                                                                                      Width
                                                                                                                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                                                                                              0.25
                                                                                                                                                                              0.00
ral networks as regression models                0.0     0.5   1.0     1.5   2.0      0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0   0.5    1.0     1.5    2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                        2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4000             2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4000           2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4000

                                            PP (Ours)                AIPW ( 1 only)               AIPW ( 2 only)           ATMLE               (True in 1)                           PP (Ours)              AIPW ( 1 only)              ATMLE          AIPW ( 2 only)

for estimating nuisance parameters
in AIPW to offer more flexibility in Figure 4: Performance for synthetic data. Left: We show
learning representations of the co- the estimated CIs for five different seeds in RCT and observa-
variate space (see Appendix G.1). tional datasets. Right: We show the width of the CIs averaged
(2) We performed experiments with over five different seeds (α = 0.05). ⇒ Our method is both
XGBoost to show the applicability of stable and leads to CIs that are faithful and narrow, as desired.
our method to underlying base mod-
els for estimating nuisance parameters in AIPW (see Appendix G.2). • Different settings: (3) We
varied the size of the covariate space to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in settings with
a high-dimensional covariate space (see Appendix G.3). (4) We varied the covariate dependence
by increasing the collinearity in the input space (see Appendix G.4). (5) We varied the strength of
confounding in D1 (see Appendix G.5). We found that our method performs best across all settings.
(6) Oftentimes, estimates of treatment effects in RCT settings benefit when the propensity score is
estimated (Su et al., 2023; Cai & van der Laan, 2018). Motivated by this, we applied our AIPW-
based method to combinations of RCT and observational datasets (see Appendix G.6). Here, we
find that we can improve the CI width further using our AIPW-based method. (7) We performed a
refutation check in which we applied A-TMLE to combinations of two observational datasets (see
Appendix G.7), but remind that this violates the assumptions of A-TMLE. As expected, A-TMLE
underperforms, and our method remains clearly superior. (8) We expanded the sample size of D1
from 100 to 2500 to further assess the role of the size of D1 and the robustness of our method regard-
ing the size of D1 . We found that our method shows a clear margin and the results are as expected
(see Appendix G.8).
7   D ISCUSSION
Relevance: In this paper, we developed a new method for ATE estimation from multiple observa-
tional datasets. Our method is highly relevant to medical practice as it helps assess the effectiveness
and safety of drugs. To this end, we perform rigorous uncertainty quantification by deriving and re-
porting valid CIs. Limitations & future work: One improvement is extending our method to other
estimands like the CATE or to causal survival analysis. Future research may combine our method
with pre-trained large language models (LLMs) or develop tailored neural network architectures on
top of our method for text-based representations. However, as with any method of causal inference,
the assumptions must be carefully assessed to ensure safe and reliable use.


                                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgments. Our research was supported by the DAAD program Konrad Zuse Schools of
Excellence in Artificial Intelligence, sponsored by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research.

R EFERENCES
Ahmed M Alaa and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Bayesian inference of individualized treatment effects
  using multi-task Gaussian processes. In NeurIPS, 2017.

Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Clara Fannjiang, Michael I Jordan, and Tijana Zrnic.
  Prediction-powered inference. Science, 382(6671):669–674, 2023a.

Anastasios N Angelopoulos, John C Duchi, and Tijana Zrnic. PPI++: Efficient prediction-powered
  inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01453, 2023b.

Timothy B Armstrong and Michal Kolesár. Finite-sample optimal estimation and inference on aver-
  age treatment effects under unconfoundedness. Econometrica, 89(3):1141–1177, 2021.

PM Aronow, James M Robins, Theo Saarinen, Fredrik Sävje, and Jasjeet Sekhon. Nonparametric
 identification is not enough, but randomized controlled trials are. In Workshop on the Neglected
 Assumptions in Causal Inference (NACI) at the 38 th International Conference on Machine Learn-
 ing, 2021.

Susan Athey, Raj Chetty, and Guido Imbens. Combining experimental and observational data to
  estimate treatment effects on long term outcomes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09676, 2020.

Heejung Bang and James M Robins. Doubly robust estimation in missing data and causal inference
  models. Biometrics, 61(4):962–973, 2005.

Pedro Baqui, Ioana Bica, Valerio Marra, Ari Ercole, and Mihaela van Der Schaar. Ethnic and
  regional variations in hospital mortality from covid-19 in brazil: a cross-sectional observational
  study. The Lancet Global Health, 8(8):e1018–e1026, 2020.

George A Barnard. Statistical inference. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Method-
  ological), 11(2):115–149, 1949.

Weixin Cai and Mark J van der Laan. One-step targeted maximum likelihood for time-to-event
 outcomes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09479, 2018.

Emily H Castellanos, Brett K Wittmershaus, and Sheenu Chandwani. Raising the bar for real-
  world data in oncology: Approaches to quality across multiple dimensions. JCO Clinical Cancer
  Informatics, 8, 2024.

Shuxiao Chen, Bo Zhang, and Ting Ye. Minimax rates and adaptivity in combining experimental
  and observational data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10522, 2021.

Victor Chernozhukov, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen, Whitney
  Newey, and James Robins. Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural pa-
  rameters. The Econometrics Journal, 21(1):C1–C68, 2018.

Bénédicte Colnet, Imke Mayer, Guanhua Chen, Awa Dieng, Ruohong Li, Gaël Varoquaux, Jean-
   Philippe Vert, Julie Josse, and Shu Yang. Causal inference methods for combining randomized
   trials and observational studies: a review. Statistical Science, 39(1):165–191, 2024.

Jacqueline Corrigan-Curay, Leonard Sacks, and Janet Woodcock. Real-world evidence and real-
  world data for evaluating drug safety and effectiveness. JAMA, 320(9):867–868, 2018.

Alicia Curth and Mihaela Van der Schaar. Nonparametric estimation of heterogeneous treatment
  effects: From theory to learning algorithms. In AISTATS, 2021.

Ilker Demirel, Ahmed Alaa, Anthony Philippakis, and David Sontag. Prediction-powered general-
   ization of causal inferences. In ICML, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Guilherme Duarte, Noam Finkelstein, Dean Knox, Jonathan Mummolo, and Ilya Shpitser. An au-
  tomated approach to causal inference in discrete settings. Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, 119(547):1778–1793, 2024.
Stefan Feuerriegel, Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk, Jonas Schweisthal, Konstantin Hess, Ali-
  cia Curth, Stefan Bauer, Niki Kilbertus, Isaac S Kohane, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Causal
  machine learning for predicting treatment outcomes. Nature Medicine, 30(4):958–968, 2024.
Adam Fisch, Joshua Maynez, R Alex Hofer, Bhuwan Dhingra, Amir Globerson, and William W
  Cohen. Stratified prediction-powered inference for hybrid language model evaluation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2406.04291, 2024.
Dennis Frauen, Tobias Hatt, Valentyn Melnychuk, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Estimating average causal
  effects from patient trajectories. In AAAI, 2023.
Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Sharp bounds for generalized causal
  sensitivity analysis. In NeurIPS, 2024.
AmirEmad Ghassami, Alan Yang, David Richardson, Ilya Shpitser, and Eric Tchetgen Tchetgen.
 Combining experimental and observational data for identification and estimation of long-term
 causal effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.10743, 2022.
Thomas A Glass, Steven N Goodman, Miguel A Hernán, and Jonathan M Samet. Causal inference
  in public health. Annual Review of Public Health, 34(1):61–75, 2013.
Wenshuo Guo, Serena Lutong Wang, Peng Ding, Yixin Wang, and Michael Jordan. Multi-source
 causal inference using control variates under outcome selection bias. Transactions on Machine
 Learning Research, 2022.
Tobias Hatt and Stefan Feuerriegel. Estimating average treatment effects via orthogonal regulariza-
  tion. In CIKM, 2021.
Tobias Hatt, Jeroen Berrevoets, Alicia Curth, Stefan Feuerriegel, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Com-
  bining observational and randomized data for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.12891, 2022.
Konstantin Hess, Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Bayesian neural
  controlled differential equations for treatment effect estimation. In ICLR, 2024.
Julian C Hong. Strategies to turn real-world data into real-world knowledge. JAMA Network Open,
  4(10):e2128045, 2021.
Shunsuke Horii and Yoichi Chikahara. Uncertainty quantification in heterogeneous treatment effect
  estimation with Gaussian-process-based partially linear model. In AAAI, 2024.
Guido Imbens, Nathan Kallus, Xiaojie Mao, and Yuhao Wang. Long-term causal inference under
  persistent confounding via data combination. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B:
  Statistical Methodology, 2024.
Guido W Imbens. Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: A
  review. Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1):4–29, 2004.
Andrew Jesson, Sören Mindermann, Uri Shalit, and Yarin Gal. Identifying causal-effect inference
  failure with uncertainty-aware models. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Fredrik Johansson, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag. Learning representations for counterfactual infer-
  ence. In ICML, 2016.
ER John, Keith R Abrams, Christopher Brightling, and Nuala A Sheehan. Assessing causal treat-
  ment effect estimation when using large observational datasets. BMC Medical Research Method-
  ology, 19(1):207, 2019.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. MIMIC-III:
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific Data, 3(1), 2016.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nathan Kallus, Aahlad Manas Puli, and Uri Shalit. Removing hidden confounding by experimental
  grounding. In NeurIPS, 2018.

Edward H Kennedy. Semiparametric theory and empirical processes in causal inference. Springer,
  Cham, Switzerland, 2016.

Edward H Kennedy. Towards optimal doubly robust estimation of heterogeneous causal effects.
  Electronic Journal of Statistics, 17(2):3008–3049, 2023.

Thomas Kneib, Alexander Silbersdorff, and Benjamin Säfken. Rage against the mean: a review of
  distributional regression approaches. Econometrics and Statistics, 26:99–123, 2023.

Lihua Lei and Emmanuel J. Candès. Conformal inference of counterfactuals and individual treat-
  ment effects. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 83(5):
  911–938, 2021.

Lauren D Liao, Emilie Højbjerre-Frandsen, Alan E Hubbard, and Alejandro Schuler. Prognostic
  adjustment with efficient estimators to unbiasedly leverage historical data in randomized trials.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19180, 2023.

Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Causal transformer for estimating
  counterfactual outcomes. In ICML, 2022.

Valentyn Melnychuk, Stefan Feuerriegel, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Quantifying aleatoric uncer-
  tainty of the treatment effect: A novel orthogonal learner. In NeurIPS, 2024.

Jerzy Neyman. Sur les applications de la thar des probabilities aux experiences agaricales: Essay
   des principle. excerpts reprinted (1990) in english. Statistical Science, 5(463-472):4, 1923.

Miruna Oprescu, Jacob Dorn, Marah Ghoummaid, Andrew Jesson, Nathan Kallus, and Uri Shalit.
 B-learner: Quasi-oracle bounds on heterogeneous causal effects under hidden confounding. In
 ICML, 2023.

Sky Qiu, Lars van der Laan, and Mark J van der Laan. atmle: Adaptive Targeted Minimum Loss-
  based Estimation for Augmenting Randomized Controlled Trial with Real-World Data., 2024. R
  package version 0.1.0.

James M Robins and Andrea Rotnitzky. Semiparametric efficiency in multivariate regression models
  with missing data. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(429):122–129, 1995.

Donald B Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies.
  Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(5):688–701, 1974.

Donald B Rubin. Causal inference using potential outcomes: Design, modeling, decisions. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 100(469):322–331, 2005.

Donald B Rubin. Matched sampling for causal effects. Cambridge University Press, Canbridge,
  UK, 2006.

Maresa Schröder, Dennis Frauen, Jonas Schweisthal, Konstantin Hess, Valentyn Melnychuk, and
 Stefan Feuerriegel. Conformal prediction for causal effects of continuous treatments. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2407.03094, 2024.

Alejandro Schuler, David Walsh, Diana Hall, Jon Walsh, and Fisher. Increasing the efficiency of
  randomized trial estimates via linear adjustment for a prognostic score. The International Journal
  of Biostatistics, 18(2):329–356, 2022.

Jonas Schweisthal, Dennis Frauen, Mihaela van der Schaar, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Meta-learners
  for partially-identified treatment effects across multiple environments. In ICML, 2024.

Uri Shalit, Fredrik D Johansson, and David Sontag. Estimating individual treatment effect: gener-
  alization bounds and algorithms. In ICML, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fangzhou Su, Wenlong Mou, Peng Ding, and Martin J Wainwright. When is the estimated
  propensity score better? High-dimensional analysis and bias correction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.17102, 2023.
Evelina Tacconelli, Anna Gorska, Elena Carrara, Ruth Joanna Davis, Marc Bonten, Alex W
  Friedrich, Corinna Glasner, Herman Goossens, Jan Hasenauer, Josep Maria Haro Abad, et al.
  Challenges of data sharing in European Covid-19 projects: A learning opportunity for advancing
  pandemic preparedness and response. The Lancet Regional Health: Europe, 21: 100467, 2022.
Mark J van der Laan and Daniel Rubin. Targeted maximum likelihood learning. The International
 Journal of Biostatistics, 2(1):11, 2006.
Mark J van der Laan, David Benkeser, and Weixin Cai. Efficient estimation of pathwise differen-
 tiable target parameters with the undersmoothed highly adaptive lasso. The International Journal
 of Biostatistics, 19(1):261–289, 2023.
Mark J van der Laan, Sky Qiu, and Lars van der Laan. Adaptive-TMLE for the average treat-
 ment effect based on randomized controlled trial augmented with real-world data. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2405.07186, 2024.
Stefan Wager. Causal Inference: A Statistical Learning Approach. Preprint, 2024.
Shirly Wang, Matthew BA McDermott, Geeticka Chauhan, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Michael C Hughes,
  and Tristan Naumann. MIMIC-extract: A data extraction, preprocessing, and representation
  pipeline for MIMIC-III. In ACM CHIL, 2020.
Carlos KH Wong, Kristy TK Lau, Ivan CH Au, Sophelia HS Chan, Eric HY Lau, Benjamin J
  Cowling, and Gabriel M Leung. Effectiveness of nirmatrelvir/ritonavir in children and adolescents
  aged 12–17 years following SARS-CoV-2 Omicron infection: A target trial emulation. Nature
  Communications, 15(1):4917, 2024.
Shu Yang and Peng Ding. Combining multiple observational data sources to estimate causal effects.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 115(531):1540–1554, 2020.
Tijana Zrnic and Emmanuel J Candès. Cross-prediction-powered inference. Proceedings of the
   National Academy of Sciences, 121(15):e2322083121, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOFS

A.1    S UPPORTING LEMMA

Below, we restate Lemma 4.1 in a more detailed way and provide the proof.
Lemma 4.1 Let D1 and D2 be sampled i.i.d. under the assumptions above. We assume sample split-
ting; i.e., let D1 be split into D1,1 and D1,2 , and let D2 be split into into D2,1 and D2,2 . Let us assume
that we have an estimated CATE estimator τ̂2 (x) on D2,1 .  Further, we assume that we have esti-
mated nuisance functions η̂ 1 (x) = µ̂10 (x), µ̂11 (x), π̂ 1,1 (x) and η̂ 2 (x) = µ̂20 (x), µ̂21 (x), π̂ 1,2 (x)
that were estimated separately on D1,1 and D1,2 with converge rates
                                   1                         p
                           n−αµ          (µ̂1 (x) − µ1a (x)) −
                                                             → 0,       a = 0, 1,
                                | D1,1 | a
                                                                                                              (10)
                                   1                                  p
                           n−απ          (1/π̂ 1,1 (x) − 1/π 1,1 (x)) −
                                                                      → 0,
                                | D1,1 |
for some constants with αµ , απ ≥ 0 and αµ + απ ≥ 1/2. We assume that Equation 10 also holds
when the roles of D1,1 and D1,2 swapped. Then, we construct the rectifier on D1 given by
                                              ˆ τ = τ̂AIPW − τ̂ D1 ,
                                              ∆                                                               (11)
                                                               2

where the cross-fitted estimator is
               | D1,1 | D1,1 | D1,2 | D1,2
      τ̂AIPW =         τ̂      +              τ̂      ,                                                        (12)
                  n                      n
          1,1     1       X
      τ̂ D = 1,1                Ỹη̂2 (xi )                                                                    (13)
               |D |
                        i∈D 1,1
                          X                                    yi − µ̂2 (xi )             yi − µ̂20 (xi )

                  1
              = 1,1                µ̂21 (xi ) − µ̂20 (xi ) + ai 1,2 1         − (1 − ai )                    ,
               |D |                                              π̂ (xi )                 1 − π̂ 1,2 (xi )
                        i∈D 1,1
          1,2     1       X
      τ̂ D = 1,2                Ỹη̂1 (xi )                                                                    (14)
               |D |
                        i∈D 1,2
                          X                                    yi − µ̂1 (xi )             yi − µ̂10 (xi )

                  1
              = 1,2                µ̂11 (xi ) − µ̂10 (xi ) + ai 1,1 1         − (1 − ai )                    ,
               |D |         1,2
                                                                 π̂ (xi )                 1 − π̂ 1,1 (xi )
                         i∈D

and the evaluated CATE estimator on D1 is
                                                 1     1 X
                                             τ̂2D =         τ̂2 (xi ).                                        (15)
                                                       n  1
                                                          i∈D

All xi in the above and following equations are x1i , so we ignore the superscript for simplicity and
use colors to distinguish. Then, we have that

                                  √
                                      ˆ τ − τ + E[τ2 ] ⇒ N 0, σ∆
                                                               2

                                   n ∆                             .                                          (16)


Proof. To prove Equation 16, we show it in three steps: (1) decomposition of the rectifier ∆              ˆτ;
(2) the central limited theorem for oracle nuisance functions and CATE estimator; and (3) error due
to nuisance estimation. These are below. We use the ‘*’ to refer to oracle estimates.
(1) Decomposition of ∆   ˆ τ . First, let us define a new auxiliary random variable Zi = Ỹη̂ (xi )− τ̂2 (xi ).
We then separate the rectifier ∆  ˆ τ (i.e., the average of Zi ) into two parts:
                    n
            ˆτ = 1          1 Xh
                   X                                     i 1 X
            ∆          Zi =         Ỹη̂ (xi ) − Yη (xi ) +         [Yη (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi )] .
                 n i=1      n                               n                                                 (17)
                              i∈D 1                           i∈D 1
                            |             {z             } |             {z              }
                                    error due to nuisance estimation     oracle nuisance functions


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first term in Equation 17 denotes the error introduced by using estimated nuisance functions,
and the second term in Equation 17 denotes the mean of the differences between pseudo-outcomes
based on the oracle nuisance function and the CATE estimator.
(2) The central limited theorem for oracle nuisance functions and CATE estimator. Note that,
for the second term in Equation 17, Yη (xi ) are pseudo-outcomes based on oracle nuisance functions
(with no dependency on any estimated functions on D1 or D2 ), while τ̂2 (·) is estimated on D2,1
(particularly, it is independent of D1 ). Thus, Yη (x) and τ̂2 (x) are independent functions, which
means that Yη (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ) are i.i.d. random variables. Then, following the central limit theorem
(CLT), we have
                                                                        !
                      √     1 X                                                   2
                        n            [Yη (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi )] − τ + E[τ2 ] ⇒ N (0, σ∆ ).             (18)
                            n      1i∈D

(3) Error due to nuisance estimation. We follow the proof in Wager (2024) to show that the
estimation error is negligible. First, we rewrite the first term in Equation 17 as
      1 Xh                          i  1 X                 1 X                          ∗
               Ỹη̂ (xi ) − Yη (xi ) =        Ỹη̂ (xi ) −        Yη (xi ) = τ̂AIPW − τ̂AIPW . (19)
      n                                n                   n
        i∈D 1                                         i∈D 1                       i∈D 1
Second, following Equation 12, we can rewrite the oracle estimation as
              ∗        | D1,1 | D1,1 ,∗ | D1,2 | D1,2 ,∗
            τ̂AIPW =            τ̂      +       τ̂
                          n                n
                       | D1,1 |      1    X               | D1,2 |     1   X                                 (20)
                     =           ·   1,1
                                               Yη (xi ) +          ·   1,2
                                                                                Yη (xi ).
                          n        |D |    1,1
                                                             n       |D |   1,2
                                                      i∈D                                       i∈D
                                          D 1,1               D 1,1 ,∗
Moreover, we can decompose τ̂                      and τ̂                as
                                                     1,1             1,1              1,1
                                              τ̂ D         = m̂D
                                                               1              − m̂D
                                                                                  0         ,
                                                                    1,1       1,1                            (21)
                                                   D 1,1 ,∗
                                              τ̂              = m̂1D ,∗ − m̂D
                                                                            0
                                                                                  ,∗

where
                                             X                       yi − µ̂21 (xi )

                              1,1     1
                       m̂1D         =               µ̂ 2
                                                       1 (x i ) + ai                     ,
                                   | D1,1 |                            π̂ 1,2 (xi )
                                            i∈D 1,1
                                             X                                 yi − µ̂20 (xi )

                            1,1       1
                      m̂0D = 1,1                    µ̂20 (xi ) + (1 − ai )                       ,
                                   |D |                                       1 − π̂ 1,2 (xi )
                                            i∈D 1,1
                                             X                                                               (22)
                          1,1         1                              yi − µ1 (xi )
                     m̂D1
                              ,∗
                                 =                  µ    (x
                                                       1 i    ) + ai                     ,
                                   | D1,1 |                            π 1,2 (xi )
                                            i∈D 1,1
                          1,1         1      X                                 yi − µ0 (xi )

                     m̂0D ,∗ = 1,1                  µ0 (xi ) + (1 − ai )                         .
                                   |D |         1,1
                                                                              1 − π 1,2 (xi )
                                                     i∈D
Then, we have
                               ∗
                    τ̂AIPW − τ̂AIPW
                  | D1,1 | D1,1 | D1,2 | D1,2 | D1,1 | D1,1 ,∗ | D1,2 | D1,2 ,∗
                =          τ̂     +             τ̂        −              τ̂          −              τ̂
                     n                    n                        n                         n
                  | D1,1 |   D1,1           1,1
                                                    | D1,2 |   1,2                       1,2

                =             τ̂     − τ̂ D ,∗ +                       τ̂ D − τ̂ D ,∗
                     n                                       n
                  | D1,1 |   D1,1           D 1,1         D 1,1 ,∗          1,1

                =             m̂1 − m̂0 − m̂1                      + m̂D  0
                                                                                ,∗
                                                                                                             (23)
                     n
                         1,2
                     |D |            1,2           1,2           1,2             1,2

                  +              m̂1D − m̂D     0       − m̂1D ,∗ + m̂D       0
                                                                                     ,∗
                        n
                  | D1,1 |   D1,1             1,1
                                                       | D1,1 |
                                                                             D 1,1         D 1,1 ,∗

                =             m̂1 − m̂D     1
                                                  ,∗
                                                        −                 m̂ 0      −   m̂ 0
                     n                                          n
                         1,2                                         1,2
                     |D |            1,2           1,2
                                                                |D |                1,2           1,2

                  +              m̂1D − m̂D     1
                                                       ,∗
                                                            −                 m̂D 0      − m̂D 0
                                                                                                      ,∗
                        n                                            n

                                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            √               ∗
                                                                   √   1,1          1,1

To verify     n (τ̂AIPW − τ̂AIPW ) →p 0, it suffices to show that n τ̂ D − τ̂ D ,∗ →p 0. Hence,
                                    √         1,1       1,1

it is further suffices to show that n m̂1D − m̂D      1
                                                            ,∗
                                                                 →p 0. The proof can then be extended by
carrying out the same argument for different cross-fitted folds and treatments.
For the first cross-fitted fold and treatment (w = 1), we decompose the error term as follows:
                         1,1     1,1
                  m̂1D− m̂1D ,∗
                         X                         yi − µ̂21 (xi )

                   1                2                                                yi − µ1 (xi )
                = 1,1             µ̂1 (xi ) + ai 1,2                 − µ1 (xi ) + ai
                 |D |                                π̂ (xi )                           π(xi )
                        i∈D 1,1

                   1     X                                               ai
                                    µ̂21 (xi ) − µ1 (xi ) 1 −

                = 1,1
                 |D |                                                 π(x   i)                           (24)
                        i∈D 1,1

                      1      X                                       ai           1
                 +                  ai (yi − µ1 (xi ))                        −
                   | D1,1 |                                     π̂ 1,2 (xi ) π(xi )
                            i∈D 1,1
                      1      X
                                                                         1          1

                                           2

                 −                       µ̂1 (xi ) − µ1 (xi )                   −          .
                   | D1,1 |     1,1
                                                                    π̂ 1,2 (xi ) π(xi )
                               i∈D

For the first term, we use the fact that, thanks to our cross-fitting construction, µ̂21 can effectively
be treated as deterministic when considering terms on D1,1 . We further observe that, conditional
on D1,2 and observed covariate values, these terms can be treated as the average of independent
mean-zero terms. We thus yield
                                                                                                       
                                  X                                                     !2
                          1                                                    ai
                                              µ̂21 (xi ) − µ1 (xi ) 1 −                       D1,2 , xi 

               E
                      | D1,1 |                                               π(x  i )
                                i∈D 1,1
                   "                                                                              #
                         1       X
                                                                              ai

                                               2                                            1,2

             =Var                            µ̂1 (xi ) − µ1 (xi ) 1 −                    D , xi
                     | D1,1 |                                                π(xi )
                               i∈D 1,1
                                     "                                             2            #
                   1        X
                                           2
                                                                  2          ai          1,2
             = 1,1 2               E µ̂1 (xi ) − µ1 (xi )             1−                D , xi
                |D |                                                       π(xi )                         (25)
                          i∈D 1,1
                   1        X 1 − π(xi )                                   2
             = 1,1 2                                 µ̂21 (xi ) − µ1 (xi )
                |D |                  π(xi )
                          i∈D 1,1
                   1        X                                 2
             ≤ 1,1 2                µ̂21 (xi ) − µ1 (xi )
                |D |
                          i∈D 1,1

                        1
             =O                  .
                    n1+2αµ
The three equalities above follow from cross-fitting, while the two inequalities follow from the
overlap assumption and consistency. The second summand in Equation 24 can also be bounded
by a similar argument. Finally, for the last summand in Equation 24, we use the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality:
          1      X
                                                          1            1

                              2

                           µ̂   (x
                              1 i   ) −  µ  (x
                                           1 i )                   −
      | D1,1 |                                       π̂ 1,2 (xi ) π(xi )
                i∈D 1,1
                                                             v
          s                                                  u             X                           2
                 1      X
                                   2                   2     u 1                       1         1       (26)
       ≤                        (µ̂1 (xi ) − µ1 (xi )) ×     t                                −
              | D1,1 |     1,1
                                                                 | D1,1 |     1,1
                                                                                  π̂ 1,2 (xi ) π(xi )
                       i∈D                                                i∈D

                   1
       =O                   ,
                nαµ +απ

which follows from the stated converge rate. Hence, we find that this term is also OP √1n , mean-
                                                          √
ing that it is negligible in probability on the 1/ n-scale as claimed.


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2

                                     / CαPP with probability of at most α; that is,
Proof of Theorem 4.2. We show that τ ∈
                                                     r                !
                                                       σ̂ 2    σ̂ 2
                                 ˆ τ + τ̂2 |> z1−α/2     ∆        τ
                    lim sup P | ∆                           +       2
                                                                        ≤ α.                             (27)
                    n,N →∞                              n       N

Following Lemma 4.1, we obtain that
                           √
                                 ˆ τ − τ + E[τ2 ] ⇒ N 0, σ 2 .

                             n ∆                          ∆                                              (28)

Then, we can apply the central limit theorem and obtain that
                                 √
                                   N (τ̂2 − E[τ2 ]) ⇒ N 0, στ22 ,

                                                                                                         (29)

where σ∆2                     ˆ i = Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ) and στ2 is the variance of τ̂2 (xi ). Therefore, by
           is the variance of ∆                                   2
Slutsky’s theorem, we yield
          √                                  √                         rN √
                  ˆ             ˆ
             N ∆τ + τ̂2 − E[∆τ + τ̂2 ] = n ∆τ − E[∆τ ] ˆ          ˆ           + N (τ̂2 − E[τ̂2 ])
                                                                           n
                                                                                                          (30)
                                                          1 2
                                              ⇒N 0, σ∆         + στ22 .
                                                          p
This, in turn, implies
                                                                          r        !
                                   ˆ τ + τ̂2 − E[∆
                                                 ˆ τ + τ̂2 ] > z1−α/2         σ̂
                     lim sup P     ∆                                                   ≤ α,              (31)
                     n,N →∞                                                   N

where σ̂ is a consistent estimate of the variance p1 σ∆ 2
                                                          + στ2 . Let σ̂ = N   2    2
                                                                            n σ∆ + στ which is a consistent
estimate since the two terms are individually consistent estimates of the respective variances. We
notice that
                                                                              "               #
     h          i         X                X               X                      X
       ˆ
    E ∆τ + τ̂2 = E           Ỹη̂ (xi ) −    τ̂2 (xi ) +        τ̂2 (xj ) = E
                                                                                     Ỹη̂ (xi ) = τ. (32)
                         i∈D 1            i∈D 1           j∈D 2                    i∈D 1

The last step is to combine Equation 31 and Equation 32 and then apply a union bound. We then
arrive at                                                   r                   !
                                                                  2
                                                                σ̂∆       σ̂τ22
                            ˆ             ˆ
                lim sup P ∆τ + τ̂2 − E[∆τ + τ̂2 ] > z1−α/2          +             ≤ α.   (33)
                n,N →∞                                           n         N
                                                          q
                                                              2
                                                            σ̂∆     σ̂τ2
                                        ˆ
Therefore, we have lim supn,N →∞ P ∆τ + τ̂2 > z1−α/2 n + N ≤ α.         2
                                                                                           □


A.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

                                     / CαPP with probability at most α; that is,
Proof of Theorem 5.2. We show that τ ∈
                                                    r                 !
                                                      σ̂ 2     σ̂ 2
                                ˆ τ + τ̂2 |> z1−α/2     ∆         τ
                   lim sup P | ∆                            +       2
                                                                        ≤ α.                             (34)
                   n,N →∞                              n        N

First, let use define the new auxiliary random variable Zi = Ỹπ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ). Given the fact that
D1 is RCT dataset and known propensity score, Ỹπ (x) and τ̂2 (x) are independent functions, which
means Zi are i.i.d random variables. Then, following the CLT, we obtain that
                               √
                                      ˆ τ − τ + E[τ2 ] ⇒ N 0, σ∆ 2

                                 n ∆                                 .                            (35)

Then, we can apply the central limit theorem on D2 and obtain that
                                 √
                                   N (τ̂2 − E[τ2 ]) ⇒ N 0, στ22 ,

                                                                                                         (36)


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where σ∆2                     ˆ i = Ỹπ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ) and στ2 is the variance of τ̂2 (xi ). Therefore, by
           is the variance of ∆                                  2
Slutsky’s theorem, we yield
          √                                 √                         rN √
                  ˆ
             N ∆τ + τ̂2 − E[∆τ + τ2 ] = n ∆τ − E[∆τ ] ˆ                      + N (τ̂2 − E[τ2 ])
                                                                          n
                                                                                                         (37)
                                                         1 2
                                            ⇒N 0, σ∆          + στ22 .
                                                         p
This, in turn, implies
                                                                         r        !
                                   ˆ τ + τ̂2 − E[∆τ + τ2 ] > z1−α/2          σ̂
                     lim sup P     ∆                                                  ≤ α,              (38)
                     n,N →∞                                                  N

where σ̂ is a consistent estimate of the variance p1 σ∆ 2
                                                          + στ2 . Let σ̂ = N  2    2
                                                                           n σ∆ + στ which is a consistent
estimate since the two terms are individually consistent estimates of the respective variances. We
notice that
                                                                            " n           #
                          X                n
                                           X              XN                   X
    E [∆τ + τ2 ] = E         Ỹπ1 (xi ) −    τ̂2 (xi ) +      τ̂2 (xj ) = E     Ỹπ1 (xi ) = τ.     (39)
                         i∈D 1             i=1            j=1                     i=1

The last step is to combine Equation 38 and Equation 39 and then apply a union bound. We then
arrive at                                               r                 !
                                                          σ̂ 2     σ̂ 2
                                 ˆ τ + τ̂2 − τ > z1−α/2      ∆       τ
                     lim sup P ∆                                 + 2 ≤ α.                (40)
                     n,N →∞                                n        N
                                                          q
                                                                 2
                                                               σ̂∆     σ̂τ22
                                         ˆ
Therefore, we have lim supn,N →∞ P ∆τ + τ̂2 > z1−α/2 n + N ≤ α.                            □


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     A DDITIONAL THEORETICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present further theoretical results regarding our method. Specifically, we show
how our method can be generalized to deal with distribution shifts (see Appendix B.1), finite sample
settings (see Appendix B.2), and average potential outcomes (see Appendix B.3).

B.1     D ISTRIBUTION SHIFT

In our main paper, we focus on computing prediction-powered confidence intervals when the D1 and
D2 come from the same distribution. We now extend the setting to the case where D1 comes from
P and the D2 comes from Q, and two distributions are related by a distribution shift of covariates.
Setting under distribution shift: First, we assume that Q is characterized by covariate shift of P.
That is, if we denote by Q = QX · QA|X · QY |A,X and P = PX · PA|X · PY |X the relevant marginal
and conditional distributions, we assume that QY |A,X = PY |A,X , and QA|X = PA|X . As in our
main paper, we calculate the measure of fit from our target population Q via
                                                              
                                                  N
                                               1  X
                                    τ̂ = EQ          τ̂2 (xj ) .                             (41)
                                               N j=1

The estimand from Equation 41 can be transferred to form on P using the Radon-Nikodym deriva-
tive. In particular, suppose that QX is dominated by PX and assume that the Radon-Nikodym
derivative w(X) = QPXX (X) is known. Then, we can rewrite Equation 41 as
                                                               
                                              N
                                           1 X
                                τ2w = EP        τ̂2 (xj )w(xj ) .                      (42)
                                           N j=1

In sum, the estimation of τ̂ on Q can be written as a reweighted function. This allows us to perform
inference using the rectifier based on data sampled from P as before. For concreteness, we explain
the estimation approach in detail. Let
                                                                             
                                          n
                                       1 X
                          ∆w τ = EP
                                            Ỹη̂ (xi )w(xi ) − τ̂ (xi )w(xi ) .                (43)
                                       n j=1

Then, the confidence interval for the above rectifier suffices for prediction-powered inference on τ .
Confidence interval covariate shift: Let σ̂τ22w denote empirical variance of τ̂2w (X), σ̂∆
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           w denote

                       ˆ
empirical variance of ∆τ w . Then, for the significance level α ∈ (0, 1), the prediction-powered
confidence interval is                             s               
                                                         2   σ̂ 2
                                                      σ̂∆w      τ w
                             CαPP = τ̂ PP ± z1− α2        + 2 ,                              (44)
                                                         n    N

where
                                       n                                         N
                 ˆ τ w + τ̂2w =     1 Xh                                   i  1 X
          τ̂ PP =∆                        Ỹη̂ (xi )w(xi ) − τ̂ (xi )w(xi ) +       τ̂2 (xj )w(xj ),   (45)
                                    n j=1                                     N j=1
                        n                                           i2
           2         1 Xh                                       ˆ τw ,
         σ̂∆ w =           Ỹη̂ (xi )w(xi ) − τ̂2 (xi )w(xi ) − ∆                                      (46)
                     n i=1
                         N
                     1 X                            2
          σ̂τ22w =         [τ̂2 (xj )w(xj ) − τ̂2w ] .                                                 (47)
                     N j=1

B.2     I NFERENCE IN FINITE POPULATION

Our method developed can be directly translated to finite-population settings.


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Setting under finite-population settings: Here, we treat D1 and D2 as fixed finite populations
consisting of n confounder-outcome pairs, without imposing distributional assumptions on the data
points. The only assumption required to apply the latter is that Ỹη̂ (x) − τ̂ (x) has a known bound,
i.e. [ai , bi ], valid for all i ∈ [n].
In the finite-population setting, we still follow the same way of constructing the prediction-powered
estimates of ATE via
                                              n                             N
                         PP     ˆ          1 Xh                       i  1 X
                    τ̂        = ∆τ + τ̂2 =       Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂ (xi ) +       τ̂2 (xj ).                       (48)
                                           n j=1                         N j=1

Confidence interval finite-population settings: Let σ̂τ22 denotes empirical variance of τ̂2 (X), σ̂∆2

                              ˆ
denotes empirical variance of ∆τ . Then, for significance level α ∈ (0, 1), by Hoeffding’s inequality,
the prediction-powered confidence interval is
                                  "r P                                 r         #!
                                         n              2                    2
                                             (b i − ai )     2            σ̂ τ
                  CαPP = τ̂ PP ±         i=1
                                                          log + z1− α2         2
                                                                                    ,            (49)
                                             2n2             α             N
                 Pn                                          2                     PN
                                                       ˆτ                                                  2
        2
where σ̂∆ = n1     i=1        Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ) − ∆          and σ̂τ22 = N1     j=1 (τ̂2 (xj ) − τ̂2 ) .


B.3   I NFERENCE OF AVERAGE POTENTIAL OUTCOMES

In this section, we show how to generalize our method to the average potential outcome (APO). We
define the mean outcome function in D1 as f1a (X) := E[Y (a) | X].
APO estimation. Let fˆ1a (x) be the estimated potential outcome function on D1 and fˆ2a (x) be the
                                             2
estimated potential outcome function onh D . Let the irectifier ∆a denotes the difference between
fˆ1 (x) and fˆ2 (x) on D , i.e., ∆a = E fˆ1 (x) − fˆ2a (x) , and let ∆
  a           a         1                 a                          ˆ i = fˆa (xi ) − fˆa (xi ). Then, the
                                                                             1           2
prediction-powered estimation of the APO on D1 is given by as
                            n          N                n                             N
                         1Xˆ        1 X ˆa           1 X h ˆa                   i  1 X ˆa
 µ̂PP   ˆ
   a,1 =∆ + µ̂a,2 =            ∆i +       f2 (xj ) =       f1 (xi ) − fˆ2a (xi ) +      f (xj ).
                         n i=1      N j=1            n i=1                         N j=1 2
                                                                                                                (50)
                                   2
Confidence interval for APO: Let σ̂a,2 denote empirical variance of fˆ2a (X), and let σ̂∆
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          denote
                      ˆ a . Then, for significance level α ∈ (0, 1), the prediction-powered confidence
empirical variance of ∆
interval is                                           s                
                                                             2   σ̂ 2
                                                          σ̂        a,2 
                               CαPP = µ̂PPa,1 ± z1− 2
                                                     α
                                                            ∆
                                                               +          ,                       (51)
                                                           n      N
                 Pn                                           2                    PN   ˆa                2
        2
where σ̂∆ = n1     i=1        fˆ1a (xi ) − fˆ2a (xi ) − ∆
                                                        ˆa        and σ̂τ22 = N1    j=1 f2 (xi ) − µ̂a,2    .


                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C        M ATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND
We offer a brief overview of PPI (Angelopoulos et al., 2023a). In the following of standard PPI
framework, one assumes a labeled dataset Sn = {(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn )} of n i.i.d. samples
drawn from some unknown, but fixed distribution P, where Xi ∈ X is input and Yi ∈ Y is the
outcome. One further assumes a larger sample S̃N = {(X̃1 , f (X̃1 )), . . . , (X̃N , f (X̃N ))} where
n ≪ N , for which the outcome is not available, but where one has access to a pre-trained function
f : X → Y.
PPI protocol:8 The objective is then to estimate a statistical quantity of interest given by the esti-
mand θ∗ (e.g., the mean). In PPI, one then constructs a prediction-powered estimate θ̂PP through a
decompisition θ̂PP = mθ + σ∆ , where mθ is called ‘measure of fit’ and ∆θ is called ‘rectifier’. Of
note, mθ is typically defined by the statistical quantity of interest (e.g., mθ computes the sample av-
erage when θ∗ is the mean), while the rectifier is a measure of the prediction accuracy of f . Yet, the
rectifier is not given ‘out-of-the-box’ but it needs to be carefully derived for the statistical quantity
of interest. Finally, the prediction-powered CI is constructed via CαPP = {θ | |mθ + ∆θ | ≤ wθ (α)}
where wθ (α) is a constant that depends on the confidence level. Then, CαPP is guaranteed to contain
the true parameter θ∗ with probability at least 1 − α% (Angelopoulos et al., 2023a). Crucially, the
prediction-powered CI is smaller than the classical CI when the model f is sufficiently accurate.
Example: Let us focus on the mean, i.e., θ∗P      = E[Yi ]. The classical estimate of θ∗ is the sample
                                        class   1  n
average of the outcomes in Sn , i.e., θ       = n i=1 Yi . Then, one can derive the prediction-powered
estimate of the mean via
                                               N                n
                                             1 X             1X
                                   θ̂PP =         f (X̃i ) +       Yi − f (X̃i ),                               (52)
                                            N i=1            n i=1
                                            |   {z      } |         {z        }
                                                :=mθ                 :=∆θ
                                                                                              q 2
                                                                                                          σ̂ 2
                                                                                               σ̂f −Y

so that 95% confidence intervals for θ∗ are given by C95%
                                                      PP
                                                          =                     θ̂PP ± 1.96       n     + Nf , where
σ̂f2 −Y and σ̂f2 are the estimated variances of the f (X) − Y and f (X̃), respectively. Then, the
prediction-powered CI is smaller than the classical CI, since, for n ≪ N , the width of the prediction-
powered CI is primarily determined by the term σ̂f2 −Y . Furthermore, when the model has only small
errors, we have σ̂f2 −Y ≪ σ̂Y2 , which thus helps significantly shrink the CIs.
Of note, the rectifier must be carefully tailored for the estimand, and the derivation is typically non-
trivial, especially in order to obtain further theoretical guarantees (e.g., to show that the CIs are
asymptotically valid).


    8
        For a formal derivation of the CIs, we refer to Angelopoulos et al. (2023a).


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    P SEUDOCODE
In our main paper, we presented the algorithm for computing the prediction-powered estimation of
ATE and confidence interval from multiple observational datasets. Here, we provide the pseudocode
in Algorithm 1. We further provide the pseudocode for the extension of our method that aims at
RCT+observational data (Algorithm 2).
Algorithm 1 Prediction-powered CIs for ATE estimation from multiple observational datasets
    Input: small dataset D1 = xi , a1i , yi1 i=1,...,n , large dataset D2 = xj , a2j , yj2 j=1,...,N ′ , signifi-


    cance level α ∈ (0, 1)
 1: τ̂2 (x) ← estimate CATE estimator on D2 by sample splitting
                                                                                  1
 2: Ỹη̂ (x) ← non-centered
                     h           IF score withi estimated nuisance functions on D by cross-fitting
     ˆτ =    1
               P n                                       1
                                                                                                   ▷ rectifier on D1
 3: ∆        n   i=1 Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi ) for xi ∈ D
                N                              2
 4: τ̂2 ← N1                                                                                 ▷ measure of fit on D2
               P
                j=1 τ̂2 (xj ) for xj ∈ D
      PP
 5: τ̂ ← τ̂2 − ∆   ˆ                                                                ▷ prediction-powered estimator
                PN τ                        2
 6: σ̂τ22 ← N1     i=1 (τ̂ 2 (xi )  −  τ̂2 )                        ▷ empirical variance of CATE estimation in D2
                                        2
       2
          ← n1 n
               P        ˆ         ˆ                                           ▷ empirical variance of rectifier in D1
 7: σ̂∆           i=1 ∆i − ∆τ
                     q
                         2
                       σ̂∆        σ̂ 2
 8: wα ← z1−α/2         n
                              + Nτ2                                                        ▷ normal approximation
    Output: prediction-powered confidence interval CαPP = τ̂ PP ± wα



Algorithm 2 Prediction-powered ATE estimation with RCT + observational datasets
Input: small RCT dataset D1 = xi , a1i , yi1 i=1,...,n , large dataset D2 = xj , a2j , yj2 j=1,...,N ′ , signif-


   icance level α ∈ (0, 1)
1: τ̂2 (x) ← estimate CATE estimator from D2
2: Ỹη̂ (x) ← estimate non-centered influential function score from D1 by cross-fitting
3: ∆ˆ i ← Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi )
4: τ̂2 ← N1
              PN                    ˆ      1
                                             Pn ˆ
                 i=1 τ̂2 (xj ), and ∆τ ← n    i=1 ∆i
5: τ̂ PP ← τ̂2 − ∆ ˆτ                                                          ▷ prediction-powered estimator
                PN                       2
6: σ̂τ22 ← N1      j=1 (τ̂2 (xj ) − τ̂2 )                      ▷ empirical variance of CATE estimation in D2
                                    2
      2
         ← n1 n
              P          ˆ       ˆ                                      ▷ empirical variance of rectifier in D1
7: σ̂∆            i=1 ∆i − ∆τ
                   q
                        2
                      σ̂∆     σ̂ 2
8: wα ← z1− α2         n
                           + Nτ2                                                      ▷ normal approximation
Output: prediction-powered confidence interval CαPP = τ̂ PP ± wα


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    E XTENDED LITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, we present additional related work on uncertainty quantification in causal treatment
effect estimation.
Uncertainty quantification for causal quantities: Various approaches exist for quantifying uncer-
tainty in causal estimates, with many relying on Bayesian methods (e.g., Alaa & Van Der Schaar,
2017; Hess et al., 2024; Jesson et al., 2020; Horii & Chikahara, 2024). While effective, Bayesian
methods require prior distributions informed by domain knowledge, making them less robust to
model misspecification and unsuitable for model-agnostic machine learning frameworks. Other
works quantify the uncertainty in treatment effect estimation through estimating and sampling from
the conditional distribution of the treatment effect (Melnychuk et al., 2024). Even other techniques
offer finite-sample uncertainty guarantees through conformal prediction (e.g., Lei & Candès, 2021;
Schröder et al., 2024) for potential outcomes. However, uncertainty intervals for treatment effects
constructed from conformal prediction intervals around the potential outcomes commonly tend to be
very wide. In contrast, in our work, we aim to provide narrow confidence intervals for the average
treatment effect.
CIs for ATE: The classical way of constructing confidence intervals by making use of one obser-
vational dataset is utilizing the TMLE estimator and the AIPW estimator (Bang & Robins, 2005;
van der Laan & Rubin, 2006). This idea is based on the property of unbiasedness and bounded
variance, which provide the theoretical support for valid CIs. Hatt & Feuerriegel (2021) propose a
novel regularization framework for estimating ATEs that exploits unconfoundedness.
CIs for ATE from multiple datasets: Other works aim at combining observational datasets to
estimate ATEs (Yang & Ding, 2020; Guo et al., 2022). However, these works make assumptions
that the small dataset needs to be sampled from the same distribution as the observational dataset.
Also, these studies aim to create more efficient point estimators. They use bootstrap way to build
confidence intervals, yet which leads to more uncertainty in the estimates.
Another important stream of combining multiple datasets Kallus et al. (2018) proposed a method
that combined the RCT dataset and observational dataset to obtain an estimate of CATE, which could
be seen as a special case of our method in Section 5. Demirel et al. (2024) also applied prediction-
powered inference but focused on average potential outcomes and did not consider the uncertainty
quantification of estimation as we do.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
F.1   S YNTHETIC DATASET

Following the setup in Section 6.1, we consider the three different scenarios of confounding in D2 .
As shown in Equation 6.1, a larger value of αu and a smaller value of lu imply stronger confounding
components. For scenario 1, we set αu = 0 and lu = 106 , which is a scenario that is almost no
confounding. For scenario 2, we set αu = 0 and lu = 0.5, which means that we still do not consider
the linear component of U , but let the unobserved confounder play a more important role in the
exponential term. For scenario 3, we set αu = 10 and lu = 0.5, where the unobserved confounder
both influences linear and exponential terms; thus, it presents a scenario with strong confounding.
For a better understanding, we state three kernels of the different settings in the following:
                                                       (X − X ′ ) (U − U ′ )

                                    ′     ′
           kscenario1 ((X, U ) , (X , U )) = exp −                −            ,               (53)
                                                        2 × 106      2 × 106
                                                       (X − X ′ ) (U − U ′ )

           kscenario2 ((X, U ) , (X ′ , U ′ )) = exp −            −            ,               (54)
                                                        2 × 106         1
                                                                   (X − X ′ ) (U − U ′ )

           kscenario3 ((X, U ) , (X ′ , U ′ )) =10 × U U ′ + exp −           −              .  (55)
                                                                    2 × 106          1
Here, we also need to make clear that the unobserved confounder only plays a role in the data-
generating process of treatment, which means that does not have a direct relationship with with the
difference in the means across D2 and D1 .

F.2   M EDICAL DATASET

We follow the prior research (Melnychuk et al., 2022; Frauen et al., 2023) to demonstrate our method
based on the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al., 2016), which includes electronic health records
(EHRs) from patients admitted to intensive care units. We extract 8 confounders (heart rate, sodium,
red blood cell count, glucose, hematocrit, respiratory rate, age, gender) and a binary treatment (me-
chanical ventilation) using an open-source preprocessing pipeline (Wang et al., 2020). We define
the outcome variable as the red blood cell count after treatment. To extract features from the patient
trajectories in the EHRs, we sample random time points and average the value of each variable over
the ten hours prior to the sampled time point. All samples with missing values and outliers are re-
moved from the dataset. Our final dataset contains 14719 samples, which we separate the samples
now into two datasets D1 and D2 with a constant ratio n/N = 1/50 and add noise on D2 .
For the second semi-synthetic dataset, we study COVID-19 hospitalizations in Brazil across different
regions (Baqui et al., 2020). We are interested in predicting the effect of comorbidity on the mortality
of COVID-19 patients. To model two different observational datasets, we use the regions of the
hospitals in Brazil, which are split into North and Central-South. As observed confounders, we
include age, sex, and ethnicity. Further, we exclude patients younger than 20 or older than 80 years.
To model comorbidity as a binary variable, we define comorbidity as 1 if at least one of the following
conditions were diagnosed for the patient: cardiovascular diseases, asthma, diabetes, pulmonary
disease, immunosuppression, obesity, liver diseases, neurological disorders, and renal disease. We
then use the same data-generating process in Section 6.1 to generate Ai and Yi , while using the
second confounding scenario and keeping the ratio of sample size n/N = 1/50 and n + N = 6881.

F.3   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

We choose the DR-learner to compute τ̂2 in D2 together with linear regression and logistic regression
models for estimating the nuisance functions. We also use linear regression and logistic regression
models for the nuisance function regression when estimating the τ̂ AIPW . We use the default set-
tings fo their regression models, and we did not perform any hyperparameter optimization, as our
method aims to provide an agnostic confidence interval that applies to all CATE estimators. All our
experiments are based on average results from runs across five random seeds.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G          A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
G.1         N EURAL INSTANTIATIONS OF OUR METHOD

We follow the same experiment setting and data generation process in Section 6.1, but replace the
regression model for the nuisance regression model with a multi-layer perception (MLP) in Figure 5.
Compared with the simple linear regression, our method achieves CIs that have a shorter width (as
desired). Further, the CIs from our method consistently cover the oracle ATE, which again confirms
the superiority of our method.
                 Scenario 1                      Scenario 2                 Scenario 3                                   1.00
                                                                                                                                  Scenario 1             Scenario 2             Scenario 3


                                                                                                        N = 5000
                                                                                                                         0.75


                                                                                                                 Width
                                                                                                                         0.50
                                                                                                                         0.25
  = 0.05


                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                                200           400      200         400        200          400
                                                                                                                                          n                    n                     n
                                                                                                                         1.00


                                                                                                        n/N = 1/50
                                                                                                                         0.75


                                                                                                                 Width
           0.5    1.0   1.5    2.0        0          1        2       0.5     1.0    1.5     2.0                         0.50
                                                                                                                         0.25
                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                                200           400      200         400        200          400
                                                                                                                                          n                    n                     n
                                                                                                                         1.00
  = 0.1


                                                                                                                         0.75



                                                                                                        n = 200
                                                                                                                 Width
                                                                                                                         0.50
                                                                                                                         0.25
                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                                2000          4000    2000         4000      2000        4000
           0.5   1.0    1.5   2.0     2.5 0          1        2     0.5     1.0     1.5      2.0                                          N                    N                     N
           PP (Ours)                AIPW ( 1 only)        AIPW ( 2 only)                  (True in 1)                                  PP (Ours)     AIPW ( 1 only)       AIPW ( 2 only)


                                                     Figure 5: Results for MLP as regression method.


                                                                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2              I NSTANTIATION WITH OTHER MACHINE LEARNING MODELS

Figure 6, we follow the same data generated setting as experiments in the Figure 3 but replace the
regression method used for the nuisance parameter estimation from a linear regression to XGBoost.
Again, our method is highly effective, which demonstrates the flexibility of our method beyond a
simple regression model.
                  Scenario 1                  Scenario 2                       Scenario 3                              1.00
                                                                                                                                Scenario 1             Scenario 2             Scenario 3


                                                                                                      N = 5000
                                                                                                                       0.75


                                                                                                               Width
                                                                                                                       0.50
                                                                                                                       0.25
  = 0.05


                                                                                                                       0.00
                                                                                                                              200           400      200         400        200          400
                                                                                                                                        n                    n                     n
                                                                                                                       1.00


                                                                                                      n/N = 1/50
                                                                                                                       0.75


                                                                                                               Width
           0.0     0.5     1.0   1.5    0.0       0.5   1.0       1.5    0.0    0.5   1.0   1.5                        0.50
                                                                                                                       0.25
                                                                                                                       0.00
                                                                                                                              200           400      200         400        200          400
                                                                                                                                        n                    n                     n
                                                                                                                       1.00
  = 0.1


                                                                                                                       0.75


                                                                                                      n = 200
                                                                                                               Width
                                                                                                                       0.50
                                                                                                                       0.25
                                                                                                                       0.00
                                                                                                                              2000          4000    2000         4000      2000        4000
       0.0        0.5      1.0         0.0        0.5   1.0             0.0    0.5    1.0   1.5                                         N                    N                     N
             PP (Ours)           AIPW ( 1 only)               AIPW ( 2 only)            (True in 1)                                  PP (Ours)     AIPW ( 1 only)       AIPW ( 2 only)


                         Figure 6: Results for using XGBoost as nuisance parameter regression model.


                                                                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.3              H IGH - DIMENSIONAL COVARIATES

We repeated our experiments with more input variables to show that our method is robust in settings
with high-dimensional covariate spaces. For this, we used a data-generating mechanism similar to
that in the main paper. In Figure 7, we generate 5 covariates, x ∈ [−1, 1]5 . In Figure 8, we generate
50 covariates, x ∈ [−1, 1]50 . In Figure 9, we generate 500 covariates, x ∈ [−1, 1]500 . The results
show that the CIs from our method consistently cover the oracle ATE and that our method reduces
the width of CIs (as desired).
                        Scenario 1                                 Scenario 2                                             Scenario 3                                         1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                            Scenario 1                        Scenario 2                       Scenario 3


                                                                                                                                                            N = 5000
                                                                                                                                                                             0.75


                                                                                                                                                                     Width
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
  = 0.05


                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          200           400                 200          400                 200          400
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n                                n                                n
                                                                                                                                                                             1.00


                                                                                                                                                            n/N = 1/50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.75


                                                                                                                                                                     Width
                   3                4             5                3                 4                5 2.5         3.0      3.5         4.0      4.5                        0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          200           400                 200          400                 200          400
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n                                n                                n
                                                                                                                                                                             1.00
  = 0.1


                                                                                                                                                                             0.75


                                                                                                                                                            n = 200
                                                                                                                                                                     Width
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          2000          4000                2000         4000                2000         4000
                 3.0         3.5    4.0    4.5                      3                 4                         3.0          3.5         4.0          4.5                                           N                                N                                N
                 PP (Ours)                      AIPW ( 1 only)                            AIPW ( 2 only)                                 (True in 1)                                             PP (Ours)              AIPW ( 1 only)                 AIPW ( 2 only)


                                                                                                       Figure 7: Results for 5 variables.
                        Scenario 1                                 Scenario 2                                             Scenario 3                                         1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                            Scenario 1                        Scenario 2                       Scenario 3
                                                                                                                                                            N = 5000


                                                                                                                                                                             0.75
                                                                                                                                                                     Width


                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
  = 0.05


                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          200           400                 200          400                 200          400
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n                                n                                n
                                                                                                                                                                             1.00
                                                                                                                                                            n/N = 1/50


                                                                                                                                                                             0.75
                                                                                                                                                                     Width


                 3.5         4.0   4.5    5.0     5.5 3.5         4.0         4.5         5.0            3.5          4.0          4.5          5.0                          0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          200           400                 200          400                 200          400
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n                                n                                n
                                                                                                                                                                             1.00
  = 0.1


                                                                                                                                                                             0.75
                                                                                                                                                            n = 200
                                                                                                                                                                     Width


                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          2000          4000                2000         4000                2000         4000
                       4.0         4.5      5.0                   4.0         4.5           5.0                4.0                4.5           5.0                                                 N                                N                                N
                 PP (Ours)                      AIPW ( 1 only)                            AIPW ( 2 only)                                 (True in 1)                                             AIPW ( 1 only)               AIPW ( 2 only)                  PP (Ours)


                                                                                                      Figure 8: Results for 50 variables.
                        Scenario 1                                 Scenario 2                                             Scenario 3                                         1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                            Scenario 1                        Scenario 2                       Scenario 3
                                                                                                                                                            N = 5000


                                                                                                                                                                             0.75
                                                                                                                                                                    Width


                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
  = 0.05


                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                    600          800           1000   600          800          1000   600          800          1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n                                n                                n
                                                                                                                                                                             1.00
                                                                                                                                                            n/N = 1/50


                                                                                                                                                                             0.75
                                                                                                                                                                    Width


           0.7          0.8        0.9     1.0              0.7         0.8         0.9         1.0            0.7           0.8          0.9         1.0                    0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                    600          800           1000   600          800          1000   600          800          1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n                                n                                n
                                                                                                                                                                             1.00
  = 0.1


                                                                                                                                                                             0.75
                                                                                                                                                            n = 200
                                                                                                                                                                    Width


                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          2000          4000                2000         4000                2000         4000
           0.7          0.8        0.9      1.0       0.7          0.8          0.9             1.0           0.7           0.8          0.9          1.0                                           N                                N                                N
                 PP (Ours)                      AIPW ( 1 only)                            AIPW ( 2 only)                                 (True in 1)                                             AIPW ( 1 only)               AIPW ( 2 only)                  PP (Ours)


                                                                                                      Figure 9: Results for 500 variables.


                                                                                                                                                            28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.4        S TRENGTH OF DEPENDENCE

As extended experiments based on Section G.3, we simulated the x ∈ [−1, 1]4 and let x5 =
 1
   P4
n     i=1 xi , which leads to collinearity in the input space in Figure 10. Thereby, we can assess
the sensitivity of our method to a varying strength of dependence in the input space. Compared with
i.i.d. high-dimensional covariates, we notice that the dependence does not affect our method. Our
method still outperforms the other baselines and achieves the best CI width.
               Scenario 1                Scenario 2                   Scenario 3                             1.00
                                                                                                                      Scenario 1             Scenario 2             Scenario 3


                                                                                            N = 5000
                                                                                                             0.75


                                                                                                     Width
                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                             0.25
  = 0.05


                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                    200           400      200         400        200          400
                                                                                                                              n                    n                     n
                                                                                                             1.00


                                                                                            n/N = 1/50
                                                                                                             0.75


                                                                                                     Width
                3      4                     3   4                     3      4                              0.50
                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                    200           400      200         400        200          400
                                                                                                                              n                    n                     n
                                                                                                             1.00
  = 0.1


                                                                                                             0.75


                                                                                            n = 200
                                                                                                     Width
                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                    2000          4000    2000         4000      2000        4000
                3      4                     3    4                   3        4                                              N                    N                     N
           PP (Ours)        AIPW ( 1 only)           AIPW ( 2 only)         (True in   1)                                  PP (Ours)     AIPW ( 1 only)       AIPW ( 2 only)


                            Figure 10: Results for varying dependence strength in input space.


                                                                                            29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.5            D IFFERENT STRENGTHS OF ( UN ) CONFOUNDING IN D1

We aim to show the experiment setting when relaxing ‘unconfoundedness’ assumption for D1 . We
fixed the confoundedness in D2 as in Scenario 2 but varied the confoundedness in D1 from Scenario
1 to 3 in Figure 11. We noticed that, while the strength of confounding becomes larger, our method
performs better. The results again confirm that our method performs best.
                      Scenario 1                   Scenario 2                          Scenario 3                             1.00
                                                                                                                                       Scenario 1             Scenario 2             Scenario 3


                                                                                                             N = 5000
                                                                                                                              0.75


                                                                                                                      Width
                                                                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                                              0.25
  = 0.05


                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                     200           400      200         400        200          400
                                                                                                                                               n                    n                     n
                                                                                                                              1.00


                                                                                                             n/N = 1/50
                                                                                                                              0.75


                                                                                                                      Width
                      0       2        4 0           1           2               0.5     1.0   1.5    2.0                     0.50
                                                                                                                              0.25
                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                     200           400      200         400        200          400
                                                                                                                                               n                    n                     n
                                                                                                                              1.00
  = 0.1


                                                                                                                              0.75


                                                                                                             n = 200
                                                                                                                      Width
                                                                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                                              0.25
                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                     2000          4000    2000         4000      2000        4000
           1      0       1   2    3         0.5    1.0   1.5     2.0            0.5     1.0    1.5    2.0                                     N                    N                     N
               PP (Ours)           AIPW ( 1 only)               AIPW ( 2 only)                 (True in 1)                                  PP (Ours)     AIPW ( 1 only)       AIPW ( 2 only)


                                  Figure 11: Results for relaxing unconfoundedness assumptions in D1 .


                                                                                                             30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.6     ROBUSTNESS CHECK OF APPLYING OUR AIPW METHOD TO RCT+ OBSERVATIONAL
        DATASETS

Data: We adopt the same data-generating process as outlined in the main paper while applying our
proposed AIPW method described in Section 4 to the RCT+observational setting.
Main results: In Figure 12, we demonstrates that, when replacing the known propensity score with
the estimated propensity score, the performance difference is small. Both methods consistently
cover the oracle ATE (in the left figure) and show a large gain compared to the naı̈ve baseline (in the
right figure).
                                  Scenario 1                        Scenario 2                        Scenario 3                                        1.00
                                                                                                                                                                 Scenario 1              Scenario 2               Scenario 3


                                                                                                                                       N = 5000
                                                                                                                                                        0.75


                                                                                                                                                Width
                                                                                                                                                        0.50
                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                  = 0.05


                                                                                                                                                        0.00
                                                                                                                                                               200        400          200          400         200         400
                                                                                                                                                                      n                         n                       n
                                                                                                                                                        1.00


                                                                                                                                       n/N = 1/50
                                                                                                                                                        0.75


                                                                                                                                                Width
                           0.5      1.0     1.5   2.0       0.0   0.5    1.0   1.5    2.0      0.5     1.0   1.5   2.0
                                                                                                                                                        0.50
                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                        0.00
                                                                                                                                                               200        400          200          400         200         400
                                                                                                                                                                      n                         n                       n
                                                                                                                                                        1.00
                  = 0.1


                                                                                                                                                        0.75


                                                                                                                                       n = 200
                                                                                                                                                Width
                                                                                                                                                        0.50
                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                        0.00
                                                                                                                                                               2000       4000         2000         4000        2000        4000
                           0.5      1.0     1.5   2.0       0.0   0.5    1.0   1.5    2.0      0.5     1.0   1.5   2.0                                                N                         N                       N
      PP (Ours)                  PP (IPW)               AIPW ( 1 only)               AIPW ( 2 only)            ATMLE     (True in 1)           PP (Ours)              AIPW ( 1 only)          ATMLE        AIPW ( 2 only)          PP (IPW)


                                 Figure 12: Applying our AIPW method to RCT+observational datasets.


                                                                                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.7   R EFUTATION CHECK OF APPLYING THE A-TMLE METHOD TO
      OBSERVATIONAL + OBSERVATIONAL DATASETS

We apply the A-TMLE method to the synthetic datasets with observational+observational data. Of
note, this violates the assumptions that underly A-TMLE, so we expect that the method leads to
large errors.
In Figure 13, we notice that, when applying the A-TMLE method to the synthetic dataset, the A-
TMLE performs not that well. Although it constructs short CIs, A-TMLE barely covers the oracle
ATE in the left figure. In the right figure, the A-TMLE method shows a large instability in the
estimation process again. These findings highlight that A-TMLE leads to CIs that are not faithful in
RCT+observational settings. Again, this is expected.
                                                                                                                                     1.00
                                                                                                                                                 Scenario 1                    Scenario 2                Scenario 3
                       Scenario 1                      Scenario 2                 Scenario 3


                                                                                                                    N = 5000
                                                                                                                                     0.75


                                                                                                                             Width
                                                                                                                                     0.50
                                                                                                                                     0.25
       = 0.05


                                                                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                                                                               200          400              200        400            200           400
                                                                                                                                                        n                           n                            n
                                                                                                                                     1.00


                                                                                                                    n/N = 1/50
                                                                                                                                     0.75


                                                                                                                             Width
                                                                                                                                     0.50
                 0          1             2        0      1         2               1           2                                    0.25
                                                                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                                                                               200          400              200        400            200           400
                                                                                                                                                        n                           n                            n
                                                                                                                                     1.00
       = 0.1


                                                                                                                                     0.75



                                                                                                                    n = 200
                                                                                                                             Width
                                                                                                                                     0.50
                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                                                                               2000         4000             2000       4000           2000          4000
                0.0   0.5   1.0     1.5   2.0      0      1             2   0.5    1.0    1.5   2.0                                                     N                           N                            N
       PP (Ours)                  AIPW ( 1 only)          AIPW ( 2 only)          ATMLE               (True in 1)                           PP (Ours)              AIPW ( 1 only)              ATMLE          AIPW ( 2 only)


                            Figure 13: Applying the A-TMLE to multiple observational datasets.


                                                                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.8   I NCREASING SAMPLE SIZE IN D1

Data: To provide a more comprehensive evaluation of our method, we increased the sample size
in D1 to enable further comparisons under varying conditions. In Figure 14, the sample size in D2
is fixed at 5000 (N = 5000), while the sample size in D1 varies from 100 to 2500 across three
distinct scenarios. This setup allows us to systematically assess the performance of our method
under different data regimes.
Main results: Figure 14 reveals that our method consistently outperforms the naı̈ve method across
all scenarios. Notably, as the sample size in D1 increases, the performance gap gradually narrows,
indicating diminishing returns in improvement as more data becomes available in D1 . These results
are expected and, therefore, further validate the robustness of our method.
                    1.0
                             Scenario 1             Scenario 2           Scenario 3
                               0.8
            N = 5000


                               0.6
                       Width


                               0.4
                               0.2
                               0.0
                                     0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500 0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500 0    500 1000 1500 2000 2500
                                                 n                              n                          n
                                                     PP (Ours)       AIPW ( 1 only)      AIPW ( 2 only)



Figure 14: Performance for an increasing sample size of D1 . The figure shows the width of the
CIs averaged over five different seeds (α = 0.05). Here, we vary the size of D1 datasets given
constant sample size N (D2 ) from 100 to 2500. Note that τ̂ AIPW (D2 only) is shown in intentionally
shown in gray: it is not faithful as seen in the left plot and therefore not a valid baseline. ⇒ Our
method continually performs better than the τ̂ AIPW (D2 only).


                                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.9   RMSE AND COVERAGE FOR THE EXPERIMENTS WITH SYNTHETIC DATA

In Table 2, we report the RMSE of our point estimation and the width of the CIs in Section 6.1.
Table 2: We report the RMSE of the ATE estimator and the width of the CIs. We use the synthetic
dataset. The results for τ̂ AIPW (D2 only) are shown in gray because the estimator is not faithful and
therefore also not a viable baseline. Reported is the average performance over 5 random seeds.


                      Dataset                             RMSE             Width
                        AIPW       1
                      τ̂      (D only)            0.298/0.298/0.298   0.241/0.240/0.237
                      τ̂ AIPW (D2 only)           0.442/0.478/0.476   0.217/0.144/0.131
                      τ̂ PP (Ours)                0.276/0.274/0.271   0.241/0.240/0.237
                     Smaller is better. Best value in bold.


                                                              34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H     C OMPARISON TO A-TMLE

In this section, we compare our method against A-TMLE (van der Laan et al., 2024) and thereby
highlight key differences as well as why the training in A-TMLE is unstable.
About A-TMLE: A-TMLE is a method that combines an RCT + observational dataset to estimate
the ATE and can also construct valid confidence
                                        √       intervals. In van der Laan et al. (2024), the au-
thors prove that the A-TMLE estimator is n-consistent and asymptotically normal and gives valid
confidence intervals. As a result, A-TMLE achieves smaller mean-squared errors and narrower
confidence intervals.
The A-TMLE method proceeds as follows. First, in A-TMLE, the author decomposed targeted
ATE estimand as the difference of (a) the pooled-ATE estimand Ψ̃ and (b) a bias estimand Ψ# ,
Ψ = Ψ̃ − Ψ# . At a high level, A-TMLE constructs two separated TMLE estimators for the Ψ̃ and
Ψ# . Then, A-TMLE calculates the difference of TMLE outcomes as the targeted estimand.
More specifically, for the bias estimand Ψ# , the estimation process can be decomposed into two
steps: (i) learning a parametric working model, and (ii) constructing an efficient estimator for the
targeted estimands. In the first step (i), the method applies the highly adaptive lasso minimum-loss
estimator (HAL-MLE)(van der Laan et al., 2023) with the HAL basis functions for the semipara-
metric regression working model. Here, the method uses the ‘atmle’ R-package (Qiu et al., 2024).
Given the above definition, one can define the working-model-specific projection parameter as

            Ψ# (P ) = Ep Πp (0 | W, 0)τw,n,β(P ) (W, 0) − Ep Πp (0 | W, 1)τw,n,β(P ) (W, 1),                    (56)
where P denotes the distribution and where W denotes the covariates. We refer to van der Laan
et al. (2024) for more details about the notation.
After that, we need the canonical gradient of the β(P )-component to construct the canonical gradient
of the working-model-specific projection parameter ΨMw,2 (P ) at P . However, when calculating
the canonical gradient of the β(P )-component, one of the important things to observe is that Ip =
Ep Π(1 − π)(1 | W, A)ϕϕT (W, A), which measures the variance-covariance structure across basis
functions. The expression for Ip adjusts for variability in different directions, reducing weights for
directions with high variance (overrepresented in data) and increasing weights where variance is
low (underrepresented). Hence, A-TMLE essentially performs an adaptive weighting to make the
patients in both datasets more similar for the final estimate.
The reason for why A-TMLE is unstable: The computation of Ip has an important shortcoming:
when (a) the dimension of the covariate space is low or (b) when collinearity among the covariates
exists, the computation of Ip is challenging due to the matrix inversion. Eventually, this can lead to
numerical instabilities, which can cause the entire A-TMLE method to break down.
Differences to our method: In addition to the drawbacks of A-TMLE, two key differences exist
as follows: (1) differences in ATE estimation processes and (2) differences in the flexibility of
estimating τ̂2 . In the following, we discuss the differences (1) and (2) in detail:
(1) Differences in the ATE estimation process. One of the key differences between our method and
A-TMLE is that our method is based on two different ATE estimations when computing the rectifier.
In our method, we define the rectifier ∆τ as the difference of τ̂AIPW and τ̂2 on D1 . Formally, we
have
           n h
 ˆτ = 1
          X                           i
∆              Ỹη̂ (xi ) − τ̂2 (xi )                                                                           (57)
       n i=1
       n
    1X          Ai          1 − Ai                 Ai − π̂(xi )
  =                    −                  Yi −                       [(1 − π̂(xi )) µ̂1 (xi ) + π̂(xi )µ̂0 (xi )] − τ̂2 (xi ) .
    n i=1    π̂(xi ) 1 − π̂(xi )               π̂(xi ) (1 − π̂(xi ))

In contrast, A-TMLE defines the target estimand by applying a bias correction Ψ# , which can
be viewed as the expectation of a weighted combination of the conditional effect of the treatment
indicators on the treatment effect of the two treatment arms, where the weights are the probabilities
of enrolling in the RCT of the two arms. Then, the highly adaptively lasso minimum-loss estimator
(HAL-MLE) is used to learn the semi-parametric regression model.


                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(2) Flexibility. Another key difference is that our method is more flexible, allowing us to use any
approach to estimate τ̂2 in D2 . In contrast, the process in A-TMLE is more rigid: A-TMLE con-
structs a TMLE for the pooled-ATE and bias correction term estimation. This can limit the flexibility
for computing τ̂2 , especially when we want to use different modeling approaches for both datasets
(which is likely given that one dataset is probably larger than the other!).
Instead, our method supports a variety of approaches, allowing end-users of our method to better
adapt to the underlying data-generating process. For example, we can use various meta-learners
like the S-learner, T-learner, R-learner, and DR-learner, where each comes with unique strengths in
practice. The S-learner, for instance, works well when there are fewer treatment interactions, while
the T-learner and R-learner handle more complex treatment effect patterns.
Additionally, our method allows us to use pre-trained models directly (which is unlike A-TMLE!).
This allows us – in our method – to calculate the ATE from model predictions without needing to
re-fit or modify the model. Alternatively, one can even use large language models or foundation
models to generate the predictions of τ̂2 . The flexibility to use various models or integrate pre-
trained models makes our approach more flexible to handle a broad variety different settings and
data structures. We believe that this makes our method a powerful tool for accurate ATE estimation
in a range of applications. For example, if we are given a pre-trained machine learning model f (x),
then we have access to the predictions on D2 as fˆ(x). Formally, we then yield the measure of fit
and the rectifier via
                       N
                   1 Xˆ
           τ̂2 =         f (xj ),                                                                          (58)
                   N j=1
                 n h                          n
          ˆτ =1
                X                       i  1X        Ai     1 − Ai
          ∆         Ỹη̂ (xi ) − fˆ(xi ) =                −              Yi                                (59)
              n i=1                        n i=1   π̂(xi ) 1 − π̂(xi )

                             Ai − π̂(xi )
                        −                       [(1 − π̂(xi )) µ̂1 (xi ) + π̂(xi )µ̂0 (xi )] − fˆ(xj ) ,
                         π̂(xi ) (1 − π̂(xi ))
                     N                 n
                  1 Xˆ              1 Xh                       i
          τ̂ PP =       f (xj ) +          Ỹη̂ (xi ) − fˆ(xi ) .                                          (60)
                  N j=1             n i=1

According to the central limited theorem of the predictions f (x) and the asymptotical normality of
the AIPW estimator,
                    we canq construct  valid CI as we mentioned in the main paper. This means, we
                                  2
                                σ̂∆  σ̂τ2               2
have CαPP =    τ̂ PP ± z1− α2    n + N
                                         2
                                              , where σ̂∆ and σ̂τ22 are variance of the rectifier and measure
of fit respectively.


                                                       36
