Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LucidPPN: Unambiguous Prototypical Parts
Network for User-centric Interpretable
Computer Vision
 Mateusz Pach1 Koryna Lewandowska2 Jacek Tabor1
 Bartosz Zieliński1,3 Dawid Rymarczyk1,4,∗
 1
   Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian University
 2
   Department of Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroergonomics, Jagiellonian University
 3
   IDEAS NCBR 4 Ardigen SA ∗ dawid.rymarczyk@uj.edu.pl



                                              Abstract
            Prototypical parts networks combine the power of deep learning with the
            explainability of case-based reasoning to make accurate, interpretable de-
            cisions. They follow the this looks like that reasoning, representing each
            prototypical part with patches from training images. However, a single
            image patch comprises multiple visual features, such as color, shape, and
            texture, making it difficult for users to identify which feature is important
            to the model. To reduce this ambiguity, we introduce the Lucid Prototyp-
            ical Parts Network (LucidPPN), a novel prototypical parts network that
            separates color prototypes from other visual features. Our method em-
            ploys two reasoning branches: one for non-color visual features, processing
            grayscale images, and another focusing solely on color information. This
            separation allows us to clarify whether the model’s decisions are based on
            color, shape, or texture. Additionally, LucidPPN identifies prototypical
            parts corresponding to semantic parts of classified objects, making compar-
            isons between data classes more intuitive, e.g., when two bird species might
            differ primarily in belly color. Our experiments demonstrate that the two
            branches are complementary and together achieve results comparable to
            baseline methods. More importantly, LucidPPN generates less ambiguous
            prototypical parts, enhancing user understanding.


1       Introduction
Increased adoption of deep neural networks across critical fields, such as healthcare (Rymar-
czyk et al., 2022b), and autonomous driving (Wu et al., 2017), shows the need to develop
models in which decisions are interpretable, ensuring accountability and transparency in
decision-making processes (Rudin, 2019; Rudin et al., 2022). One promising approach is
based on prototypical parts (Chen et al., 2019; Nauta et al., 2023; Rymarczyk et al., 2021;
2022d), which integrate the power of deep learning with interpretability, particularly in
fine-grained image classification tasks. During training, these models learn visual concepts
characteristic for each class, called Prototypical Parts (PPs). In inference, predictions are
made by identifying the PPs of distinct classes within an image. This way, the user is
provided with explanations in the form of “This looks like that”.
The primary benefit of PPs-based methods over post hoc approaches is their ability to in-
corporate explanations into the prediction process (Chen et al., 2019) directly. Nevertheless,
a significant challenge with these methods lies in the ambiguity of prototypical parts, vi-
sualized using five to ten nearest patches. Each patch encodes a range of visual features,
including color1 , shape, texture, and contrast (Nauta et al., 2021a), making it difficult for
users to identify which of them are relevant. This issue is compounded by the fact that neu-
ral networks are generally biased towards texture (Geirhos et al., 2019) and color (Hosseini
et al., 2018), whereas humans are typically biased towards shape (Landau et al., 1988).
    1
        We follow the color definition from the research of (Berga et al., 2020; Khan et al., 2012)


                                                     1
                                                                                            even
                                                                                            shape
                                                                                            doesnt
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025                                                match


                   Existing methods
                                                                         This does not
                                                                        look like that,
                                         ?
                                         ~                         ✕     but I cannot
                                                                        tell you why…


                                         ?
                                         ~                         ✕ This does not

                   LucidPPN (ours)
                                                                        look like that
                                                   =                     BECAUSE:
                                         ?
                                         ~                         ✔    although the
                                                                          shape and
                                                                           texture is
                                                  &                       similar, the
                                         ?
                                         ~                         ✕     color differs



Figure 1: Our novel prototypical parts-based model, LucidPPN, enables the disentangling
of color information from the prototypical parts. This capability allows us to examine more
closely the differences between an image patch and patches representing a prototypical part.
As shown in the image, our model can visualize that the head of a bird, compared to the
prototypical part of a bird’s head from different classes, shows a high resemblance in shape
and texture but differs in color. Such detailed analysis was not possible with previous
prototypical parts-based approaches.
Therefore, recent works have attempted to solve this problem using various strategies. Some
works propose to reduce the ambiguity of prototypical parts by visualizing them through
a larger number of patches (Ma et al., 2024; Nauta et al., 2023). However, it does not
solve the problem with various visual features encoded in each patch. Other approaches
tend to solve this problem by quantifying the appearance of specific visual features (Nauta
et al., 2021a) or concepts (Wan et al., 2024) on prototypical parts. However, they generate
ambiguous statements such as “color is important”, leading to further questions (e.g. about
which color) that complicate understanding (Ma et al., 2024; Xu-Darme et al., 2023).
Motivated by the challenge of decoding the crucial visual attributes of prototypical parts, we
introduce the Lucid Prototypical Parts Network (LucidPPN). It uniquely divides the model
into two branches: the first focuses on identifying visual features of texture and shape
corresponding to specific object parts (e.g. heads, tails, wings for birds), while the second
is dedicated solely to color. It allows us to disentangle color features from the prototypical
parts and present pairs of a simplified gray prototypical part and corresponding color (see
Figure 1). The second advantage of LucidPPN is that the successive prototypes in each
class correspond to the same object parts (e.g., the first prototypes are heads, the second
prototypes are legs, etc.). Altogether, it enabled us to introduce a novel type of visualization
presented in Figure 2, more intuitive and less ambiguous according to our user studies.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that LucidPPN achieves results competitive with cur-
rent PPs-based models while successfully disentangling and fusing color information. Addi-
tionally, using LucidPPN , we can identify tasks where color information is an unimportant
feature, as demonstrated on the Stanford Cars dataset (Krause et al., 2013). Finally, a
user study showed that participants, guided by LucidPPN explanations, more accurately
identified the ground truth compared to those using PIP-Net.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
       • We introduce LucidPPN, a novel architecture based on PPs, which disentangles
         color features from the PPs in inference. Consequently, thanks to LucidPPN we
         know the relevance of the color and shape with texture in the decision process2 .
       • We propose a mechanism that ensures successive prototypes within each class con-
         sistently correspond to the same object parts.
       • We introduce a more intuitive type of visualization incorporating the assumption
         about the fine-grained classification.
       • We conduct a comprehensive examination demonstrating the usability and limita-
         tions of LucidPPN. Specifically, we highlight scenarios where color information may
         not be pivotal or even confuses the model in fine-grained image classification.

  2
      See the discussion in paragraph Color Impact in Section 5.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

        Evidence for Lazuli Bunting                                      0070_14665

     Evidence for Lazuli Bunting           Part prototypes of Lazuli Bunting          μ score
                                             0.9 &         1.0   =             0.90
                                             1.0 &         1.0   =             1.00
                                                                                        0.86
                                             0.9 &         0.9   =             0.81
                                             0.8 &         0.9   =             0.72

Figure 2: Our novel type of visualization utilizes the fact that the successive prototypes
in each class of LucidPPN correspond to the same object parts. That is why we use a
schematic drawing of a bird to show the location of the specific prototypical parts. Moreover,
LucidPPN disentangles color features from the prototypical parts to present pairs of a
simplified gray prototypical part and a corresponding color. The aggregated resemblance is
obtained by multiplying the resemblance to the prototypical part and the resemblance to
the corresponding color.

2   Related works
Ante-hoc methods for XAI. Self-explainable models (ante-hoc) aim to make the de-
cision process more transparent by providing the explanation together with the prediction,
and they have attracted significant attention (Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola, 2018; Böhle et al.,
2022; Brendel & Bethge, 2019). Much of this attention has focused on enhancing the concept
of prototypical parts introduced in ProtoPNet (Chen et al., 2019) to represent the activa-
tion patterns of networks. Several extensions have been proposed, including TesNet (Wang
et al., 2021) and Deformable ProtoPNet (Donnelly et al., 2022), which exploit orthogonal-
ity in prototype construction. ProtoPShare (Rymarczyk et al., 2021), ProtoTree (Nauta
et al., 2021b), ProtKNN (Ukai et al., 2022), and ProtoPool (Rymarczyk et al., 2022d)
reduce the number of prototypes used in classification. Other methods consider hierarchi-
cal classification with prototypes (Hase et al., 2019), prototypical part transformation (Li
et al., 2018), and knowledge distillation techniques from prototypes (Keswani et al., 2022).
Prototype-based solutions have been widely adopted in various applications such as medical
imaging (Afnan et al., 2021; Barnett et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021; Rymarczyk et al., 2022b),
time-series analysis (Gee et al., 2019), graph classification (Rymarczyk et al., 2023a; Zhang
et al., 2022), semantic segmentation (Sacha et al., 2023), and class incremental learning (Ry-
marczyk et al., 2023b).
However, prototypical parts still need to be improved, especially regarding the understand-
ability and clarity of the underlying features responsible for the prediction (Kim et al.,
2022). Issues such as spatial misalignment of prototypical parts (Carmichael et al., 2024;
Sacha et al., 2024) and imprecise visualization techniques (Gautam et al., 2023; Xu-Darme
et al., 2023) have been identified. There are also post-hoc explainers analyzing visual fea-
tures such as color, shape, and textures (Nauta et al., 2021a), and approaches using multiple
image patches to visualize the prototypical parts (Ma et al., 2024; Nauta et al., 2023). In
this work, we address the ambiguity of prototypical parts by presenting a dedicated archi-
tecture, LucidPPN, that detects separate sets of prototypes for shapes with textures and
another set for colors. This approach aims to enhance the interpretability and clarity of the
interpretations.

Usage of low-level vision features for image classification. Multiple approaches to
extracting features based on texture (Armi & Fekri-Ershad, 2019; Haralick et al., 1973),
shape (Khan et al., 2012; Mingqiang et al., 2008), and color (Chen et al., 2010; Kobayashi
& Otsu, 2009) have been proposed before the deep learning era, based on the knowledge
about human perception (Fan et al., 2017). Similar features are trained by shallow layers
of deep networks, which can be visualized with methods such as (Zeiler, 2014; Springenberg
et al., 2014). However, while these methods effectively illustrate low-level features, they
struggle with deeper layers, where the visualized concepts entangle multiple visual features
and lead to ambiguous explanations. Similar behavior can be observed in recent eXplainable
AI (XAI) methods (Basaj et al., 2021; Laina et al., 2022; Rymarczyk et al., 2022a; Zieliński
& Górszczak, 2021; Nauta et al., 2021a). By using two branches, one for color and one for
remaining visual features, our method explicitly disentangles these visual features, reducing
ambiguity of explanations based on high-level concepts.


                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     Method
3.1 Preliminaries
Problem formulation. Our objective is to train a fine-grained classification model based
on prototypical parts, which accurately predicts one of M subtly differentiating classes.
We use N image-label pairs {(x0 , y0 ), . . . , (xN , yN )} ⊂ I × {1, . . . , M } as a training set to
obtain the model returning highly accurate predictions and lucid explanations. For this,
we separate color from other visual features at the input and process them through two
network branches with separate sets of PPs.

PDiscoNet. PDiscoNet (van der Klis et al., 2023) generates segmentation masks of object
parts, used in training of LucidPPN to align K successive prototypical parts of each class
with K successive object parts. We decided to use it instead of human annotators because
it is more efficient and cost-effective. However, it can be replaced with any method of object
part segmentation due to the modularity of our approach.
PDiscoNet model fDisco utilizes a convolutional neural network (CNN) to generate a feature
map ZDisco = [zij ]i,j ∈ (RDDisco )HDisco ×WDisco from a given image x. Each of HDisco ×
WDisco vectors from such feature map is then compared to trainable vectors q k ∈ RDDisco
representing K object parts and background, using similarity based on Euclidean distance
                                       exp(−||zij − q k ||2 )
                             tkij = PK+1                        ,                      (1)
                                     k0 =1 exp(−||zij − q || )
                                                           k0 2


for i = 1, . . . , WDisco and j = 1, . . . , HDisco , and k ∈ {1, . . . , K + 1}. This way, we obtain
an attention map T k = [tkij ]i,j ∈ RHDisco ×WDisco for each object part and background. Such
attention maps are multiplied by feature map ZDisco and averaged to obtain one vector per
object part. Those vectors are passed to the classification part of PDiscoNet, which involves
learnable modulation vectors and a linear classifier.
A vital observation is that the maps T k continuously split the image into regions corre-
sponding to discovered object parts thanks to a well-conceived set of loss functions added
to the usual cross-entropy. They assure the distinctiveness, consistency, and presence of the
semantic regions. Yet, the only annotations used in training are the class labels.
In the subsequent sections, we ignore the PDiscoNet predictions PDisco , using only the
attention maps T k , which we will call segmentation masks from now on.

3.2     LucidPPN
3.2.1    Architecture
LucidPPN is a deep architecture, presented in Figure 3, consisting of two branches: one for
revealing information about shape and texture (ShapeTexNet), and the second dedicated to
color (ColorNet). That is why ShapeTexNet operates on grayscaled input, while ColorNet
uses aggregated information about the color.
ShapeTexNet. A grayscaled version of image x is obtained by converting its channels x =
(r, g, b) to xS = (w, w, w), where w = 0.299r + 0.587g + 0.114b. This formula approximates
human perception of brightness (Pratt, 2013) and is a default grayscale method used in
computational libraries, such as PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019).
Grayscaled image xS is fed to a convolutional neural network backbone fSb . For this purpose,
we adapt the ConvNeXt-tiny (Liu et al., 2022) without classification head and with increased
stride at the two last convolutional layers to increase the resolution of the feature map, like
in PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023). As an output of fSb , we obtain a matrix of dimension
(D × H × W ), which is projected to dimension KM × H × W using 1 × 1 convolution layer
fScl (where K is the number of object parts and M is the number of classes) so that each
prototype has its channel. Then, it is reshaped to the size of K × M × H × W on which we
apply the sigmoid. As a result, we obtain ShapeTexNet feature map defined as
                ZS = [zSkm ]k,m = σ(fScl (fSb (xS ))) = fS (xS ) ∈ (RH×W )K×M .                   (2)


                                                  4
                                  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                   S
                                                                               C
aps S
                                                                                           Input x

                                                           Grayscaled                                                                          Downscaled                            ~
                                                            input xS                                                                             input x C


                                                                    ShapeTexNet fS                                                   ColorNet fC
               Class 1


                                       feature                                                                                                                  feature
        Part 1 TODO: swap              map ZS                                                                                                                   map ZC
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Class
                         Maps C

                                                              ~                           ~
                                                              ~                           ~                                                                                     RA


                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                            y^

                                                                                                  Information fusion


                                                                                            ~                                    ~
                                                            feature map ZA
                                                                                            ~                                    ~                      Prototypical
                                                                                                                                                            part
                                                                                                     MaxPool2D                                          Object part 1

                                                            resemblance RA                                                                              Object part 2
                                                                                                        Mean
                                                                                                                                                             Class A
                                                                                          0.1                            0.9
                                                               prediction y^
                                                                                        Class A                        Class B                               Class B

                                  Figure 3: LucidPPN architecture consists of two branches: ColorNet and ShapeTexNet that
                                  encode color and shape with texture in feature maps ZC and ZS , respectively. Thanks
                                  to a special type of training each channel of a feature map corresponds to similarity to a
                                  specific object part of a given class. In this image, green and orange correspond to two
                                  object parts: head and belly, and red and blue correspond to classes A and B. Therefore,
                                  each feature map consists of four channels for head of A, belly of A, head of B, and belly
                                  of B. Corresponding channels from both branches are multiplied to obtain feature map ZA ,
                                  which is then pooled with maximum to obtain the resemblance of prototypical parts fusion
                                                 Class 1


                                  and aggregated through mean to obtain final logits.        Part 1  Part 2
                                  Thus, we link each map zSkm to a unique prototypical part of an object part k for class m,
                                  from which we compute ShapeTexNet resemblance RS = [rSkm ]k,m~∈ [0, 1]K×M , where
                                                             ~
                                                                                       rSkm = MaxPool2D(zSkm ).                                                           (3)
                                  Finally, we obtain ShapeTexNet predictions PS = [pm
                                                                                    S ]m ∈ [0, 1]
                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                    by taking the mean over
                                  the resemblance of all parts of a specific class
                                                                                                              K
                                                                                                       1 X km
                                                                                            pm
                                                                                             S =          rS .                                                            (4)
                                                                                                       K
                                                                                                           k=1

                                  ColorNet. To obtain aggregated information about color, as an input of ColorNet, image
                                  x is downscaled through bilinear interpolation to H × W resolution, marked as xC . Then,
                                  xC is passed to convolutional neural network fC , composed of six 1 × 1 convolutional layers
                                  with ReLU activations, except the last layer after which we apply sigmoid. This way, we
                                  process each input pixel of xC separately, taking into account only its color. As a result, we
                                  obtain ColorNet feature map
                                                                                      km
                                                                               ZC = [zC  ]k,m = fC (xC ) ∈ (RH×W )K×M .                                                   (5)
                                  Analogously to ShapeTexNet, each dimension in the feature map is related to a unique
                                  prototypical part of an object part k in class m. Hence, as before, we calculate ColorNet
                                  resemblance RC = [rC km
                                                          ]k,m ∈ [0, 1]K×M , where
                                                                                        km
                                                                                       rC  = MaxPool2D(zC
                                                                                                        km
                                                                                                           ).                                                             (6)

                                                                                                          5
             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              S
                                     C
                                                           Input x

Grayscaled                                                                                                                       Object           Downscaled
                                                  Grayscale                          Downscale
 Input xS                                                                                                                        part 1             Input xC
                             ShapeTexNet fS                     PDiscoNet fDisco ❄                   ColorNet fC                 Object
                                                                                                                                 part 2

                  feature                                                            segmentation                  feature       Class A
                                                      LD
                  map ZS                                                               masks T                     map ZC
                                                                                                                                 Class B

                                                                                                                                   Stop
                                                                                                                                 gradient
                                                               LS                   LA                                           Frozen
                              resemblance RS                            0 1                         resemblance RA           ❄ weights
                                                                     Ground truth                                            L
                                                                                                                                 Loss L
                                                                       label y

             Figure 4: LucidPPN training schema. We use segmentation masks from PDiscoNet to                          prediction y^
             align the activation of prototypical parts with object parts. Additionally, we enforce the
             ShapeTexNet to encode as much predictive information as possible through the usage of LS .
             Lastly, we learn how to classify images through LA which is a binary cross-entropy loss.
                                                                                                                        2DMaxPool

             Information fusion and prediction. To obtain aggregated feature map ZA =                                       Mean
               km
             [zA  ]k,m ∈ (RH×W )K×M from both branches, we multiply the ShapeTexNet feature map                 0.1                       0.
             with ColorNet feature map element-wise                                                   Black-and-white Warbler       Prairie W
                                                 km
                                                zA  = zSkm zC km
                                                                 ,                                                                          (7)
             and define aggregated resemblance RA = [rA ]k,m ∈ [0, 1]K×M as
                                                      km

                                                km
                                               rA    = MaxPool2D(zA   km
                                                                         ).                           (8)
             The final predictions ŷ = [ŷ ]m ∈ [0, 1] for all classes are obtained by averaging rA over
                                           m            M                                          km

             class-related parts                              K
                                                           1 X km
                                                    ŷ m =       rA .                                 (9)
                                                           K
             3.2.2 Training
                                                             k=1


             As a result of LucidPPN training (presented in Figure 4), we aim to achieve three primary
             goals: 1) obtaining a high-accuracy model, 2) ensuring the correspondence of prototypical
             parts to object parts, 3) and disentangling color information from other visual features. To
             accomplish these goals, we design three loss functions: 1) prototypical-object part correspon-
             dence loss LD , 2) loss disentangling color from shape with texture LS , 3) and classification
             loss LA that contribute to the final loss
                                             L = αD LD + αS LS + αA LA ,                               (10)
             where αD , αS , αA are weighting factors whose values are found through hyperparameter
             search. The definition of each loss component is presented in the following paragraphs.
             Please note that we assume that PDiscoNet was already trained, and we denote ȳ ∈ BM as
             a one-hot encoding of y.
             Correspondence of prototypical parts to object parts. To ensure that each pro-
             totypical part assigned to a given class corresponds to distinct object parts, we define
             the prototypical-object part correspondence loss LD . This function leverages segmenta-
             tion masks T k from PDiscoNet to align the activations of prototypical parts, represented by
             the ShapeTexNet feature map ZS with the locations of object parts. Hence, the activations
             from the aggregated feature map ZA will be aligned with these object parts. It is defined as
                                                       K
                                                    1 X
                                            LD =          MBCE ZSky , T k ,                            (11)
                                                   K
                                                                      k=1
             where MBCE(u, v) is defined as the mean binary cross-entropy loss between two maps
             u, v ∈ [0, 1]H×W .
                                                      H W
                                                  1 XX
                                  MBCE(u, v) =              BCE(uij , vij ),                (12)
                                                 HW i=1 j=1
             and y is the ground truth class. We align only the maps corresponding to y because the
             prototypical parts assigned to other classes should not be highly activated.

                                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Disentangling color from other visual infromation. To maximize the usage of in-
formation about shape and texture during the classification with prototypical parts, we
maximize the accuracy of the ShapeTexNet through the usage of binary cross-entropy as
classification loss function on ShapeTexNet resemblances values
                                         M   K
                                     1 XX
                              LS =              BCE(rSkm , ȳm ).                  (13)
                                    KM m=1
                                              k=1


Classification loss. Lastly, to ensure the high accuracy of the model and to combine
information from ColorNet and ShapeTexNet, we employ binary cross-entropy on aggregated
resemblances as our classification loss
                                        M  K
                                      1 XX
                             LA =            BCE(rAkm
                                                      , ȳm ).                     (14)
                                    KM m=1
                                              k=1
3.3 Prediction Interpretation
LucidPPN adopts the definition of prototypical parts from PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023),
where each prototypical part is represented by ten patches, typically activated by ten colored
images from the training set. However, in LucidPPN , the visualization must demonstrate
how each prototypical part is disentangled into color and shape with texture features. That
is why we propose a method to present the disentangled visual features of a prototypical part
by combining five grayscale patches, a color bar, and five colored patches. The grayscale
and colored patches are selected from the training images with the highest ShapeTexNet
resemblance and aggregated resemblance, respectively. The color bar is created by sampling
RGB color values from the ten colored patches with the highest aggregated resemblance and
projecting them using t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008). Moreover, in contrast to
PIP-Net, LucidPPN creates prototypical parts corresponding to the same object parts in
all classes. Therefore, we can use the information about the specific object part location to
enrich the explainability.
Local (prediction) interpretation. Figure 2 demonstrates how LucidPPN classifies a
specific sample x into class ŷ by examining the prototypical parts assigned to ŷ that are
disentangled into color and other visual features. The views are enhanced with pointers to
regions of highest aggregated resemblance, clearly associated with the object parts.
Comparison explanation. Users may wish to inspect and compare local explanations
for multiple classes. LucidPPN facilitates this comparison by allowing users to compare
prototypical parts of corresponding object parts, making the process intuitive, as shown in
pplementary Figure 8.
Class (global) characteristic. Disentangled prototypical parts corresponding to object
parts reveal the patterns the model uses to classify a given class. This enables the identi-
fication of texture and shape features, as well as colors (see Sup. Figure 21), that describe
a class without the need to analyze the final-layer connections, unlike other prototypical
part-based approaches (Chen et al., 2019; Donnelly et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2024; Nauta
et al., 2023; Rymarczyk et al., 2021; 2022c).

4   Experimental Setup
Datasets. We train and evaluate our model on four datasets: CUB-200-2011 (CUB) with
200 bird species (Wah et al., 2011), Stanford Cars (CARS) with 196 car models (Krause
et al., 2013), Stanford Dogs (DOGS) with 120 breeds of dogs (Khosla et al., 2011), and
Oxford 102 Flower (FLOWER) with 102 kinds of flowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008).
More details on image preprocessing are in the Supplement.
Implementation details. Trainings are repeated 3 times. We made the code public. The
size of ShapeTexNet feature map is 768 × 28 × 28. The channel number of ColorNet’s con-
volutional layers is 20, 50, 150, 200, 600, K · M . The values of loss weights are found through
hyperparameter search (αD = 1.4, αS = 1.0, αA = 1.0). Details are in the Supplement.
Metrics During the evaluation, we report the top-1 accuracy classification score. Addi-
tionally, we measure the quality of prototypical parts alignment with object parts by cal-
culating intersection-over-union (IoU). In PDiscoNet, the segmentation map is the size of


                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison of accuracy of PPs-based models on 4 datasets. LucidPPN achieves
competitive results to all methods, and SOTA on 2 datasets. Note that, LucidPPN is
trained with K = 12, and “–“ means that the model did not converge during training when
using the code provided by the authors.
                                              CUB           CARS          DOGS        FLOWER
        ProtoPNet (Chen et al., 2019)          79.2          86.1       77.4±0.2      92.1±0.3
       ProtoTree (Nauta et al., 2021b)      82.2 ± 0.7    86.6 ± 0.2        –             –
    ProtoPShare (Rymarczyk et al., 2021)       74.7          86.4       74.1±0.3      90.3±0.2
     ProtoPool (Rymarczyk et al., 2022c)   85.5 ± 0.1     88.9 ± 0.1    71.7±0.2      92.7±0.1
        PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023)        84.3 ± 0.2    88.2 ± 0.5   80.8 ± 0.4     91.8 ± 0.5
                 LucidPPN                   81.5 ± 0.4   91.6 ± 0.2     79.4 ± 0.4   95.0 ± 0.3
the input image, while our activation map is the size of the latent space. Hence, we are
downsizing the segmentation map to 26 × 26 resolution to match its dimensions with the
activation map before calculating the IoU between the corresponding patches of both maps.
User studies. Using ClickWorker System3 , we run two user studies to compare the quality
of patch-based prototypes and the influence of disentangled resemblance scores provided by
LucidPPN. For the first study, we collect the testing examples from CUB which are correctly
classified by PIP-Net, single branch CNN4 and LucidPPN. These are joined with information
about the two most probable classes per model and associated prototypical parts. Ninety
workers (30 per method) answer the survey, which consists of 10 questions. They are asked
to predict the model’s decision based on the evidence for the top two output classes without
the numerical scores. This approach mimics the user study presented in HIVE (Kim et al.,
2022) and is also inspired by the study performed in (Ma et al., 2024). In the second study,
we also collect images from CUB. This time we join them with prototypical parts of the
correctly predicted class and one other class. Each of the forty workers answers 10 questions
in which he/she rates from 1 (least) to 5 (most) to assess the influence of the color features
on the model’s prediction. The users give ratings based on LucidPPN prototypical parts
visualization, with or without included numerical resemblance scores. More details and the
survey templates are in the Supplement.

5        Results
In this section, we show the effec- Table 2: Comparison of the accuracy of ShapeTexNet
tiveness of LucidPPN, the influence to LucidPPN. Integrating color with other visual fea-
of the color disentanglement in the tures proves advantageous for datasets containing
processing on the model’s perfor- objects found in nature. However, for the CARS
mance, and the results related to the dataset, adding color information does not enhance
interpretability of learned prototyp- the model’s performance. This is because color is not
ical parts based on the user study.   a significant feature when classifying vehicles, as the
Comparison to other PPs- same car model can appear in various colors.
based models. In Table 1 we                             CUB CARS DOGS FLOWER
compare the classification quality
                                        ShapeTexNet
of LucidPPN and other PPs-based                         80.4   91.7      78.6       93.6
                                         LucidPPN       81.8   91.7     78.9       95.3
methods. We present the mean ac-
curacy and standard deviation. We report best performing LucidPPN , which in the case of
all datasets was trained with fixed K = 12. Our LucidPPN achieves the highest accuracy
for CARS and FLOWER datasets, and competitive results on CUB and DOGS.
Color impact. The influence of ColorNet on LucidPPN predictions is shown in Table 2.
We compare the accuracy of ShapeTexNet with the LucidPPN predictions. The information
fusion enhances the results on the CUB, DOGS, and FLOWER. However, it does not affect
performance on the CARS. This can be attributed to the characteristics of the CARS
dataset, where vehicles of the same model can differ in colors, indicating that color is not
     3
    https://www.clickworker.com/
     4
    For ablation analysis we also report results of a single branch CNN which has the same archi-
tecture as ShapeTexNet and receives colored images as input. Its local interpretation is visualized
similarly to LucidPPN, but without the gray patches and color bar as presented in Sup. Figure 13


                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


critical for this task. This contrasts with the fine-grained classification of natural objects,
such as birds and flowers, where color plays a significant role.
In Table 3 we show the results of experiments aiming to analyze how the model is susceptible
to the change of the color on the image. We report the accuracy of PIP-Net, ShapeTexNet,
and LucidPPN on original and hue-perturbed images from the CUB dataset. One can notice
that PIP-Net is highly dependent on color information and its score drops by over 37%
after perturbation. At the same time ShapeTexNet is immune to this transformation, while
LucidPPN loses approximately 12.5% accuracy because of it. To alter hue we randomly
rotate hue values in the HSV color space. After rotation, we adjust the luminosity of each
pixel by proportionately scaling its RGB channels. This step is key to modifying the hue
without changing the brightness perceived by humans.
User studies. Statistics from the user study Table 3: Robustness of the model to
assessing the lucidity of explanations gener- changes in image color. When the hue
ated by LucidPPN, single branch, and PIP- value is perturbed, the accuracy of PIP-
Net are in Figure 5 and Supplementary Ta- Net drops significantly. In contrast, the ac-
ble 5. We report the mean user accuracy with curacy drop for LucidPPN is only half as
a standard deviation and p-values. Users bas- much, and for ShapeTexNet none.
ing their responses on LucidPPN explanations
                                                                  Original Hue-perturbed
score significantly better than both PIP-Net
and random guess baselines. Additionally, we          PIP-Net       83.9         53.0
conclude that most of the accuracy in this user     ShapeTexNet     80.3         80.3
study can be attributed to the PDiscoNet part        LucidPPN       81.9         71.7
supervision as single branch scores similarly to
LucidPPN, without a statistically significant difference. While both of our explanation vari-
ants with prototypical parts corresponding to the same object parts prove to be more intu-
itive for users, we also want to highlight the advantage of using full LucidPPN over single
branch. To this end, in Supplementary Figure 7 and Supplementary Table 6 we show the
outcomes of the study evaluating the user’s ability to recognize the importance of color fea-
tures in LucidPPN’s decisions. Users without information about resemblance values struggle
in this task achieving the same performance as if they answered at random. In contrast,
users provided with the resemblances in LucidPPN visualizations score 23% better. Note
that neither single branch nor PIP-Net gives the disentangled resemblance values. In both
studies, we perform a one-sided t-test and one-sample t-test to compare methods against
each other and 50% accuracy, respectively. More details can be found in the Supplement.

6   Ablation and analysis
In this section, we examine how LucidPPN’s perfor-                       100
mance is impacted by object part supervision and the                         * p-value < 0.05 *              **
weights of the loss function components.                                  75
                                                                                          * *
                                                          Accuracy [%]


Influence of part supervision on the perfor-                              50
mance of LucidPPN. One of the features of Lu-
cidPPN is object part supervision based on PDis-                          25
coNet. To check its influence on the PPs-based model
without disentanglement, in Table 4 we compare the                         0
accuracy of a single branch to LucidPPN and PIP-                                  dom PIP-Net          N     le
                                                                               Ran                 idPP Sinagnch
Net. The single branch scores better than both mod-                                             Luc      br
els. The disentanglement in LucidPPN causes a small    Figure 5: User study results show
(<6%) or negligible drop in accuracy while offering    that users based on LucidPPN ex-
more insights from the model.                          planations outperform those with
Loss weighting. In Figure 6 we investigate the im- explanations from PIP-Net to a sta-
pact of the loss weight αD , which is responsible for tistically significant degree.
prototypical-object parts alignment, on training outcomes. In this analysis, the weights of
the other losses are fixed at αS = αC = 1. We evaluate the accuracy and intersection-
over-union (IoU) between the highest activated ShapeTexNet feature map and PDiscoNet’s
segmentation masks for each object part. The results show that increasing αD enhances
the IoU, but after a certain point, it gradually reduces accuracy. Notably, omitting the


                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


loss αD (part supervision) significantly diminishes the network’s classification performance
and makes the learned prototypical parts collapse into a single, most descriptive one as pre-
sented in Supplementary Figure 10. While other works address this issue by adding novel
regularization losses (Nauta et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021), these solutions fail to ensure
consistency of the considered parts across different classes.
We provide additional results in the Supplementary Materials. They include ablations
on the LucidPPN’s backbone, the size of a ColorNet, type of input color representation,
number of object parts K, and different training schedules for LucidPPN‘s branches. Also,
we show examples of PIPNet failures mitigated by LucidPPN, and we discuss the reasons
for introducing LS .

7   Conclusions
In this work, we propose LucidPPN, Table 4: Accuracy of PIP-Net, LucidPPN, and a
an inherently interpretable model that single branch CNN supervised by PDiscoNet.
uses prototypical parts to disentangle                       CUB CARS DOGS FLOWER
color from other visual features in its
explanations. Our extensive results             PIP-Net      84.3   88.2     80.8       91.8
                                               LucidPPN      81.5   91.6     79.4       95.0
demonstrate the effectiveness of our         single branch 86.6     91.9    82.7        95.6
method, and user studies confirm that
our explanations are less ambiguous than those from PIP-Net. In future research, we aim
to further refine the model architecture to separately process shape and texture features, as
well as analyze different visualization strategies of disentanglement and their recognition by
the users. Additionally, we plan to explore the human perception system in greater depth
to inform the design of the next generation of interpretable neural network architectures.

Limitations. Our work faces a significant con-              84                          40
straint: while our designed mechanism adeptly disen-
tangles color information from input images, it can-
                                                        Accuracy [%]


not currently extract other crucial visual features


                                                                                          IoU [%]
such as texture, shape, and contrast. This high-            76                          25
lights a broader challenge within the field: the ab-
sence of a universal mechanism capable of encom-
passing diverse visual attributes. Furthermore, our         68                          10
approach inherits limitations from other PPs-based              0          1         2
architectures, including issues such as spatial mis-                        D
alignment (Sacha et al., 2024), the non-obvious in- Figure 6: Influence of the weight
terpretation of PPs (Ma et al., 2024) and those of of prototypical-object part corre-
PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023). The latter could be spondence loss on accuracy and
addressed with textual descriptions of concepts dis- Intersection-over-Union (IoU). An
covered by PPs. Lastly, LucidPPN increases the increase of αD improves IoU but at
transparency of the decision made by the deep neu- a certain point gradually reduces ac-
ral networks however it still has a performance gap curacy.
to black-box models, or even to those offering some
insights into the model reasoning process such as PDiscoNet (van der Klis et al., 2023). This
shall be under further investigation to fill this performance gap if possible.

Broader Impact. Our work advances the field of interpretability, a crucial component
for trustworthy AI systems, where users have the right to understand the decisions made by
these systems (Kaminski, 2021; Tabassi, 2023). LucidPPN enhances the quality of explana-
tions derived from PPs-based neural networks, which are among the most promising tech-
niques for ante-hoc interpretability methods. Consequently, it can facilitate the derivation
of scientific insights and the creation of better human-AI interfaces for complex, high-stakes
applications.
Additionally, LucidPPN provides visual characteristics for PPs, which are especially ben-
eficial in domains lacking standardized semantic textual descriptions of concepts. This
is particularly useful in fields such as medicine, where it aids in analyzing radiology and
histopathology images.


                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reproducibility Statement
We ensured that our experiments are reproducible by thoroughly describing them in Sec-
tion 4 and the Supplement. Additionally, the Supplementary Materials include the code used
to perform the experiments, along with a README.md file providing further instructions.

Acknowledgements
The work of M. Pach, K. Lewandowska and B. Zieliński work was funded by National
Centre of Science (Poland) grant no. 2022/47/B/ST6/03397. The work of D. Rymar-
czyk was funded by National Centre of Science (Poland) grant no. 2022/45/N/ST6/04147.
The work of J. Tabor was funded by National Centre of Science (Poland) grant no.
2023/49/B/ST6/01137.
We gratefully acknowledge Polish high-performance computing infrastructure PLGrid (HPC
Centers: ACK Cyfronet AGH) for providing computer facilities and support within com-
putational grant no. PLG/2023/016555. Some experiments were performed on servers
purchased with funds from the Priority Research Area (Artificial Intelligence Computing
Center Core Facility) under the Strategic Programme Excellence Initiative at Jagiellonian
University.
We are grateful to Jakub Pach and Tomasz Pach for their assistance in composing images
for the survey according to our developed template.

References
Michael Anis Mihdi Afnan, Yanhe Liu, Vincent Conitzer, Cynthia Rudin, Abhishek Mishra,
 Julian Savulescu, and Masoud Afnan. Interpretable, not black-box, artificial intelligence
 should be used for embryo selection. Human Reproduction Open, 2021.
David Alvarez Melis and Tommi Jaakkola. Towards robust interpretability with self-
  explaining neural networks. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
  N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Laleh Armi and Shervan Fekri-Ershad. Texture image analysis and texture classification
  methods-a review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.06554, 2019.
Alina Jade Barnett, Fides Regina Schwartz, Chaofan Tao, Chaofan Chen, Yinhao Ren,
  Joseph Y Lo, and Cynthia Rudin. A case-based interpretable deep learning model for
  classification of mass lesions in digital mammography. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3
  (12):1061–1070, 2021.
Dominika Basaj, Witold Oleszkiewicz, Igor Sieradzki, Michał Górszczak, B Rychalska,
 T Trzcinski, and B Zielinski. Explaining self-supervised image representations with visual
 probing. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
David Berga, Marc Masana, and Joost Van de Weijer. Disentanglement of color and shape
  representations for continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.06356, 2020.
Moritz Böhle, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele. B-cos networks: Alignment is all we need for
 interpretability. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 10329–10338, 2022.
Wieland Brendel and Matthias Bethge. Approximating CNNs with bag-of-local-features
 models works surprisingly well on imagenet. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SkfMWhAqYQ.
Zachariah Carmichael, Suhas Lohit, Anoop Cherian, Michael J Jones, and Walter J Scheirer.
  Pixel-grounded prototypical part networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 4768–4779, 2024.


                                            11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, Daniel Tao, Alina Barnett, Cynthia Rudin, and Jonathan K Su.
  This looks like that: deep learning for interpretable image recognition. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Wei-Ta Chen, Wei-Chuan Liu, and Ming-Syan Chen. Adaptive color feature extraction based
 on image color distributions. IEEE Transactions on image processing, 19(8):2005–2016,
 2010.
Jon Donnelly, Alina Jade Barnett, and Chaofan Chen. Deformable protopnet: An inter-
  pretable image classifier using deformable prototypes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10265–10275, 2022.
Shaojing Fan, Tian-Tsong Ng, Bryan Lee Koenig, Jonathan Samuel Herberg, Ming Jiang,
  Zhiqi Shen, and Qi Zhao. Image visual realism: From human perception to machine
  computation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 40(9):
  2180–2193, 2017.
Srishti Gautam, Marina M-C Höhne, Stine Hansen, Robert Jenssen, and Michael
  Kampffmeyer. This looks more like that: Enhancing self-explaining models by proto-
  typical relevance propagation. Pattern Recognition, 136:109172, 2023.
Alan H Gee, Diego Garcia-Olano, Joydeep Ghosh, and David Paydarfar. Explaining deep
  classification of time-series data with learned prototypes. In CEUR workshop proceedings,
  volume 2429, pp. 15. NIH Public Access, 2019.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann,
  and Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape
  bias improves accuracy and robustness. 7th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, ICLR, 2019.
Robert M Haralick, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Its’ Hak Dinstein. Textural features for
  image classification. IEEE Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics, (6):610–621,
  1973.
Peter Hase, Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, and Cynthia Rudin. Interpretable image recogni-
  tion with hierarchical prototypes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Human
  Computation and Crowdsourcing, volume 7, pp. 32–40, 2019.
Ju He, Shuo Yang, Shaokang Yang, Adam Kortylewski, Xiaoding Yuan, Jie-Neng Chen,
  Shuai Liu, Cheng Yang, Qihang Yu, and Alan Yuille. Partimagenet: A large, high-quality
  dataset of parts. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 128–145. Springer,
  2022.
Hossein Hosseini, Baicen Xiao, Mayoore Jaiswal, and Radha Poovendran. Assessing shape
  bias property of convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 1923–1931, 2018.
Qihan Huang, Mengqi Xue, Wenqi Huang, Haofei Zhang, Jie Song, Yongcheng Jing, and
  Mingli Song. Evaluation and improvement of interpretability for self-explainable part-
  prototype networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, pp. 2011–2020, 2023.
Margot E Kaminski. The right to explanation, explained. In Research Handbook on Infor-
 mation Law and Governance, pp. 278–299. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2021.
Monish Keswani, Sriranjani Ramakrishnan, Nishant Reddy, and Vineeth N Balasubrama-
 nian. Proto2proto: Can you recognize the car, the way i do? In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10233–10243,
 2022.
Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Joost Van de Weijer, and Maria Vanrell. Modulating shape features
  by color attention for object recognition. International Journal of Computer Vision, 98:
  49–64, 2012.


                                             12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aditya Khosla, Nityananda Jayadevaprakash, Bangpeng Yao, and Fei-Fei Li. Novel dataset
  for fine-grained image categorization: Stanford dogs. In Proc. CVPR workshop on fine-
  grained visual categorization (FGVC), volume 2. Citeseer, 2011.

Eunji Kim, Siwon Kim, Minji Seo, and Sungroh Yoon. Xprotonet: Diagnosis in chest radio-
  graphy with global and local explanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15719–15728, 2021.

Sunnie SY Kim, Nicole Meister, Vikram V Ramaswamy, Ruth Fong, and Olga Russakovsky.
  Hive: Evaluating the human interpretability of visual explanations. In European Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 280–298. Springer, 2022.

Takumi Kobayashi and Nobuyuki Otsu. Color image feature extraction using color index
  local auto-correlations. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing, pp. 1057–1060. IEEE, 2009.

Jonathan Krause, Michael Stark, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for fine-
  grained categorization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
  vision workshops, pp. 554–561, 2013.

Iro Laina, Yuki M Asano, and Andrea Vedaldi. Measuring the interpretability of unsuper-
  vised representations via quantized reverse probing. ICLR, 2022.

Barbara Landau, Linda B Smith, and Susan S Jones. The importance of shape in early
  lexical learning. Cognitive development, 3(3):299–321, 1988.

Oscar Li, Hao Liu, Chaofan Chen, and Cynthia Rudin. Deep learning for case-based reason-
  ing through prototypes: A neural network that explains its predictions. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and
  Saining Xie. A convnet for the 2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11976–11986, 2022.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

Chiyu Ma, Brandon Zhao, Chaofan Chen, and Cynthia Rudin. This looks like those: Illu-
  minating prototypical concepts using multiple visualizations. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Yang Mingqiang, Kpalma Kidiyo, Ronsin Joseph, et al. A survey of shape feature extraction
  techniques. Pattern recognition, 15(7):43–90, 2008.

Meike Nauta, Annemarie Jutte, Jesper Provoost, and Christin Seifert. This looks like that,
 because... explaining prototypes for interpretable image recognition. In Joint European
 Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 441–456.
 Springer, 2021a.

Meike Nauta, Ron Van Bree, and Christin Seifert. Neural prototype trees for interpretable
 fine-grained image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pp. 14933–14943, 2021b.

Meike Nauta, Jörg Schlötterer, Maurice van Keulen, and Christin Seifert. Pip-net: Patch-
 based intuitive prototypes for interpretable image classification. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2744–2753,
 2023.

Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large
 number of classes. In 2008 Sixth Indian conference on computer vision, graphics & image
 processing, pp. 722–729. IEEE, 2008.


                                             13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
  Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An im-
  perative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
William K Pratt. Introduction to digital image processing. CRC press, 2013.
Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions
  and use interpretable models instead. Nature machine intelligence, 1(5):206–215, 2019.
Cynthia Rudin, Chaofan Chen, Zhi Chen, Haiyang Huang, Lesia Semenova, and Chudi
  Zhong. Interpretable machine learning: Fundamental principles and 10 grand challenges.
  Statistic Surveys, 16:1–85, 2022.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Łukasz Struski, Jacek Tabor, and Bartosz Zieliński. Protopshare: Pro-
  totypical parts sharing for similarity discovery in interpretable image classification. In
  Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Min-
  ing, pp. 1420–1430, 2021.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Adriana Borowa, Anna Bracha, Maurycy Chronowski, Wojciech Ozimek,
  and Bartosz Zieliński. Comparison of supervised and self-supervised deep representations
  trained on histological images. In MEDINFO 2021: One World, One Health–Global
  Partnership for Digital Innovation, pp. 1052–1053. IOS Press, 2022a.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Adam Pardyl, Jarosław Kraus, Aneta Kaczyńska, Marek Skomorowski,
  and Bartosz Zieliński. Protomil: multiple instance learning with prototypical parts for
  whole-slide image classification. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and
  Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 421–436. Springer, 2022b.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Łukasz Struski, Michał Górszczak, Koryna Lewandowska, Jacek Tabor,
  and Bartosz Zieliński. Interpretable image classification with differentiable prototypes
  assignment. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  2022c.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Łukasz Struski, Michał Górszczak, Koryna Lewandowska, Jacek Tabor,
  and Bartosz Zieliński. Interpretable image classification with differentiable prototypes
  assignment. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 351–368. Springer, 2022d.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Daniel Dobrowolski, and Tomasz Danel. Progrest: Prototypical graph
  regression soft trees for molecular property prediction. SIAM International Conference
  on Data Mining, 2023a.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Joost van de Weijer, Bartosz Zieliński, and Bartlomiej Twardowski.
  Icicle: Interpretable class incremental continual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1887–1898, 2023b.
Mikołaj Sacha, Bartosz Jura, Dawid Rymarczyk, Łukasz Struski, Jacek Tabor, and Bartosz
 Zieliński. Interpretability benchmark for evaluating spatial misalignment of prototypical
 parts explanations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 volume 38, pp. 21563–21573, 2024.
Mikołaj Sacha, Dawid Rymarczyk, Lukasz Struski, Jacek Tabor, and Bartosz Zieliński. Pro-
 toseg: Interpretable semantic segmentation with prototypical parts. In Winter Conference
 on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2023.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striv-
  ing for simplicity: The all convolutional net. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Elham Tabassi. Artificial intelligence risk management framework (ai rmf 1.0). 2023.
Yuki Ukai, Tsubasa Hirakawa, Takayoshi Yamashita, and Hironobu Fujiyoshi. This looks like
  it rather than that: Protoknn for similarity-based classifiers. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                              14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robert van der Klis, Stephan Alaniz, Massimiliano Mancini, Cassio F Dantas, Dino Ienco,
  Zeynep Akata, and Diego Marcos. Pdisconet: Semantically consistent part discovery for
  fine-grained recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 1866–1876, 2023.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of
  machine learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The
  caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011 dataset. 2011.
Qiyang Wan, Ruiping Wang, and Xilin Chen. Interpretable object recognition by semantic
  prototype analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications
  of Computer Vision, pp. 800–809, 2024.
Jiaqi Wang et al. Interpretable image recognition by constructing transparent embedding
  space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 895–904, 2021.
Bichen Wu, Forrest Iandola, Peter H Jin, and Kurt Keutzer. Squeezedet: Unified, small, low
  power fully convolutional neural networks for real-time object detection for autonomous
  driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
  workshops, pp. 129–137, 2017.
Nan Wu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Kyunghyun Cho, and Krzysztof J Geras. Characterizing
  and overcoming the greedy nature of learning in multi-modal deep neural networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 24043–24055. PMLR, 2022.
Romain Xu-Darme, Georges Quénot, Zakaria Chihani, and Marie-Christine Rousset. Sanity
  checks for patch visualisation in prototype-based image classification. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3690–3695,
  2023.
MD Zeiler. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In European conference
 on computer vision/arXiv, volume 1311, 2014.
Zaixi Zhang, Qi Liu, Hao Wang, Chengqiang Lu, and Cheekong Lee. Protgnn: Towards
  self-explaining graph neural networks. 2022.
Bartosz Zieliński and Michał Górszczak. What pushes self-supervised image representations
  away? In International Conference on Neural Information Processing, pp. 514–521.
  Springer, 2021.


                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Supplement for LucidPPN: Unambiguous Prototypical Parts
Network for User-centric Interpretable Computer Vision
More details on data preprocessing

In training, we apply transformations as follows: Resize(size=224+8), TAWideNoColor(),
RandomHorizontalFlip(), RandomResizedCrop(size=(224, 224), scale=(0.95, 1.),
where TAWideNoColor() is the same variation of TrivialAugment augmentation as
in PIP-Net. Additionally, the image entering the ShapeTexNet is normalized with
Normalize(mean=0.445, std=0.269) after being converted to grayscale. At test time and
when finding the prototypical parts patches, we only apply Resize(size=224) followed by
grayscaling and normalization in case of ShapeTexNet input. The CUB images used for
training and evaluation are first cropped to the bounding boxes similarly to other PP-based
methods.
We do not modify any parameters in PDiscoNet. CUB settings are used for datasets not
trained in the PDiscoNet paper. For efficiency, we generated and saved the segmentation
masks to avoid inferencing PDiscoNet during LucidPPN’ training.

More details on experimental setup

The networks (ShapeTexNet and ColorNet) are optimized together in minibatches of size
64 for 40 epochs using AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) optimizer with beta values of
0.9 and 0.999, epsilon of 10−8 , and weight decay of 0. The learning rate of ShapeTexNet
parameters is initialized to 0.002 and lowered to 0.0002 after 15 epochs. The learning rate
of the ColorNet is fixed at 0.002. We freeze the weights of ShapeTexNet backbone for the
first 15 epochs as a warm-up stage similar to other PPs-based approaches (Chen et al., 2019;
Nauta et al., 2023; Rymarczyk et al., 2022c).

More details on computing resources

We ran our experiments on an internal cluster and a local cloud provider, a single GPU, it
was either NVIDIA A100 40GB or NVIDIA H100 80GB. The node we ran the experiments
on has 40GB of RAM and an 8-core CPU. The model on average trains for 3 hours.

More details on user studies with exemplary surveys.

Each worker answering a short 10-question survey was paid 1.50 euros. Questions between
users may differ as they are randomly composed. Participants are gender-balanced and have
ages from 18 to 60.

User study on quality of prototypical parts. For PIP-Net, we randomly select sam-
ples with K 0 = 4, 3, 2, 1 in the proportion of 5 : 3 : 2 : 1 based on the frequency of occurrence
as PIP-Net doesn’t have the same number of prototypical parts assigned to data classes. The
LucidPPN pieces of evidence for classes in the same samples always show four prototypical
parts as we use a model trained with K = 4 here.
Example surveys for LucidPPN, PIP-Net, and single branch are presented in Figures 25 to
37, 38 to 50, and 51 to 63, respectively.

User study on the importance of disentangled visual features. Because we focus
on the influence of the color features, we use visualizations with a random single object
and prototypical part to let the user focus on the influence of the color. When gathering
samples for the survey, we make sure that for nearly half of them color was important for the
correct prediction, and for half of them, it was not. We define that the color was important,
when LucidPPN was correct, but ShapeTexNet was wrong. And, we define that color was
unimportant if both outputs were correct.
Example surveys for LucidPPN with color feature scores and without them are presented
in Figures 64 to 76, and 77 to 89, respectively.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Detailed results of the user study
In Tables 5 and 6, we present detailed results of the user studies. We also visualize the
results of the user study on the importance of scores in the Figure 7.


Table 5: User study results indicate that users based on LucidPPN explanations outperform
those with explanations from PIP-Net to a statistically significant degree.
                             Mean Acc. [%]                                                     p-value
                                ± Std.                               random                    PIP-Net     LucidPPN
                PIP-Net       60.0 ± 18.1                             0.002                       −            −
               LucidPPN       67.9 ± 16.9                          2.13 · 10−6                  0.044          −
             single branch    69.9 ± 12.8                          1.11 · 10−9                  0.008        0.299


        Table 6: Details of the user study about assesing the importance of color.
                                                  Mean Acc. [%]                                          p-value
                                                     ± Std.                            random           without resemblances
           without resemblances                       49.50 ± 11.3                        0.577                  −
      with resemblances (LucidPPN)                    60.87 ± 19.9                        0.012                0.016


                                                100
                                                      * p-value < 0.05
                                                75                                   **
                                 Accuracy [%]


                                                50

                                                25

                                                  0
                                                                                           s
                                                             dom          ut s         nce
                                                       Ran             tho ce      bla
                                                                    Wi mblan resem PPN)
                                                                      e           d
                                                                   res With (Luci


Figure 7: User study shows that disentangled resemblance scores enable users to better
understand the relevance of color in model’s decisions.
Comparison explanation example
We show how our model can generate explanations by comparison of two potential classes
in Figure 8.

Color representation
We have performed an ablation study to evaluate how different color representations of the
input xc influence the model’s results. Instead of directly downsizing the RGB image, we
first transformed it into HSV space, replaced the S and V values with the Hue value, and
then downsized the image. In other words, the input to the network was an image composed
of the Hue channel repeated three times. The results demonstrate that LucidPPN with this
input still outperforms ShapeTexNet, with performance similar to the basic LucidPPN as
presented in the Table 7.

ColorNet size
Since the architecture of ColorNet may significantly impact LucidPPN’s performance, we
conducted an ablation study on the architecture’s size. Table 8 presents the accuracy com-
parison for CUB. All layers are 1 × 1 convolutions followed by ReLU, except the last layer,
which is followed by a sigmoid activation. The results indicate that using at least two layers


                                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                        Evidence for
                                                                                       Green Violetear


                                                                                                                                Part prototypes for of Green Violetear
                                            Green Violetears seen in training


                                                                                                & 1.0

                                                                                                        & 0.9

                                                                                                                & 1.0

                                                                                                                        & 0.9
                                                                                                = 0.9

                                                                                                        = 0.7

                                                                                                                = 0.8

                                                                                                                        = 0.9
                                                                                                0.90

                                                                                                        0.63

                                                                                                                0.80

                                                                                                                        0.81


                                                                                                                                                                          0.01 vs 2.53
                         Classified image


                                                                                                                                                                                         Final scores
                                                                                                0.01

                                                                                                        0.00

                                                                                                                0.01

                                                                                                                        0.02
                                            Bay-breasted Warblers seen in training


                                                                                                                                Part prototypes of Bay-breasted Warbler
                                                                                                0.1 =

                                                                                                        0.1 =

                                                                                                                0.1 =

                                                                                                                        0.1 =
                                                                                                0.1 &

                                                                                                        0.0 &

                                                                                                                0.1 &

                                                                                                                        0.2 &


                                                                                     Bay-breasted Warbler
                                                                                         Evidence for

    Figure 8: Comparison explanation example. Best viewed in landscape orientation.


to introduce non-linearity is beneficial. Additional layers have a smaller impact but can be
added to ensure sufficient expressiveness of the network.

Qualitative examples of failure cases without disentanglement that are
improved through LucidPPN

The main goal of the disentanglement is not to improve the accuracy but to provide a better
understanding of the model’s reasoning based on color and shape with texture information.
The explanations containing ShapeTexNet, ColorNet, and aggregated resemblances intro-


                                                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Accuracy of LucidPPN when ColorNet receives RGB values vs. only hue value.
ShapeTexNet added for comparison.
                         ColorNet input      CUB       CARS         DOGS        FLOWER
           ShapeTexNet            -        80.1 ± 0.2 91.7 ± 0.1 79.0 ± 0.3 93.6 ± 0.3
                            RGB            81.5 ± 0.4 91.6 ± 0.2 79.4 ± 0.4 95.0 ± 0.3
            LucidPPN
                           Only Hue        81.1 ± 0.4 91.6 ± 0.2 79.5 ± 0.2 94.1 ± 0.5


             Table 8: LucidPPN’s accuracy for CUB vs the size of ColorNet.
                    Number of layers      Hidden dimensions      Accuracy [%]
                              1                   -                 80.3
                              2                 (600)               81.4
                              4            (50, 200, 600)           81.2
                              6        (20, 50, 150, 200, 600)      81.5



duced in this work offer this additional information. Such an insight was missing in the
previous prototypical parts models (Chen et al., 2019; Nauta et al., 2023).
Nevertheless, disentanglement can enhance accuracy in scenarios where shape and texture
are the primary decision factors, with color serving to refine decisions that are difficult to
make based on other features alone. Figure 9 illustrates examples from CARS and CUB
where LucidPPN adheres to this principle, whereas the single branch CNN does not. Table
9 shows how often single branch CNN with colored input misclassifies color-altered images
compared to the LucidPPN, and vice versa, for two specific data classes scenarios:

     1. For test images of the typically red Lamborghini Aventador, which were converted to
        green and yellow via hue rotation, the single branch CNN mistakenly classified these
        altered images as either the typically green Lamborghini Gallardo or the usually
        yellow Lamborghini Diablo 24 times, despite the noticeable differences in shape (e.g.,
        headlights and bumpers). In contrast, LucidPPN correctly classified these altered
        images. LucidPPN only made such a mistake 3 times, while the single branch CNN
        did not.

     2. For test images of the red Cardinal, which were similarly converted to yellow and
        indigo, the single branch CNN misclassified the Cardinal as any other bird 34 times.
        LucidPPN made this mistake only once, while the single branch CNN was correct
        in all other instances.



Table 9: Number of found examples for which LucidPPN and single branch outperformed
each other when asked to predict class in the color altered images.
                                                  Lamborghini
                                                              Cardinal
                                                   Avendator
                         LucidPPN correct but
                                                      24            34
                          single branch wrong
                         LucidPPN wrong but
                                                       3             1
                         single branch correct


Prototypical parts examples trained without part supervision

are presented in Figure 10.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Original image                                               Wrong class guessed
                                   Altered images        Predictions
                                                                           by single branch
                                                         single branch:
                                                          Lamborghini
                                                            Gallardo
                                                           LucidPPN:
                                                          Lamborghini
                                                           Aventador
                                                         single branch:
                                                          Lamborghini
                                                             Diablo
             Correct label:
                                                           LucidPPN:
              Lamborghini
                                                          Lamborghini
               Aventador
                                                           Aventador
                                                         single branch:
                                                          Blue-winged
                                                            Warbler
                                                           LucidPPN:
                                                            Cardinal

                                                         single branch:
                                                             Indigo
                                                            Bunting
             Correct label:                                LucidPPN:
               Cardinal                                     Cardinal

            Figure A1: Examples of images with altered colors that change the prediction of a
          single branch CNN include a Lamborghini Aventador (top) and a Cardinal (bottom).
Figure 9: Both
          Examples     of images
               are incorrectly       withbyaltered
                               classified   the singlecolors
                                                       branchthat
                                                               CNN,change    the prediction
                                                                     while LucidPPN with colorof a single
branch CNN include a Lamborghini           Aventador
                                  disentangling classifies(top)  and a Cardinal (bottom). Both are
                                                           them correctly.
incorrectly classified by the single branch CNN, while LucidPPN with color disentangling
classifies them correctly.



Number of parts

In Figure 11, we show the impact of choosing a different number of parts K. Lu-
cidPPN achives high results for all tested K, however it is noticeable that increasing K
improves classification. Especially on CARS, our method seems to strongly benefit from
choosing K ≥ 4. The reasonably high scores for all K allow for a choice between sparse
explanations and higher accuracy.


Need for LS

Many prototypical-parts-based models, such as ProtoPNet (Chen et al., 2019), Pro-
toPool (Rymarczyk et al., 2022d), and PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023), involve complex
training schemes with warm-up and pretraining phases. Initially, we believed that Shape-
TexNet should be pretrained before training ColorNet, given that ShapeTexNet processes
more complex data. However, the ablation study presented in Figure 12 shows that warming
up ShapeTexNet (or delaying the training of ColorNet) is either unnecessary or may even
negatively influence color-based explanations.
During the initial development of LucidPPN, we used LS to guide the learning of Shape-
TexNet during its warm-up phase. Once we observed that ShapeTexNet did not require
a warm-up, we switched to jointly using LS and LA in training. We found that remov-
ing LS negatively impacted LucidPPN’s performance which is presented in Figure 6 in the
manuscript. Consequently, we retained LS , as it provides essential guidance for ShapeTexNet
to effectively extract important features from its more complex input.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        With PDiscoNet         Without PDiscoNet
                                                         supervision              supervision


                         Yellow-headed
                           Blackbird
                           Blue Jay


                         Figure A2: Examples from two classes demonstrate
                             that prototypes learned without PDiscoNet
Figure 10: Examples from   two classes
                        supervision  focusdemonstrate     that
                                           on a single object   prototypes
                                                              part, in contrast learned without PDis-
coNet supervision focus on ato single  object
                               those more      part,
                                           diverse     in contrast
                                                   learned by LucidPPN.to those more diverse learned
by LucidPPN.

                                                                  FLOWER            CUB
                                                                  CARS              DOGS
                                                        100
                                                         95
                                         Accuracy [%]


                                                         90
                                                         85
                                                         80
                                                         75
                                                              2 3 4            8         12
                                                                           K
Figure 11: Influence of the number of object parts K on LucidPPN accuracy. Increasing
the number of parts improves the accuracy of the model. Note that each dataset is plotted
in a unique color.


This need for stronger guidance aligns with observations in multimodal learning, where
separate learning of different modality branches maximizes the information extracted from
each modality (Wu et al., 2022). Here, we can think of each branch as different modalities.
Alternatively, using a weighted average could yield similar accuracy, but it would complicate
the final prediction. This approach would necessitate analyzing the contribution of each logit
vector separately and understanding their aggregation, with potentially different weights for
each dataset, making the process less transparent for the user.

Start of color network training

It is natural to ask whether delaying the start of ColorNet optimization could improve
LucidPPN. In Figure 12, we report the accuracy and color sparsity after delaying the training
of ColorNet. The change in classification quality is negligible. However, we observe a drop
in color sparsity, indicating that ColorNet is less focused on relevant colors. It is important
to note that despite the delay, the number of training epochs for ColorNet remains constant
for comparability.


                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           100                                  100


                                                                                     Color sparsity [%]
                            Accuracy [%]
                                            50                                  50


                                             0                                  0
                                                 0       10       20       30
                                                        Delay [epochs]


Figure 12: Influence of a delay when ColorNet starts to train on LucidPPN ’s accuracy and
color sparsity. While this delay does not negatively affect accuracy, it results in lower color
sparsity. This means that the network is not concentrating on a single color when processing
the PP.


LucidPPN with different backbones

We evaluate LucidPPN on an additional ResNet50 backbone and compare the results to
other models and backbones in Table 10. LucidPPN with ResNet50 backbone performs
worse than the one with ConvNeXt-tiny, which is similar to PIP-Net. When comparing
the results, note that iNaturalist-pretrained backbones have an advantage over ImageNet
resulting in a few points higher accuracy.


Table 10: Accuracy for different PP-based methods and backbones. The asterisk means
that the used backbone was pretrained on the iNaturalist dataset instead of ImageNet.
                                                       CUB               CARS                             DOGS   FLOWER
         ProtoPNet      ResNet34        79.2                           86.1         -          -
        ProtoPShare     ResNet34        74.7                           86.4         -          -
         ProtoTree      ResNet50     82.2 ± 0.7∗                    86.6 ± 0.2      -          -
         ProtoPool      ResNet50    85.5 ± 0.1∗                     88.9 ± 0.1      -          -
                        ResNet50     82.0 ± 0.3∗                    86.5 ± 0.3      -          -
         PIP-Net
                      ConvNeXt-tiny 84.3 ± 0.2                      88.2 ± 0.5 80.8 ± 0.4 91.8 ± 0.5
                        ResNet50                     75.5 ± 1.1     89.0 ± 0.3 70.8 ± 0.2 89.5 ± 0.4
         LucidPPN
                      ConvNeXt-tiny                  81.5 ± 0.4    91.6 ± 0.2 79.4 ± 0.4 95.0 ± 0.3



Discussion on patches of the color info and the patch of gray-scaled input
aligned in the latent space

Using a convolutional backbone, we assume a spatial correspondence between the latent
map from ShapeTexNet and the input, similar to the approach in ProtoPNet (Chen et al.,
2019). As we downsize the colorful image to match the height and width of the activation
map, the input dimensions for ColorNet are maintained consistently. ColorNet employs 1×1
convolutions to encode color information, ensuring the latent map has the same dimensions
as both the downsized input and the ShapeTexNet activation map.
Given the use of 1 × 1 convolutions on the downsized image and a convolutional backbone
for the full-resolution image, we can assume that the (i, j) position on one map corresponds
to the (i, j) position on the other. Finally, we extract color information from the latent
representation at the same location where the prototypical part is most active, ensuring
alignment between the color and shape features.

Local interpretation of single branch

An example of prediction interpretation of single branch is presented in Figure 13.


                                                             22
             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                               Evidence for Lazuli Bunting                                                      0070_14665

                           Evidence for Lazuli Bunting           Part prototypes      μ score
                                                                               0.90
                                                                               1.00
                                                                                           0.86
                                                                               0.81
                                                                               0.72


                                           S
                   Figure 13: An example local interpretation of single branch for Lazuli Bunting.
                                  C


                                                                                                      Object
                                               Grayscale                                              part 1
                                                Input x
Grayscaled                                                                                            Object                Downscaled
 Input xS                                                                                             part 2                  Input xC

                          ShapeTexNet fS                             PDiscoNet fDisco ❄               Class A

                                                                                                      Class B
                feature                                                     segmentation              Frozen
                map ZS
                                                       LD
                                                                              masks T             ❄   weights
                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                      Loss L


             Figure 14: The image illustrates the object-part correspondence loss, which is applied solely
             to the outputs of ShapeTexNet and PDiscoNet. First, we identify object parts through
             PDiscoNet (e.g., first on the head, second on the wing). Next, we align the corresponding
             prototypical parts with the object parts identified by the segmentation results through LD
             loss.                                                                                                             prediction y^


             Object-part correspondence                                                                                           2DMaxPool

             On Figure 14 we present how object-part correspondence LD loss works.                                                   Mean
                                                                                                                          0.1
             Consistency and stability of prototypical parts                                                    Black-and-white Warbler        Pra

             One way to evaluate the quality of prototypical parts is to measure their consistency and
             stability Huang et al. (2023). In Table 11. we present the results of those metrics. The
             results show that LucidPPN achieves state-of-the-art results on stability without any ad-
             ditional loss components, and is comparable to other metrics when it comes to stability.
             This improvement is likely due to the enhanced object-part correspondence enabled by its
             prototypical parts.

             Computational costs

             In Table 12, we provide computational costs of training LucidPPN when compared to other
             prototypical-parts-based architectures.

             Generalization to not fine-grained dataset

             To assess whether LucidPPN generalizes to broader classification tasks (beyond fine-grained
             datasets), we present results on PartImageNet He et al. (2022). On this dataset, LucidPPN
             achieves an accuracy of 84.1%, outperforming PIPNet, which achieves 82.8%.

             Comparison of explanation visualizations

             In Figures 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19 we compare the decision explanations generated by
             different methods.


                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Results of LucidPPN on consistency and stability metrics from the work of Huang
et al. (2023). The results indicate that LucidPPN is more robust than other prototypical-
parts-based approaches and achieves state-of-the-art results for Consistency while still re-
maining competitive in Stability.
                      Method                  Consistency Stability
                      ProtoPNet                      28.3     56.7
                      ProtoTree                      16.4     23.2
                      ProtoPool                      35.7     58.4
                      TesNet                         48.6     60.0
                      Deformable ProtoPNet           44.2     53.5
                      Huang et al. (2023)            70.6     72.1
                      LucidPPN (our)                 71.2     66.3


Table 12: Computational costs of prototypical-parts-based methods. One can observe that
training of LucidPPN requires fewer hours and less RAM memory than PIP-Net, but more
GFLOPs. Generally, LucidPPN and PIPNet require more RAM memory than ProtoPNet
and ProtoPool, however they converge faster.
 Method           Training time GFLOPs for 1 batch of data Avg. Training Memory Usage
ProtoPNet               3h                     586                           4.9GB
ProtoPool              18h                     658                          14.4GB
PIP-Net                 3h                     354                          41.5GB
LucidPPN (our)          2h                     475                          22.9GB


Faithfullness of patch visualizations
LucidPPN introduces a key difference in the definition of prototypical parts compared to
PIPNet. While PIPNet employs Softmax across channels in the latent feature map, Lu-
cidPPN uses the sigmoid activation function. The sigmoid function allows each channel’s
activation to be learned independently, not influenced by the relative activations of other
channels. At the same time, Softmax normalization can distort activations by emphasizing
values that are only relatively high compared to others, even if they are low in absolute
terms. Therefore, using the sigmoid function instead of Softmax, one can easily verify if
the image patches selected for visualization are faithful because such patches should have a
resemblance score close to 1. In Figure 20, we provide a distribution of the sigmoid function
values obtained for patches used in prototype visualization. For LucidPPN trained on the
CUB dataset (blue curve), 61.04% of those patches have values above 0.9, which indicates
that prototype visualizations are relatively faithful. Moreover, higher faithfulness can be
obtained when training with an additional loss component LC that punishes the model if
the sigmoid function value for a given prototype is smaller than 1 for all samples in the
batch:
                                          K M
                                     1 XX
                             LC =                 max(1 − rA,b
                                                            km
                                                               ),
                                    KM       m=1
                                                  b∈B
                                        k=1

where B is the number of samples in a batch and rA,b
                                                 km
                                                     is the value of rA
                                                                      km
                                                                         for sample b in the
batch. As we observe in Figure 20 (green and yellow curves), the distribution of sigmoid
function values moves right with increasing weight αC of LC . However, it also comes with
a small decrease in accuracy.

Pruning prototypes with less faithful visualizations
To increase the faithfulness of LucidPPN, we analyze the effects of pruning the prototypes
with less faithful representation (those with resemblance scores < 0.9). As shown in Ta-
ble 13, LucidPPN accuracy after pruning drops only by around 2% (from 81.6% to 79.3%).
However, interestingly, the accuracy stays the same for LC = 0.05. It suggests that combi-


                                              24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


nation of using loss LC and applying the pruning allows to enforce high resemblance scores
(>0.9) of visualized patches without sacrificing on the accuracy.

Reason behind using the Binary Cross Entropy with Sigmoid instead of the
Cross Entropy with Softmax
The intuition behind Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) usage is rooted from multilabel classifi-
cation. To some degree, ShapeTexNet operates in a multilabel setting from the prototypical
parts perspective, as they may match multiple classes. Hence, to enable multiple classes
having high similarity to the same prototypical parts, we use sigmoid instead of softmax
when computing the feature maps. This necessitates a shift from Cross-Entropy (CE) to
Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) because CE would then solely maximize the activation of the
correct class while ignoring crucial signals from negative classes. Another reason behind our
choice is to make it easier to verify the faithfulness of visualizations, as the sigmoid function
allows each channel’s activation to be learned independently, not influenced by the relative
activations of other channels. While, Softmax normalization used with CE can distort acti-
vations by emphasizing values that are only relatively high compared to others, even if they
are low in absolute  terms.
                 Evidence for Lazuli Bunting                        0070_14665

               Evidence for Lazuli Bunting   Part prototypes of Lazuli Bunting          μ score
                                               0.9 &         1.0   =             0.90
                                               1.0 &         1.0   =             1.00
                                                                                          0.86
                                               0.9 &         0.9   =             0.81
                                               0.8 &         0.9   =             0.72



                  Figure 15: Local interpretation visualization in LucidPPN


                   Figure 16: Local interpretation visualization in PIP-Net


                  Figure 17: Local interpretation visualization in ProtoTree


Global characteristics examples
We present global characteristics for different datasets in Figures 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 18: Local interpretation visualization in ProtoPool


               Figure 19: Local interpretation visualization in ProtoPNet


                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 20: Distribution of the aggregated resemblance scores for different weights of cluster
loss LC . For LucidPPN (αC = 0) trained on CUB dataset, 61.04% of patches representing
prototypes have aggregated resemblance score above 0.9, which indicates that prototype
visualizations are relatively faithful. Moreover, when training with additional loss function
LC , we obtain 95.33% patches with values above 0.9, with only a small drop in accuracy.


Table 13: Accuracy before and after pruning the prototypes with less faithful visualizations.
The results show that the combination of training with loss LC and pruning can enforce
faithfullness of visualizations without the loss in performance.
                              αC Before pruning After pruning
                           0           81.6            79.3
                           0.05        81.6            81.6
                           0.1         79.2            79.2


                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Blackberry
                                         &           =


                 Lily
                                         &           =



              Osteosper-
                                         &           =


                mum
                                         &           =
              Black-eyed

                                         &           =
                Susan


                                         &           =

                                         &           =
              Pansy
              Wild


                                         &           =

Figure 21: An example showcasing global characteristics of four classes in the FLOWER
dataset, using prototypical parts from LucidPPN trained with K = 2. This visualization
demonstrates the ability to detect differences between data classes. For instance, the os-
teospermum and black-eyed susan exhibit more variation in color, while the blackberry lilly
and wild pansay classes differ in texture and shape.


                                             28
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
=
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =

                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =

                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =

                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =

                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =

                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =

                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =
                   &        =                                  &        =


      Figure 22: Selected global characteristics for LucidPPN trained on CUB with K = 4


                                             29
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
=
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =

                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =

                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =

                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =

                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =

                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =

                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =
                   &        =                                   &        =


      Figure 23: Selected global characteristics for LucidPPN trained on CARS with K = 4


                                             30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =

               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =

               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =

               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =

               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =

               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =

               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =

               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =
               &        =                                   &        =


  Figure 24: Selected global characteristics for LucidPPN trained on DOGS with K = 4


                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =

               &        =                                  &        =
               &        =                                  &        =


Figure 25: Selected global characteristics for LucidPPN trained on FLOWER with K = 2


                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 26: Page 1 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 27: Page 2 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 28: Page 3 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 29: Page 4 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 30: Page 5 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 31: Page 6 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 32: Page 7 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 33: Page 8 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 34: Page 9 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 35: Page 10 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 36: Page 11 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 37: Page 12 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 38: Page 13 of survey for LucidPPN


                                         45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 39: Page 1 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 40: Page 2 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 41: Page 3 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 42: Page 4 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 43: Page 5 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 44: Page 6 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 45: Page 7 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 46: Page 8 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 47: Page 9 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 48: Page 10 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 49: Page 11 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 50: Page 12 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 51: Page 13 of survey for PIP-Net


                                         58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 52: Page 1 of survey for single branch


                                          59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 53: Page 2 of survey for single branch


                                          60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 54: Page 3 of survey for single branch


                                          61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 55: Page 4 of survey for single branch


                                          62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 56: Page 5 of survey for single branch


                                          63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 57: Page 6 of survey for single branch


                                          64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 58: Page 7 of survey for single branch


                                          65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 59: Page 8 of survey for single branch


                                          66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 60: Page 9 of survey for single branch


                                          67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 61: Page 10 of survey for single branch


                                          68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 62: Page 11 of survey for single branch


                                          69
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 63: Page 12 of survey for single branch


                                          70
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 64: Page 13 of survey for single branch


                                          71
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 65: Page 1 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          72
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 66: Page 2 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          73
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 67: Page 3 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          74
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 68: Page 4 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          75
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 69: Page 5 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          76
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 70: Page 6 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          77
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 71: Page 7 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          78
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 72: Page 8 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          79
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 73: Page 9 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          80
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 74: Page 10 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          81
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 75: Page 11 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          82
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 76: Page 12 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          83
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 77: Page 13 of survey for full LucidPPN (with scores)


                                          84
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 78: Page 1 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         85
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 79: Page 2 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         86
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 80: Page 3 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         87
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 81: Page 4 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         88
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 82: Page 5 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         89
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 83: Page 6 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         90
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 84: Page 7 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         91
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 85: Page 8 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         92
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 86: Page 9 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         93
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 87: Page 10 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         94
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 88: Page 11 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         95
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 89: Page 12 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         96
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Figure 90: Page 13 of survey for LucidPPN with no scores


                                         97
