Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE KO LM OGOROV T EST:
C OMPRESSION BY C ODE G ENERATION
 Ori Yoran1,2∗, Kunhao Zheng1 , Fabian Gloeckle1
 Jonas Gehring1 , Gabriel Synnaeve1 , Taco Cohen1
  1
    Meta AI (FAIR), 2 Tel Aviv University
 ori.yoran@cs.tau.ac.il
 {kunhao, fgloeckle, jgehring, gab, tscohen}@meta.com



                                              A BSTRACT

          Compression is at the heart of intelligence. A theoretically optimal way to com-
          press any sequence of data is to find the shortest program that outputs that se-
          quence and then halts. However, such Kolmogorov compression is uncomputable,
          and code generating LLMs struggle to approximate this theoretical ideal, as it
          requires reasoning, planning and search capabilities beyond those of current mod-
          els. In this work, we introduce the KO LM OGOROV-T EST (KT), a compression-
          as-intelligence test for code generating LLMs. In KT a model is presented with
          a sequence of data at inference time, and asked to generate the shortest program
          that produces the sequence. We identify several benefits of KT for both evalua-
          tion and training: an essentially infinite number of problem instances of varying
          difficulty is readily available, strong baselines already exist, the evaluation metric
          (compression) cannot be gamed, and pretraining data contamination is highly un-
          likely. To evaluate current models, we use audio, text, and DNA data, as well as
          sequences produced by random synthetic programs. Current flagship models per-
          form poorly – both GPT4- O and L LAMA -3.1-405B struggle on our natural and
          synthetic sequences. On our synthetic distribution, we are able to train code gener-
          ation models with lower compression rates than previous approaches. Moreover,
          we show that gains on synthetic data generalize poorly to real data, suggesting
          that new innovations are necessary for additional gains on KT.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Compression and code generation are deeply related through the notion of Kolmogorov complexity,
denoted K(x), which is defined as the length of the shortest computer program1 that produces the
sequence x as output and hence constitutes the optimal compression of x (Kolmogorov, 1963; Li &
Vitányi, 1997; Hutter et al., 2024) (see §2 for a detailed background). Kolmogorov complexity is un-
computable as it reduces to the halting problem, making the search for improved computable upper
bounds a never-ending challenge and a potential benchmark for intelligence that by definition cannot
saturate. We propose to view code generation language models (C ODE LM S) as upper bounds for
Kolmogorov complexity: we task them to identify patterns in an input sequence and to compress it
by producing a short program that outputs said sequence, and can measure their accuracy at produc-
ing correct programs as well as the compression rates achieved. This is the KO LM OGOROV-T EST
(KT), a benchmark for reasoning capabilities for C ODE LM S, illustrated in Fig. 1.
We point out the following benefits of compression by code generation as a benchmark for the rea-
soning capabilities of language models: (1) the compression metric can be trusted in that it does
not produce false positives, (2) diverse and richly structured sequence data is abundantly available,
(3) it is highly unlikely that pretrained models have seen many relevant (program, sequence) pairs,
making memorization-based solutions infeasible2 , (4) if the benchmark is saturated, either through
improved reasoning and search capabilities or memorization, we can simply increase the sequence
    ∗
      Work done during an internship at Meta FAIR.
    1
      For some universal Turing machine U .
    2
      Models trained on synthetic data or by RL could very well end up using memorization.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Data compression by code generation. Consider compressing a sequence of bytes (pre-
sented as numbers in range [0, 255]) that can be produced by composing simpler sub-sequences.
Standard compression methods, such as G ZIP, focous on repetitions and frequency of characters
and fail to exploit the logical patterns in this sequence (although they are strong baselines for long
sequences, §5.3). LLMs are better at finding complex patterns, such as a sequence of incremental
numbers, and can be used for compression with arithmetic coding. However, they are sensitive to
phase-shifts due to their auto-regressive manner, and require model weights for decoding. Code
generative models, inspired by the concept of Kolmogorov Complexity, can identify patterns in the
input sequence to generate concise programs whose execution produces the original sequence.


length and (5) following research spanning decades of theoretical computer science, classical com-
pression algorithms such as G ZIP (Deutsch, 1996) can serve as strong baselines.
To evaluate current C ODE LM S on KT, we use naturally occurring sequences from three data modal-
ities: text, audio, and DNA (§3.2). As we do not know the optimal program for the sequences, it
is not possible to use this data for supervised learning, making it ideal for evaluation. To collect
program-sequence pairs for supervised training and evaluation, we design a compositional domain-
specific language (DSL) coupled with an automatic data generation framework (§3.3), inspired by
context-free grammars (Chomsky, 1956; Hopcroft et al., 2006).
Our experiments (§4) show that sequence compression is an extremely challenging task for cur-
rent C ODE LM S. Strong L LAMA -3.1-405B (Grattafiori et al., 2024) and GPT4- O (OpenAI et al.,
2024b) models generate Python programs that fail to produce the input sequence in 78% and 40%
of the time for naturally occurring data, and 66% and 45% percent of the time for synthetic se-
quences that follow clear patterns. On our synthetic distribution, we are able to train relatively small
C ODE LM S with 1.5B parameters that outperform state-of-the-art prompted models by more than
40%, but struggle on real sequences. We further find that the prior used for program-compression is
an important factor in overall compression performance, with a simple uniform prior over our DSL
outperforming G ZIP. Finally, we observe modest gains for adding inline execution feedback.
In §5.3, we conduct a thorough analysis of our results. We find that gains on synthetic data partially
generalize to real data – models trained for longer perform better on short sequences, but all current
models perform poorly on long sequences, suggesting KT can act as a useful test-bed to evaluate
scaling properties of new methods. Finally, we perform an error analysis and find that models make
a wide range of errors, from generating over-simplified programs that do not produce the input
sequence, to repeating the input sequence in over-complicated ways.
To summarize, our main contributions are:3

          • We propose the KO LM OGOROV-T EST, an extremely challenging compression-as-
            intelligence test for C ODE LM S (§3).
          • We show that C ODE LM S can outperform previous compression methods on synthetic dis-
            tributions where sampling program-sequence pairs is possible and efficient priors can be
            used, but fare very poorly on real data (§5).
   3
       To support future progress, we release our code, data, and a public leaderboard.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Figure 2: Our main experimental settings.


       • We show that performance on real data scales poorly with increasing synthetic dataset size,
         suggesting that new breakthroughs may be needed for further progress on KT.


2   BACKGROUND


Generative Modelling, Information Theory and Compression. Generative modelling and com-
pression are deeply related. Given a generative model over sequences (e.g., autoregressive trans-
former (Radford et al., 2018)) p(xi |x<i ), one can use the P
                                                            arithmetic coding algorithm to compress
a particular sequence x to a bitstream of length about − i log2 p(xi |x<i ) bits (Rissanen, 1976;
Pasco, 1977). If the sequences are sampled from the gold distribution p∗ , then the expected arith-
metic code length is the cross entropy between p∗ and p. When p = p∗ , the cross entropy equals the
entropy, which is the fundamental limit on average compression length for data sampled from p∗ .
Similarly, given a latent variable model p(x, z), one can encode a sequence x by first encoding a
code z using prior p(z) and then encoding x using likelihood p(x|z). Using an optimal code for p(z)
and p(x|z) the coding cost will be roughly − log p(z) − log p(x|z). If we obtain z by sampling from
an encoder network q(z|x), the expected coding cost will be Eq [− log p(z) − log p(x|z)] (Habibian
et al., 2019), which (up to an additional entropy bonus H(q)) equals the evidence lower bound
(ELBO) used for instance for VAE training (Kingma & Welling, 2022). Thus, both for autoregressive
and latent variable models, maximizing likelihood is maximizing compression.



Algorithmic Information Theory, Solomonoff Induction, and Kolmogorov Complexity. In
classical generative modelling and compression, one is concerned with finding a generative model
from a particular model class that can be used to compress data from a particular distribution. By
contrast, in algorithmic information theory, one considers as “model class” the set of all computable
functions. This class trivially contains the optimal compression, and changing the computational
model (programming language / universal Turing machine) only incurs a constant overhead depend-
ing on the pair of languages involved and regardless of the input (Grunwald & Vitanyi, 2008, 2.2.2).
In analogy to the discussion above, we can sketch the theory as follows, inspired by Solomonoff’s
theory of inductive inference (Solomonoff, 1964). We consider the universal prior p(ρ) = 2−l(ρ)
over programs ρ (where l(ρ) denotes the length) that assigns higher probability to shorter programs
(“Occam’s Razor”). Furthermore, we consider the likelihood p(x|ρ) over output sequences x given
ρ which puts all mass on the actual output of ρ.
Then, treating ρ as latent we may encode x using a two-part code by finding a program ρ that outputs
x (e.g. using a neural network q(ρ|x)), and encoding it using the prior p(ρ). As before, the coding
cost will be Eq [− log p(ρ) − log p(x|ρ)], where the second term is ∞ whenever x is not the output of
ρ, and 0 when it is. Clearly, the optimal ρ is the shortest program that outputs x. The length of this
program ρ∗ is called the Kolmogorov Complexity K(x) (Kolmogorov, 1963; Li & Vitányi, 1997).


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3       DATA C OLLECTION
3.1     P ROBLEM S ETTING

The theory presented above suggests an interesting challenge for C ODE LM S: to generate concise
programs (under well-defined priors) that output a given sequence (Fig. 1 and Alg. 2 in §A.3). We
evaluate C ODE LM S on three naturally occurring modalities: audio, text, and DNA (Fig. 2, left, and
§3.2). We focus on audio and textual data, popular modalities in compression works with strong
baselines (Deletang et al., 2024). We also introduce DNA sequences as these follow simple biolog-
ical patterns. Although real data is useful for evaluation since it can be obtained in large amounts
for many modalities, corresponding programs required for supervised training are not available.
As a remedy, we experiment with synthetic settings where we collect program-sequence pairs by
sampling programs from a Domain Specific Language (DSL) and executing the sampled programs
(Fig. 2, right, and §3.3).

3.2     NATURALLY O CCURRING S EQUENCES

In all our experiments on natural data, the model has to compress 1MB of information. The length of
the input sequence presented to our models ranges from 16 to 1024 bytes depending on the setting.

Audio. We randomly sample audio snippets from the LibriSpeech development and test sets
(Panayotov et al., 2015). We parse the data to three audio formats: (a) high quality audio with
16 bits depth, from which the original data can be perfectly recreated but each sample is split across
two bytes, (b) lower quality audio with 8 bits depth, which is simpler for our baselines (§5), and (c)
an estimation of the Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients encoding (MFCC) which does not allow
direct reconstruction but describes the main features of the sound (see §A.1 for more details). Each
byte is represented as a number in range [0, 255].

Text. Following recent work (Deletang et al., 2024), we use the enwik9 Wikipedia corpus (Hut-
ter, 2009). The Unicode text is encoded to a sequence of bytes with UTF-8 encoding which are
represented as a list of numbers.

DNA. We use Genome assembly GRCh38 which contains 3.1GB of human DNA in FASTA format
(NCBI, 2023). Since the original files include upper and lower case variants of each of the four
nucleotides, we use a vocabulary of eight characters represented by numbers in range [0, 7]4 .

3.3     S YNTHETIC DATA G ENERATION

Our aim is to examine whether C ODE LM S can be trained to generate concise and correct programs.
Hence, we adhere to the following desiderata for our data generation process: (a) completeness:
each sequence has some probability for a program that produces it to be sampled, and (b) simplicity:
shorter programs will be sampled with higher probability.

Domain Specific Language. We design a compositional DSL, in the sense that the output se-
quence is created by composing simpler sub-sequences (Fig. 2, center). Our DSL supports the
following four classes of functions (see §A.2 for a list of all supported functions):5
         • Sequence initiators: functions that take variables as input and return a sequence of num-
           bers. These include a range of increasing numbers, a repetition of a single number, or a
           fixed (hard-coded) list of numbers.
         • Sequence modifiers: functions that take a sequence as input and return a modified version
           of the sequence, e.g., by reversing, repeating, or substituting elements from the sequence.
           A sub-class of our modifiers includes mathematical operations, such as scan-adding the
           elements in the sequence or applying a modulo operation.
    4
     Lower case variants represent low-complexity or masked regions (e.g., repeats or predicted sequences),
which we keep to allow perfect reconstruction of the input sequence.
   5
     We note that for simplicity, our DSL does not allow recursion – it is a proper subset of primitive recursive
functions and of Turing-computable functions (Turing, 1937) and thus deviates from the theory in §2.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Two examples of program-sequence pairs from our synthetic data generation process.


         • Sequence filters: functions that filter a sequence, e.g., by keeping only even values.
         • Sequence mergers: functions that take two sequences and merge them to a single one:
           concatenation, interleaving, pointwise addition, subtraction or modulo of the sequences.

Sampling programs. Given the compositional nature of our DSL, we sample programs similarly
to the way sequences are sampled from a Context Free Grammar (Chomsky, 1956; Hopcroft et al.,
2006). We can also control the distribution of programs by assigning priors over the program distri-
bution, e.g., the lengths of the initiated sequence or probability to apply modifications. For simplicity
and to avoid biases we keep the priors uniform6 . For examples of program-sequence pairs, see Fig. 3.
As in the natural data domains, we generate 1MB of evaluation data. For training, we sample 1M
pairs from the same distribution. We provide additional details and statistics in §A.2.

Encoding programs. We encode programs written in our DSL using a factorized uniform prior
over functions and arguments. As each line includes a call to a single function, the encoding cost
of each line is the cost of encoding the function (i.e., log2 (|f unctions|)) plus the cost of the input
parameters (e.g., the number of bits needed to set an arbitrary list for set list, or the indices of the
sequences in concatenate). Our code length calculation algorithm is presented in §A.2, Alg. 1.

4       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Baselines. For our classical compression baseline, we use G ZIP (Deutsch, 1996). We also include
a Language Modeling is Compression (LM I C) baseline (see §B.1 for implementation details), where
the LM predictions are used together with arithmetic coding to compress the sequence as discussed
in §2 (Deletang et al., 2024). A major limitation of LM I C is that the original LLM is needed
to decompress the data7 . We also include R EPEAT, a naive baseline that always returns the input
sequence, and an U PPER B OUND baseline that returns the matching program for our synthetic pairs.

Zero-shot prompted baselines. We prompt our models to generate the shortest Python program
that produces the input sequence (see §B.1, Fig. 9 for the full prompt). We use strong open-weight
models from the L LAMA -3.1 family with 8, 70, and 405 billion parameters Grattafiori et al. (2024).
In addition, we use GPT4- O as a closed-source alternative (OpenAI et al., 2024b). We also exper-
iment with a chain-of-thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) baseline (see prompt in Fig. 10) and with
O PENAI O 1- MINI (OpenAI et al., 2024a), a closed-source model trained to think before generating
the final answer. We use G ZIP to encode programs before measuring their bit length (i.e., we use
G ZIP as a prior over programs) in all experiments, unless stated otherwise.

Trained models. For our trained models, we use L LAMA -3.1-8B as base model in addition to a
1.5-billion parameter LLM with the same architecture, which we train on a mixture of open-source
code and text (see §B.1 for more details and technical specifications). We further train our models
on 10K, 100K or 1M unique programs-sequence pairs sampled from our data generator (§3.3), and
    6
      We note that this does not guarantee that each operator is used with the same probability, as some operators
are only applicable in specific contexts (e.g., an addition between two sequences is only applicable when the
sequences have the same length and the sum of the matching elements is in the allowed range).
    7
      As our focus is on compressing relatively small amounts of data, we report raw LM I C results disregarding
the weights of the model, an upper bound of the true performance which requires the weights that were used
for encoding at decoding time.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


name them S EQ C ODER-10K, S EQ C ODER-100K and S EQ C ODER(-1M), respectively. We use the
encoding algorithm defined in §3.3 for encoding programs from our synthetic DSL.

Sequence lengths. We use a sequence length of 1024 bytes for our LM I C baseline, based on
findings that further increasing context length does not result in significant gains (Deletang et al.,
2024). For natural data, we use a sequence length of 128 bytes (see §5.3 for a discussion on input
lengths). Our synthetic data has an average sequence length of 75.9 bytes with a standard deviation
of 73.7 (see §A.2, Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 for histograms of sequence and programs lengths).

Metrics. Given a sequence x and a program candidate ρ suggested by the model with output [ρ],
we define the variable y that backs off to the R EPEAT baseline when ρ errs by:

                                             ρ     if [ρ] = x,
                                     y=
                                             x     otherwise.
We define the following metrics:


                                    Accuracy(x, ρ) = 1{[ρ]=x} ,
                                                      1 + ∥y∥enc
                           CompressionRate(x, ρ) =               ,
                                                         ∥x∥
                                                      ∥ρ∥enc
                                    Precision(x, ρ) =              where [ρ] = x,
                                                      ∥x∥gzip
where ∥ · ∥ denotes the bit-length of the data, ∥ · ∥gzip denotes the length after G ZIP-encoding, and
∥ · ∥enc denotes the length after encoding programs with G ZIP for prompted models and our uni-
form encoding for S EQ C ODER models. In other words, Accuracy measures whether the program
is correct, CompressionRate measures the compression of the input when storing the compressed
representation (an additional bit is saved to determine whether y is ρ or x and lower Compression-
Rate is better8 ), and Precision measures the compression of correct programs in relation to the G ZIP
baseline. R EPEAT has an Accuracy, CompressionRate and Precision of 1 by definition.


5       R ESULTS

Running prompted pretrained models as well as smaller trained models on KO LM OGOROV-T EST
with natural as well as synthetic sequence data sources, we make the following main findings: Zero-
shot compression by code generation is a challenging benchmark even for the most powerful models
available (§5.1). On short sequences of synthetic data, trained specialized models outperform the
in-context reasoning baseline LM I C as well as classical baseline algorithms (§5.2). In additional
analyses, we examine the effect of scaling model and dataset size for models trained on synthetic
data, their length generalization as well as typical failure modes (§5.3).

5.1       KO LM OGOROV-T EST IS C HALLENGING FOR C URRENT M ODELS

Tab. 1 presents results for our prompted and S EQ C ODER models on different data modalities.
Prompted models perform poorly – strong L LAMA -3.1-405B and GPT4- O models err on average
more than 78% and 40% of the time for naturally occurring sequences, with high variance between
modalities, and more than 65% and 55% of the time on our synthetic data, which follows simple
compositional rules by design.
Nevertheless, larger models perform better, with L LAMA -3.1-405B reaching the best Accuracy be-
tween L LAMA models, and GPT4- O reaching the highest Accuracy and lowest Precision overall.
All prompted models have a Precision score that is higher than 1.0, meaning that on average, gen-
erated programs are larger than the G ZIP-encoded sequences. We partly attribute this to G ZIP being
unoptimized to the generated Python programs, a phenomenon we discuss in more detail in §5.3.
    8
        CompressionRate is higher than 1 when the compressed representation is larger than the original.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Audio-16-bit    Audio-8-bit    Audio-MFCC              DNA                       Text                          Syn.
                          Acc.    Prec.   Acc.    Prec.   Acc.   Prec.     Acc.      Prec.        Acc.          Prec.             Acc.        Prec.

      L LAMA -3.1-8B      5.9     1.54     3.9    1.74    8.8       1.51    3.7       2.34          1.4             3.12           8.5            2.48
      L LAMA -3.1-70B     18.0    1.96    10.1    1.67    24.2      1.56   22.5       2.18          9.6             3.17          18.0            2.78
      L LAMA -3.1-405B    35.6    1.66    15.0    1.66    29.6      1.58   24.8       2.06          6.5             3.17          33.3            2.18

      GPT4- O             69.5    1.34    36.4    1.43    83.8      1.33   50.3       1.73        54.2              1.94          44.7            1.65

      S EQ C ODER -1.5B   0.0      n/a    <0.1     n/a    0.1       n/a    0.0        n/a           0.0              n/a          84.5            0.57
      S EQ C ODER -8B     <0.1     n/a     0.1     n/a    0.1       n/a    0.0        n/a           0.0              n/a          92.5            0.56


Table 1: Accuracy and Precision for zero-shot prompted models on the KO LM OGOROV-T EST
for sequences of length 128. Larger models have higher Accuracy. On synthetic distributions when
sampling program-sequence pairs is possible, our trained S EQ C ODER performs best and is the only
model to achieve Precision that is lower than 1.0, i.e., it outperforms G ZIP when programs are
correct. However, it performs poorly on real data.


Our trained S EQ C ODER models significantly outperform all C ODE LM S on synthetic data, and are
the only models with a better Precision than the naive R EPEAT baseline (which has a perfect Accu-
racy and a Precision of 1.0 by definition), suggesting that training data and strong priors are nec-
essary for good performance. Nevertheless, it reaches near-zero performance on natural sequences.
We discuss generalization to real data in more detail in §5.2 and §5.3.
We present results for L LAMA with CoT prompting in §B.2, Tab. 4. We observe similar trends,
albeit lower performance for L LAMA -3.1-8B and L LAMA -3.1-70B (a drop of 1.3 and 5.1 points in
Accuracy on average across modalities), and a small increase of 2.1 points in Accuracy for L LAMA -
3.1-405B. For O 1- MINI, we observe overall similar results to GPT4- O (see §B.2, Tab. 5 for mode
details). Overall, our results are in line with recent work showing that CoT does not consistently
improve performance for code generation tasks (Sprague et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025).

5.2   T RAINED C ODE LM S O UTPERFORM P REVIOUS C OMPRESSION A LGORITHMS

Fig. 4 presents CompressionRate on synthetic data for S EQ -
                                                                                      1.00
C ODER models. Even though instruction-tuned models strug-
gle on this distribution, models can be trained to outperform                         0.75

previous compression algorithms, reaching a Compression-                              0.50
Rate of 0.38 for S EQ C ODER -8B, outperforming the strong
G ZIP and LM I C baselines without requiring gigabytes of LLM                         0.25


weights for decoding (in §B.2 we empirically show that G ZIP                          0.00

and LM I C are strong baselines and that scaling also improves                               Gz
                                                                                               ip
                                                                                                    -1.
                                                                                                       5B
                                                                                                         -10
                                                                                                             K

                                                                                                              -1.
                                                                                                                 5B
                                                                                                                    -10
                                                                                                                        0K
                                                                                                                             LM
                                                                                                                               iC
                                                                                                                                   -1.
                                                                                                                                       5B
                                                                                                                                          -1M
                                                                                                                                              SC
                                                                                                                                                 -8B
                                                                                                                                                     -1M
                                                                                                                                                         pe
                                                                                                                                                           rB
                                                                                                                                                              ou
                                                                                                                                                                nd

                                                                                              SC                                SC                    Up
                                                                                                          SC
Accuracy on synthetic data).
                                                                                                      CompressionRate for 1MB of synthetic data



Length generalization. To better test if improvements on                             Figure 4:     CompressionRate
synthetic data generalize to real data, we evaluate S EQ C ODER                      for S EQ C ODER models trained
models on 10,000 shorter Audio-MFCC sequences of lengths                             on 10K-1M program-sequence
16-64, presented in Fig. 5. All models perform poorly on                             pairs. Models trained on enough
longer sequences of length 64. Models trained on 100K and                            data outperform the baselines.
1M examples significantly outperform S EQ C ODER -1.5B-10K
on shorter sequences, and larger S EQ C ODER -8B perform best.
Fig. 6 presents the length of correct prefixes for S EQ C ODER
on Audio-MFCC sequences of length 128. S EQ C ODER -1.5B models trained on 10K examples fail
early, i.e., more than 99% of programs have an error in the first 16 characters, even though the model
correctly produces programs for 27.2% of sequences of the same length (Fig. 5). Models trained
on 100K and 1M examples perform better, but they exhibit similar trends, and err in the first 16
characters in 93.5% and 88.7% of test cases. We provide additional evidence that longer synthetic
programs and sequences are challenging for S EQ C ODER -1.5B in §B.3, Fig. 11a and Fig. 11b.
Tab. 2 presents results for G ZIP and L LAMA -3.1-405B on a random sample of 2,000 Audio-8-bit
sequences of lengths 16-128. As expected, CompressionRate for G ZIP improves with length, as
it is able to better exploit patterns in the input data (we extend to longer sequences for G ZIP and
LM I C in §B.2, Tab. 6, showing that these are strong baselines and CompressionRate is correlated


                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          G ZIP        L LAMA -405B
           Length          CR          Acc.    Prec.
                                                                                                              Syn.            Audio
           16            0.966         47.1        3.20
           32            0.846         29.9        2.70                                SQ-1.5B                    86.6          6.5
           64            0.736         20.9        1.82                                + feed only                77.6          8.6
           128           0.622         14.2        1.67                                + feed & ex                75.9          8.7
           1M            0.398         n/a         n/a
                                                                          Table 3: Accuracy for synthetic sequences
                                                                          and Audio MFCC sequences of length 64
Table 2: Effect of input length on Audio-                                 bytes with and without execution feed-
8-bit sequences. Performance improves for                                 back. Execution feedback is not sufficient
G ZIP and CompressionRate as lengths in-                                  to close the gap between synthetic and real
crease, but Accuracy decreases.                                           data.


with length). However, for prompted models, longer sequences are more challenging and Accuracy
decreases with length. Overall, these results suggest that while scaling to large models is beneficial,
generalization to long sequences and from synthetic to real distributions remains a major challenge.


 50.0
                            1.5B-10K   1.5B-100K   1.5B-1M    8B-1M        50.0
                                                                                                       1.5B-10K     1.5B-100K    1.5B-1M    8B-1M
 40.0
                                                                           40.0
 30.0
                                                                           30.0
 20.0
                                                                           20.0
 10.0
                                                                           10.0
  0.0
               16            32           64            128                 0.0
                                                                                        16             32                64           128
        SeqCoder Accuracy on audio MFCC sequences of length 16-128
                                                                                  % of SeqCoder Programs with Correct Prefix of Length 16-128


Figure 5: Accuracy for our S EQ C ODER -
                                                                          Figure 6: The longest correct prefix length
1.5B on Audio MFCC sequences of
                                                                          for S EQ C ODER on Audio MFCC se-
lengths 16-128. Models trained on more ex-
                                                                          quences of length 128. Models trained on
amples are significantly better on short se-
                                                                          more examples and more parameters gener-
quences, but all models struggle on longer
                                                                          ate longer correct prefixes.
ones.


5.3       A DDITIONAL A NALYSES

Effect of execution feedback. To examine the effect of adding execution feedback (Yang et al.,
2023; Shojaee et al., 2023; Ni et al., 2024), we experiment with two variants: (a) feedback only
during training: execution feedback is added to training examples, and (b) feedback & execution:
the code is executed by an interpreter at each line and results are presented to the model before the
next step. In both cases the feedback is added as an end-of-line comment (see §B.3, Fig. 12).
Tab. 3 presents our results for 1,280 synthetic and 1,280 Audio-MFCC sequences of length 64.
Execution feedback leads to small gains on real data, but also decreases performance on synthetic
data and is not sufficient to significantly improve performance. This can be partially attributed to the
fact that most training is spent on feedback tokens and the model is only trained on gold programs,
and hence is not trained to dynamically fix model errors or bad trajectories (Ni et al., 2024).

Repetitions of input data. Python is highly expressive – there are many ways the model can
repeat input sequences (e.g., by extracting to multiple sub-sequences that are later concatenated,
see §B.3, Fig. 13 and Fig. 14). To check how often repetitions happen, we perform a qualitative
analysis for 25 correct programs per modality (chosen randomly) for our L LAMA -3.1-405B and
GPT4- O prompted models, presented in Tab. 9. We find that repetitions account for most correct
predictions on natural data (more than 95% on average), but only 20% on our synthetic sequences,
where models are able to leverage the synthetically induced patterns (Fig. 15). Hence, the low


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Precision of our prompted models can be partly attributed to the G ZIP prior being under-optimized
to Python programs.

Error analysis. To understand the errors our models make, we manually analyze 25 errors per
modality for L LAMA -3.1-405B and GPT4- O, presented in Tab. 10. For both natural and syn-
thetic sequences, most errors are caused by models misusing specific operators during execution,
e.g., the wrong number of repetitions for a character (see Fig. 16 and Fig. 17 in §B.3). This can
be attributed to the fact that current LLMs still struggle with symbolic reasoning and counting in
particular (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Yehudai et al., 2024; Ball et al., 2024).
Additionally, we identify a couple of specific failure cases. In more than 30% of cases, models try
repeating the input sequence by breaking it to sub-sequences that are later merged, but still introduce
subtle errors when constructing and merging these sub-sequences (Fig. 18). We identify a special
failure case for the text modality, where models successfully reverse-engineer our data generation
process and generate a string which they convert to UTF-8-encoded bytes, but often with subtle
errors leading to low success rates (Fig. 19).

6   R ELATED W ORK
Data compression. Data compression is one of the main problems in computer science & com-
munications. In addition to the works described in §2, fundamental work includes Shannon (1948);
Cover & Thomas (2006). See Salomon (2004); Lelewer & Hirschberg (1987); Jayasankar et al.
(2021) for detailed surveys. A major line of work is devoted towards domain-specific algorithms,
including specifically for text, audio, and DNA (Storer & Szymanski, 1982; Neuburger, 2010; Salau
et al., 2019; Du et al., 2020). Recently, it has been proposed that LLMs can be harnessed for
compression via arithmetic coding (Valmeekam et al., 2023; Deletang et al., 2024). While the raw
compression rate (excluding the weights of the LLM) of this method outperforms classical compres-
sion algorithms, the full LLM parameters are required for decoding. Our work differs by prompting
and training C ODE LM S to directly generate programs that produce the original data.

Evaluation of C ODE LM S. Recent jumps in the coding ability of LLMs (Chen et al., 2021;
Rozière et al., 2024) paved the path to benchmarks that focus on code generation. For example,
Chen et al. (2021) on generating code given a function’s signature, Austin et al. (2021) on solving
coding interview questions, and Li et al. (2022) focus on competitive programming tasks. Other
benchmarks focus on agentic settings where models interact with an environment to solve GitHub
issues or run research experiments (Jimenez et al., 2024; Bogin et al., 2024). KT has several advan-
tages over previous benchmarks: there is an abundance of diverse natural data, strong baselines for
compression already exist, and evaluation metrics are well-defined. Our work suggests that making
progress on KT is challenging and new innovations are needed for further progress. Moreover, to
outperform current compression methods, C ODE LM S must model complex environments, poten-
tially improving their ability to act as world models (Tang et al., 2024).

Synthetic data augmentation for coding and symbolic reasoning. Synthetic data augmentation
has been recently shown to be highly effective in injecting numerical skills to LMs (Geva et al., 2020;
Yoran et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2024; Mitra et al., 2024), however improvements do not necessarily
generalize (Liu et al., 2023a). More complex pipelines for synthetic data generation with LLMs are
often used for C ODE LM S (Rozière et al., 2024).

7   D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS
Generalization from synthetic to real data. Our results show that generalization from synthetic
to real distributions remains a challenge. Future work can experiment with methods that tilt the syn-
thetic distribution towards the real one, e.g., by filtering easy-to-detect synthetic sequences (Ganin
& Lempitsky, 2015). An exciting direction for future research is to model KT as a reinforcement
learning task (François-Lavet et al., 2018; Mnih et al., 2013) and learn from a reward when cor-
rect solutions are generated, with a bias towards shorter solutions (Ellis et al., 2023). Additionally,
future methods can benefit from curriculum-learning where models learn simpler examples before
more complex ones (Hacohen & Weinshall, 2019; Soviany et al., 2022).


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Additional modalities. This work focuses on natural text, audio, and DNA sequences in addition
to our synthetic data, and can be easily extended to cover additional modalities such as publicly-
available image and video sequences (Deng et al., 2009; Soomro et al., 2012). An exciting direction
for future work is to mix training examples from different domains, composing of different patterns
and functionalities. Additionally, we only focus on the ability of C ODE LM S to compress sequences
of data, and leave compression of executable programs for future work.

Compressing larger amounts of data. In this work, we focus on compressing 1MB of data, a
smaller amount than previous work (Deletang et al., 2024) and the Hutter Prize (Hutter, 2009),
which focus on 1GB of data per modality. We opt for 1MB sequences as this amounts to roughly
60K sequences across all modalities (around 20K for 1MB of DNA and 7800 sequences for each
of the other modalities), a relatively large amount of examples in terms of current code generation
benchmarks (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; 2023). Nevertheless, compressing
larger sequences is likely to be feasible as C ODE LM S and hardware continue to improve. To assist
further progress, we will also release 1GB versions of our datasets.

Scaling to longer sequences. In our synthetic experiments, we set the maximum size of a sub-
sequence to 25, and the maximum number of initiated sub-sequences to 5 (see §A.2 for all hyper-
parameters). Hence, a program will not produce a sequence of more than 125 random characters
(concatenating 5 sub-sequences of 25 random characters), but can produce longer sequences by
using modifiers, e.g., by repeating a sub-sequence. Extending our DSL to longer sequences, for
example by further scaling training compute, can be an interesting direction for future research.
Moreover, longer sequences sequences yield lower compression rates, as exemplified for G ZIP in
Tab. 2. Although we mainly experiment with sequences of length 128 due to the low Accuracy of
current models on long sequences, future models might be able to achieve better compression on
much longer sequences.

Other languages We have experimented with general Python as well as a simple sequence-
oriented DSL. Future work could explore how the choice of language affects the performance of
models, the rate of training progress, and the degree of generalization to OOD sequences.

Stronger priors. In our experiments we used the G ZIP prior for programs from our prompted
models and our uniform prior over our synthetic DSL. Future work can experiment with stronger
priors, e.g., small LMs that are trained on the distribution of programs. Another possible future
direction is to focus on lower level languages where developing strong priors might be simpler.
Although such programs might be harder for humans to understand, the potential of C ODE LM S to
generate novel solutions is an exciting opportunity for future work.

Runtime compute. In our experiments, we do not consider the runtime compute of programs
execution. To limit the effect of inefficient programs, we limit the runtime of each program to five
seconds and consider programs that run for longer as non-executable (similar to runtime exceptions).
We provide additional statistics on failed and non-executable programs in §B.2. Similarly, we do not
consider the weights of the LLM (which are only required for generating the programs) or the cost of
the Python standard library required to execute the programs. Additionally, we leave experimenting
with specialized tokenization methods, e.g., Dagan et al. (2024), for future work.

8   C ONCLUSION
In this work we introduce the KO LM OGOROV-T EST, a compression-as-intelligence test for code
generation models, based on the notion of Kolmogorov complexity. To evaluate current models, we
use real audio, text, and DNA data, and develop an automatic framework for sampling program-
sequence pairs. KT is extremely challenging for current models, including L LAMA -3.1-405B and
GPT4- O. Additionally, for synthetic distributions where pairs can be automatically sampled, trained
models have a better CompressionRate than current methods. As our method can potentially be
scaled to an infinite number of real problems of varying difficulty, it can provide a challenging
evaluation test-bed for future code generation models and pave the path towards new methods that
compress large amounts of real data.

                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY
We have made significant efforts to ensure our work can be reproduced. Our datasets will be fully
released, including our DSL and synthetic data generation framework. We will also release larger
1GB variants to facilitate future research. In addition, we will release code to reproduce results with
our prompted models and will host a live leaderboard to allow the community to monitor future
developments. As we will not be able to open-weight our S EQ C ODER models, we will release
training code for S EQ C ODER -8B models on our synthetic pairs, enabling reproduction of our results
and simplify training new S EQ C ODER models.

E THICS S TATEMENT
In this work, we introduce the KO LM OGOROV-T EST, a challenging intelligence test for C ODE LM S
based on the notion of Kolmogorov complexity. While we do not see any immediate risk caused
by KT, code generation research is not without risk. Powerful models can be used for malicious
reasons, e.g., by hackers or other malicious users. If compression via zero-shot code generation
was solved, it might enable a leap in telecommunications efficiency while at the same time raising
concerns about opaque behavior of strong artificial intelligence.

R EFERENCES
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large
  language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732.
Thomas Ball, Shuo Chen, and Cormac Herley. Can we count on LLMs? the fixed-effect fallacy
  and claims of GPT-4 capabilities. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN
  2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qt4d0EGZsK.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le bras, Jianfeng Gao, and Yejin Choi. Piqa: Reasoning about
  physical commonsense in natural language. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 34(05):7432–7439, Apr. 2020. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i05.6239. URL https://
  ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/6239.
Ben Bogin, Kejuan Yang, Shashank Gupta, Kyle Richardson, Erin Bransom, Peter Clark, Ashish
  Sabharwal, and Tushar Khot. SUPER: Evaluating agents on setting up and executing tasks from
  research repositories. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  12622–12645, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.702. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  emnlp-main.702/.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
N. Chomsky. Three models for the description of language. IRE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 2(3):113–124, 1956. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1956.1056813.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv:1803.05457v1, 2018.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory (Wiley Series in Telecom-
  munications and Signal Processing). Wiley-Interscience, USA, 2006. ISBN 0471241954.
Gautier Dagan, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Baptiste Rozière. Getting the most out of your tokenizer
  for pre-training and domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024.
Gregoire Deletang, Anian Ruoss, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Elliot Catt, Tim Genewein, Christo-
  pher Mattern, Jordi Grau-Moya, Li Kevin Wenliang, Matthew Aitchison, Laurent Orseau, Marcus
  Hutter, and Joel Veness. Language modeling is compression. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  jznbgiynus.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
P. Deutsch. RFC1952: GZIP file format specification version 4.3. RFC Editor, USA, 1996.
Shasha Du, Jialin Li, and Ning Bian. A compression method for dna. PLoS One, 15(11):e0238220,
  November 2020. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238220. Published 2020 Nov 25.
Kevin Ellis, Lawrence Wong, Max Nye, et al. Dreamcoder: growing generalizable, interpretable
  knowledge with wake–sleep bayesian program learning. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
  Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 381(2251), 2023.
Vincent François-Lavet, Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Marc G. Bellemare, and Joelle Pineau. An
  introduction to deep reinforcement learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11
  (3–4):219–354, 2018. ISSN 1935-8245. doi: 10.1561/2200000071. URL http://dx.doi.
  org/10.1561/2200000071.
Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 32nd International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning
  - Volume 37, ICML’15, pp. 1180–1189. JMLR.org, 2015.
Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, and Jonathan Berant. Injecting numerical reasoning skills into language
 models. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of
 the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 946–958, Online,
 July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.89. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.89.
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
  Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan,
  Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Ko-
  renev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava
  Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux,
  Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret,
  Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius,
  Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary,
  Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab
  AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco
  Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind That-
  tai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Kore-
  vaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra,
  Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu,
  Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jong-
  soo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala,
  Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid
  El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren
  Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin,
  Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi,


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew
  Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Ku-
  mar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoy-
  chev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan
  Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan,
  Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ra-
  mon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Ro-
  hit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan
  Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell,
  Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng
  Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer
  Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman,
  Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mi-
  haylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor
  Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vı́tor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei
  Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang
  Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Gold-
  schlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning
  Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh,
  Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria,
  Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein,
  Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, An-
  drew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, An-
  nie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel,
  Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leon-
  hardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu
  Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Mon-
  talvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao
  Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia
  Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide
  Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le,
  Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
  Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smoth-
  ers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni,
  Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia
  Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan,
  Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harri-
  son Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj,
  Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James
  Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jen-
  nifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang,
  Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Jun-
  jie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy
  Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang,
  Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell,
  Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa,
  Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias
  Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L.
  Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike
  Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari,
  Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan
  Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent,
  Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar,
  Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Ro-
  driguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy,
  Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin
  Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon,
  Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ra-


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  maswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha,
  Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal,
  Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satter-
  field, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj
  Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo
  Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook
  Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Ku-
  mar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov,
  Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiao-
  jian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia,
  Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao,
  Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhao-
  duo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Peter D. Grunwald and Paul M. B. Vitanyi. Algorithmic information theory, 2008. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/0809.2754.
Amirhossein Habibian, Ties Van Rozendaal, Jakub Tomczak, and Taco Cohen. Video compression
 with rate-distortion autoencoders. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
 Vision (ICCV), pp. 7032–7041, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00713.
Guy Hacohen and Daphna Weinshall. On the power of curriculum learning in training deep net-
  works, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.03626.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. NeurIPS,
  2021.
John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Introduction to Automata Theory, Lan-
  guages, and Computation (3rd Edition). Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., USA,
  2006. ISBN 0321455363.
Marcus Hutter. The hutter prize for compressing human knowledge. Theoretical Computer Science,
 410(51):5372–5380, 2009. doi: 10.1016/j.tcs.2009.09.037.
Marcus Hutter, Elliot Catt, and David Quarel. An introduction to universal artificial intelligence.
 Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2024.
Uthayakumar Jayasankar, Vengattaraman Thirumal, and Dhavachelvan Ponnurangam. A survey on
  data compression techniques: From the perspective of data quality, coding schemes, data type and
  applications. Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences, 33(2):119–
  140, 2021. ISSN 1319-1578. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2018.05.006. URL https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1319157818301101.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
  Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114.
A. N. Kolmogorov. On tables of random numbers. Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series
  A (1961-2002), 25(4):369–376, 1963. ISSN 0581572X. URL http://www.jstor.org/
  stable/25049284.
Debra A. Lelewer and Daniel S. Hirschberg. Data compression. ACM Comput. Surv., 19(3):
  261–296, sep 1987. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/45072.45074. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1145/45072.45074.
Ming Li and Paul Vitányi. An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and Its Applica-
 tions. Springer-Verlag New York Inc., 01 1997. ISBN 9780387948683. doi: 10.1007/
 978-1-4757-2606-0.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rongao Li, Jie Fu, Bo-Wen Zhang, Tao Huang, Zhihong Sun, Chen Lyu, Guang Liu, Zhi Jin, and
  Ge Li. Taco: Topics in algorithmic code generation dataset, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2312.14852.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien
  de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven
  Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Push-
  meet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level code
  generation with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022. doi: 10.1126/science.abq1158.
  URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abq1158.
Bingbin Liu, Sebastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Janardhan Kulkarni, Yuanzhi Li, Anh Nguyen, Rachel
  Ward, and Yi Zhang. Tinygsm: achieving ¿80 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.
  09241.
Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. Is your code generated by
   chatGPT really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. In
   Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b. URL https:
   //openreview.net/forum?id=1qvx610Cu7.
Zimu Lu, Aojun Zhou, Houxing Ren, Ke Wang, Weikang Shi, Junting Pan, Mingjie Zhan, and
  Hongsheng Li. MathGenie: Generating synthetic data with question back-translation for en-
  hancing mathematical reasoning of LLMs. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Sriku-
  mar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2732–2747, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.151. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.151.
Arindam Mitra, Hamed Khanpour, Corby Rosset, and Ahmed Awadallah. Orca-math: Unlocking
  the potential of slms in grade school math, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
  14830.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.
NCBI. Genome reference consortium human build 38 (grch38), 2023. URL https://www.
 ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/GCF_000001405.26/.
Shoshana Neuburger. The burrows-wheeler transform: data compression, suffix arrays, and pattern
  matching by donald adjeroh, timothy bell and amar mukherjee springer, 2008. SIGACT News, 41
  (1):21–24, mar 2010. ISSN 0163-5700. doi: 10.1145/1753171.1753177. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1145/1753171.1753177.
Ansong Ni, Miltiadis Allamanis, Arman Cohan, Yinlin Deng, Kensen Shi, Charles Sutton, and
  Pengcheng Yin. Next: teaching large language models to reason about code execution. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024.
OpenAI, :, Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden
  Low, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, Alex Iftimie, Alex Karpenko,
  Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Neitz, Alexander Prokofiev, Alexander Wei, Allison Tam, Ally
  Bennett, Ananya Kumar, Andre Saraiva, Andrea Vallone, Andrew Duberstein, Andrew Kondrich,
  Andrey Mishchenko, Andy Applebaum, Angela Jiang, Ashvin Nair, Barret Zoph, Behrooz Ghor-
  bani, Ben Rossen, Benjamin Sokolowsky, Boaz Barak, Bob McGrew, Borys Minaiev, Botao Hao,
  Bowen Baker, Brandon Houghton, Brandon McKinzie, Brydon Eastman, Camillo Lugaresi, Cary
  Bassin, Cary Hudson, Chak Ming Li, Charles de Bourcy, Chelsea Voss, Chen Shen, Chong Zhang,
  Chris Koch, Chris Orsinger, Christopher Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clive Chan, Dan Roberts, Daniel
  Kappler, Daniel Levy, Daniel Selsam, David Dohan, David Farhi, David Mely, David Robinson,
  Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Dragos Oprica, Eben Freeman, Eddie Zhang, Edmund Wong, Eliz-
  abeth Proehl, Enoch Cheung, Eric Mitchell, Eric Wallace, Erik Ritter, Evan Mays, Fan Wang,
  Felipe Petroski Such, Filippo Raso, Florencia Leoni, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Francis Song, Fred


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit, Geoff Salmon, Giambattista Parascandolo, Gildas Chabot, Grace
  Zhao, Greg Brockman, Guillaume Leclerc, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Hao Sheng, Hart An-
  drin, Hessam Bagherinezhad, Hongyu Ren, Hunter Lightman, Hyung Won Chung, Ian Kivlichan,
  Ian O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ignasi Clavera Gilaberte, Ilge Akkaya, Ilya Kostrikov, Ilya Sutskever,
  Irina Kofman, Jakub Pachocki, James Lennon, Jason Wei, Jean Harb, Jerry Twore, Jiacheng Feng,
  Jiahui Yu, Jiayi Weng, Jie Tang, Jieqi Yu, Joaquin Quiñonero Candela, Joe Palermo, Joel Parish,
  Johannes Heidecke, John Hallman, John Rizzo, Jonathan Gordon, Jonathan Uesato, Jonathan
  Ward, Joost Huizinga, Julie Wang, Kai Chen, Kai Xiao, Karan Singhal, Karina Nguyen, Karl
  Cobbe, Katy Shi, Kayla Wood, Kendra Rimbach, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin Liu, Kevin Lu,
  Kevin Stone, Kevin Yu, Lama Ahmad, Lauren Yang, Leo Liu, Leon Maksin, Leyton Ho, Liam
  Fedus, Lilian Weng, Linden Li, Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Lorenz Kuhn, Lukas Kon-
  draciuk, Lukasz Kaiser, Luke Metz, Madelaine Boyd, Maja Trebacz, Manas Joglekar, Mark Chen,
  Marko Tintor, Mason Meyer, Matt Jones, Matt Kaufer, Max Schwarzer, Meghan Shah, Mehmet
  Yatbaz, Melody Y. Guan, Mengyuan Xu, Mengyuan Yan, Mia Glaese, Mianna Chen, Michael
  Lampe, Michael Malek, Michele Wang, Michelle Fradin, Mike McClay, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles
  Wang, Mingxuan Wang, Mira Murati, Mo Bavarian, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Nat McAleese, Neil
  Chowdhury, Neil Chowdhury, Nick Ryder, Nikolas Tezak, Noam Brown, Ofir Nachum, Oleg
  Boiko, Oleg Murk, Olivia Watkins, Patrick Chao, Paul Ashbourne, Pavel Izmailov, Peter Zhokhov,
  Rachel Dias, Rahul Arora, Randall Lin, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Raz Gaon, Reah Miyara, Reimar
  Leike, Renny Hwang, Rhythm Garg, Robin Brown, Roshan James, Rui Shu, Ryan Cheu, Ryan
  Greene, Saachi Jain, Sam Altman, Sam Toizer, Sam Toyer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Santiago Hernandez, Sasha Baker, Scott McKinney, Scottie Yan, Shengjia Zhao, Shengli Hu,
  Shibani Santurkar, Shraman Ray Chaudhuri, Shuyuan Zhang, Siyuan Fu, Spencer Papay, Steph
  Lin, Suchir Balaji, Suvansh Sanjeev, Szymon Sidor, Tal Broda, Aidan Clark, Tao Wang, Tay-
  lor Gordon, Ted Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thibault Sottiaux, Thomas Degry, Thomas Dimson,
  Tianhao Zheng, Timur Garipov, Tom Stasi, Trapit Bansal, Trevor Creech, Troy Peterson, Tyna
  Eloundou, Valerie Qi, Vineet Kosaraju, Vinnie Monaco, Vitchyr Pong, Vlad Fomenko, Weiyi
  Zheng, Wenda Zhou, Wes McCabe, Wojciech Zaremba, Yann Dubois, Yinghai Lu, Yining Chen,
  Young Cha, Yu Bai, Yuchen He, Yuchen Zhang, Yunyun Wang, Zheng Shao, and Zhuohan Li.
  Openai o1 system card, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16720.

OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng,
  Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Work-
  man, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
  Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
  Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: An asr corpus
  based on public domain audio books. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5206–5210, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2015.
  7178964.
R. Pasco. Source coding algorithms for fast data compression (ph.d. thesis abstr.). IEEE Transac-
  tions on Information Theory, 23(4):548–548, 1977. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1977.1055739.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training, 2018.
J. J. Rissanen. Generalized kraft inequality and arithmetic coding. IBM Journal of Research and
   Development, 20(3):198–203, 1976. doi: 10.1147/rd.203.0198.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Ev-
  timov, Joanna Bitton, Manish Bhatt, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong,
  Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Nicolas Usunier,
  Thomas Scialom, and Gabriel Synnaeve. Code llama: Open foundation models for code, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.12950.
Ayodeji Olalekan Salau, Ifetayo Oluwafemi, Kehinde Felix Faleye, and Shruti Jain. Audio com-
  pression using a modified discrete cosine transform with temporal auditory masking. In 2019
  international conference on signal processing and communication (ICSC), pp. 135–142. IEEE,
  2019.
David Salomon. Data Compression: The Complete Reference. Springer, New York, 4th edition,
  2004.
C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical Journal, 27
  (3):379–423, 1948. doi: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.
Parshin Shojaee, Aneesh Jain, Sindhu Tipirneni, and Chandan K. Reddy. Execution-based code gen-
  eration using deep reinforcement learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
  ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0XBuaxqEcG.
R.J. Solomonoff. A formal theory of inductive inference. part i. Information and Control, 7(1):1–
  22, 1964. ISSN 0019-9958. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0019-9958(64)90223-2. URL https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0019995864902232.
Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. Ucf101: A dataset of 101 human actions
  classes from videos in the wild, 2012. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1212.0402.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Petru Soviany, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Paolo Rota, and Nicu Sebe. Curriculum learning: A sur-
  vey. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 130(6):1526–1565, June 2022. ISSN 0920-5691. doi: 10.1007/
  s11263-022-01611-x. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-022-01611-x.
Zayne Rea Sprague, Fangcong Yin, Juan Diego Rodriguez, Dongwei Jiang, Manya Wadhwa,
  Prasann Singhal, Xinyu Zhao, Xi Ye, Kyle Mahowald, and Greg Durrett. To cot or not to cot?
  chain-of-thought helps mainly on math and symbolic reasoning. In The Thirteenth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=w6nlcS8Kkn.
James A. Storer and Thomas G. Szymanski. Data compression via textual substitution. J. ACM, 29
  (4):928–951, oct 1982. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/322344.322346. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1145/322344.322346.
Hao Tang, Darren Yan Key, and Kevin Ellis. Worldcoder, a model-based LLM agent: Building
  world models by writing code and interacting with the environment. In The Thirty-eighth Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=QGJSXMhVaL.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.
A. M. Turing. On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem. Pro-
  ceedings of the London Mathematical Society, s2-42(1):230–265, 01 1937. ISSN 0024-6115. doi:
  10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230. URL https://doi.org/10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230.
Chandra Shekhara Kaushik Valmeekam, Krishna Narayanan, Dileep Kalathil, Jean-Francois Cham-
  berland, and Srinivas Shakkottai. Llmzip: Lossless text compression using large language models,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04050.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Proceedings of the 31st Inter-
  national Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’17, pp. 6000–6010, Red
  Hook, NY, USA, 2017. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510860964.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J.
John Yang, Akshara Prabhakar, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Intercode: Standardizing
  and benchmarking interactive coding with execution feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=fvKaLF1ns8.
Gilad Yehudai, Haim Kaplan, Asma Ghandeharioun, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. When can
  transformers count to n?, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.15160.
Ori Yoran, Alon Talmor, and Jonathan Berant. Turning tables: Generating examples from semi-
  structured tables for endowing language models with reasoning skills. In Smaranda Muresan,


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6016–6031, Dublin,
  Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.
  416. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.416.
Kunhao Zheng, Juliette Decugis, Jonas Gehring, Taco Cohen, benjamin negrevergne, and Gabriel
  Synnaeve. What makes large language models reason in (multi-turn) code generation? In
  The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Zk9guOl9NS.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        DATA G ENERATION

Additional details and statistics. We randomly choose audio sequences from LibriSpeech until
reaching 1MB of data. As we opt not to trim sequences, we are left with 1,015,360 bytes in the 16-
bit setting, 1,00,3280 bytes in the 8-bit setting, and 1,000,960 bytes in the MFCC setting. Similarly,
we have 1,004,232 text bytes, and 1,000,105 synthetic bytes. For DNA, we have exactly 1MB.
The maximum sequence length shown to our models is 128. As we do not merge between different
origin sequences (i.e., an audio file or synthetic sequence), some sequences can be shorter. The
average sequence length for natural sequences is 75.9 for our synthetic data, 126.0 for MFCC and
127.9 for all other modalities. We provide detailed statistics regarding synthetic program-sequence
lenghts in §A.2.

Figures. The DNA illustration in Fig. 2 is courtesy of The National Human Genome Research
Institute9 .

A.1       NATURALLY O CCURRING S EQUENCES

Audio MFCC. We use Librosa10 to parse our audio files to MFCC. Specifically, we parse each file
to 20 MFCCs. As MFCCs are floats, we round each float into an integer which we take modulo 256
to obtain numbers in the range [0, 255]. Note that this representation is far from being reconstructible
but we posit that it provides a source of richly structured natural data nevertheless.

A.2       S YNTHETIC DATA G ENERATION

Automatic generation of program-sequence pairs. Our DSL supports the following functions
and can be easily extended in the future:

           • [Initiator] Set list: Initiates a fixed sequence of numbers.
           • [Initiator] Range: Initiates a sequence of increasing numbers from start to end index,
             either with or without a step interval.
           • [Initiator] Repeat: Initiates a sequence of repeated occurrences of the same number.
           • [Modifier] Substitute: Substitutes a value in a list with a different value.
           • [Modifier] Reverse: Reverses a sequence.
           • [Modifier] Sub-sequence between indexes: Returns a sub-sequence between two indexes,
             either with or without intervals.
           • [Modifier] Repeat list: Returns a repetition of a sequence a specified number of times.
           • [Modifier] Max/Min: Returns the n maximum or minimum items in the sequence.
           • [Modifier] Add/Subtract/Modulo: Applies a mathematical operation (addition, subtrac-
             tion, or modulo) with a specified fixed operand to all elements in the sequence.
           • [Modifier] Scan add: Returns a new sequence where the value at index n is the sum of all
             items up to that index.
           • [Filter] Is even/odd: Keeps only even or odd numbers in the sequence.
           • [Filter] Is non-zero: Keeps only non-zero numbers in the sequence.
           • [Merger] Add/Subtract/Modulo two lists: Applies a mathematical operation (addition,
             subtraction, or modulo) over elements at matching indexes in two sequences.
           • [Merger] Concatenate: Concatenates two sequences.
           • [Merger] Interleave: Interleaves one sequence with another in alternating indexes. If one
             sequence is longer, the remaining values will form the suffix of the interleaved sequence.
     9
         https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/acgt
    10
         https://librosa.org/doc/main/generated/librosa.feature.mfcc.html


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When sampling from our DSL, we first sample the initiators, then produce additional sequences
using sampled filters and modifiers before the sub-sequences are composed by sampled mergers to
form the final sequence. We can control the distribution of programs via the hyper-parameters of the
sampling process.
The number of initiators is uniformly sampled in range {1, ..., 5}, the length of each fixed sequence
is sampled uniformly in range {5, ..., 25}.
The probability to apply any non-mathematical modifier (e.g., repeat or substitute) is set to 0.4,
and the probability for each specific modifier is set to 0.1. After the modification, we reuse the
original sequence at probability 0.2. For substitution, we exclude the original sequence at probability
0.25. Similarly, the probability to apply any mathematical modifier (e.g., Add/Subtract/Modulo) to
an initiated sequence or filter is set to 0.4, and the probability for a specific filter is set to 0.1.
Mathematical mergers are treated similarly – the probability to any mathematical merger is 0.4 and
for a specific merger is 0.1. Finally, the probability for concatenate and interleave operations is set
to 0.8 and 0.2, respectively, and we continue to concatenate and interleave sub-sequence until all
sub-sequences are used in the final output sequence.
Additionally, we make sure that sequences in our evaluation data will not be part of a program-
sequence pair during training. In case a sequence is generated by more than one program, we only
keep the shortest program that produces the sequence in our dataset.

Program-sequence lengths. Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 presents the histogram of the lengths of our syn-
thetic sequences and programs respectively.


                                                          Figure 8: Cumulative histogram of program
Figure 7: Cumulative histogram of sequence
                                                          lengths (number of lines) for our synthetic
lengths for our synthetic distribution.
                                                          distribution.



Uniform prior over DSL programs. Alg. 1 presents the number of bits needed to sample a pro-
gram using the uniform prior over programs and arithmetic coding (Rissanen, 1976; Pasco, 1977).
The cost to encode each line has two main components.
The first, is to encode the method that is being called. Since we use a uniform prior, this is always
log of the number of functions (stopping the generation and assigning one of the previously defined
sequences as the output is formulized as an additional function).
The second, is to encode the variables that are being passed to the function, which is determined by
the environment and is specific for each function. For example, setting a random list of elements
(set list), requires l ∗ b bytes, l indicating the length of the list, and b indicating the number of bits
in each byte. Similarly, concatenation two previously defined sub-sequences requires encoding the
indexes of these sequences (which is a log operation of the current number of lines), and repeating
a character requires encoding the character (again, the byte size) and the number of repetitions (log
of the maximal number of allowed repetitions in the environment).


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Encoding a program under the uniform prior.
    function ENCODE FUNC PARAMS(func, func params, hps)
        mapping = { “set list”:          len(f unc params.list size) × hps.byte size, “concatenate”:
    log2 (hps.line index) × 2, “repeat num: hps.byte size + hps.max num repetitions, ... }
        return mapping[func]
    end function
    x←0
    bits per f unc ← log2 (num f unctions + 1)
    for all i, (f, f params) in enumerate(program lines) do
        x += bits per f unc                                             ▷ # bits to encode the function type
        x += encode f unc params(f, f params, hps, i)                ▷ # bits to encode the function params
    end for
    return x


A.3      F ORMAL D EFINITION OF THE KO LM OGOROV-T EST

Alg. 2 presents a formal definition of the KO LM OGOROV-T EST. C ODE LM S that generate shorter
programs have better compression rates (see §4 for our metrics and experimental settings).

Algorithm 2 Compression by Code Generation (The KO LM OGOROV-T EST)
Require: Sequence x, C ODE LM M , Programs prior p
 1: Generate program ρ with model M that produces the sequence x
 2: Encode ρ with prior p
 3: return p(ρ)



B        E XPERIMENTS
B.1      M ODELS

G ZIP baseline. We use the python implementation of G ZIP11 . To enable reconstruction of the
sequential data, we use new line as the separator between sequences.

LM I C baseline. We use our S EQ C ODER -1.5B model for the results reported in §5 and provide
additional results in §B.2.

Prompted baselines. Fig. 9 presents our full prompt used in our prompted models experiments.
We use vLLM12 to set-up inference servers with the instruction-tuned L LAMA -3.1 models available
on HuggingFace13 .

Trained models. Our S EQ C ODER -1.5B model is a transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) with 1.5
billion parameters. The model follows a similar architecture to the recent L LAMA models (Touvron
et al., 2023; Grattafiori et al., 2024) but with less parameters – it has 24 layers, a hidden-dimension
of 2,048, multi-head attention with 16 heads, and a maximum sequence length of 2,048 tokens. To
endow the model with coding and reasoning skills before training on synthetic data from our DSL,
we pre-train on 200B tokens of publicly-available text and code. Although this model is under-
trained in relation to current state-of-the-art models and hence significantly weaker, it achieves non-
negligible performance on popular coding and reasoning tasks – Pass@1 of 11.6 on HumanEvalPlus
(Liu et al., 2023b), and Accuracy of 28.2% on ARC (Clark et al., 2018) and 68.2% on PIQA (Bisk
et al., 2020).


    11
       https://docs.python.org/3/library/gzip.html
    12
       https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm
    13
       https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3.1-{8B/70B/405B}


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       System Prompt
       Generate a Python program that, when executed, reproduces a
       specified input sequence. The program should be as concise as
       possible.



       Instructions
       Instructions:
       - Write a multi-line Python program. Each line should either
       assign a new variable or define a new function.
       - These variables and functions can be reused throughout the
       program.
       - Identify and utilize patterns in the input sequence to
       minimize the length of the program.
       - Assign the final output of the sequence to the variable
       output. This output will be used to verify the correctness
       of the program.
       - Do not include print statements or return statements.
       - Ensure that the generated code is executable in a Python
       interpreter without modifications.
       - Do not include the python code block syntax in your
       response.
       - End your response with ###.

       ### Input Sequence:
       #SEQ#

       ### Expected Output:
       The Python program that generates the sequence is:


                         Figure 9: Full prompt used in our zero-shot experiments.

                          Audio-16-bit    Audio-8-bit    Audio-MFCC            DNA               Text               Syn.
                         Acc.    Prec.   Acc.    Prec.   Acc.   Prec.   Acc.      Prec.   Acc.       Prec.   Acc.       Prec.

      L LAMA -3.1-8B     2.9     1.6     1.60    2.05    5.4     1.59    6.9        3.8   0.4        2.67    6.9        3.8
      L LAMA -3.1-70B    14.3    1.61     4.2    1.74    23.6    1.50    9.2       2.25   3.7        2.69    16.9       2.93
      L LAMA -3.1-405B   37.9    1.53    10.4    1.60    49.7    1.41   23.4       1.94   5.1        2.35    30.5        2.6


Table 4: Accuracy and Precision for zero-shot prompted models on the KO LM OGOROV-T EST for
sequences of length 128 with CoT. Trends are similar to those without CoT in Tab. 1.


B.2   R ESULTS

Chain-of-thought prompting does not lead to additional improvements. We present our CoT
prompt in Fig. 10 and our experiments with CoT with L LAMA in Tab.4. Similarly to recent work
Sprague et al. (2025); Zheng et al. (2025), we do not observe significant gains with CoT prompting.
We present the percentage of executable programs, accuracy for executable programs, and Accuracy
for GPT4- O and O 1- MINI in Tab. 5. While O 1- MINI has a higher accuracy for executable programs
(69.8 vs 63.2), it also has a lower percentage of executable programs (81.7 vs 89.9), and both models
have similar Accuracy (57.2 vs 56.5), suggesting that while longer chains-of-thoughts are able to
increase performance, they do not yet lead to major improvements on the KO LM OGOROV-T EST.

G ZIP and LM I C are strong baselines. Tab. 6 presents results for our G ZIP and LM I C base-
lines, for sequences of length 128 and 1,02414 . For G ZIP we also compress all 1MB as a single
  14
     Each element in the sequence is a single token, and we use a comma separator between elements. We do
not consider the cost of generating the separator token for the LM I C baseline.


                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       System Prompt
       Generate a Python program that, when executed, reproduces a
       specified input sequence. The program should be as concise as
       possible.



       Instructions
       Instructions:
       - Write a multi-line Python program. Each line should either
       assign a new variable or define a new function.
       - These variables and functions can be reused throughout the
       program.
       - Identify and utilize patterns in the input sequence to
       minimize the length of the program.
       - Assign the final output of the sequence to the variable
       output. This output will be used to verify the correctness
       of the program.
       - Do not include print statements or return statements.
       - Ensure that the generated code is executable in a Python
       interpreter without modifications.
       - Do not include the python code block syntax in your
       response.
       - End your response with ###.
       - Before the program, you can use the Thought field to
       generate how you think the task should be solved. After
       the thought, generate "The Python program that generates the
       sequence is:", followed by the program.

       ### Input Sequence:
       #SEQ#

       ### Expected Output:
       The Python program that generates the sequence is:


Figure 10: Full prompt used in our zero-shot CoT experiments. The difference from our non-CoT
prompt in Fig. 9 is highlighted.

                                       GPT4- O                       O 1- MINI
                               % Ex.   Ex. Acc.       Acc.   % Ex.   Ex. Acc.    Acc.
               Audio-16-bit     88.2      78.8        69.5   81.2       87.7     71.2
               Audio-8-bit      94.6      38.5        36.4   82.2       51.1     42.0
               Audio-MFCC       94.4      88.8        83.8   86.8       93.8     81.4
               DNA              93.1      54.0        50.3   85.6       67.1     57.4
               Text             76.5      70.8        54.2   82.8       53.6     44.4
               Synthetic        92.9      48.1        44.7   71.4       65.8     47.0
               Average          89.9      63.2        56.5   81.7       69.8     57.2

Table 5: The percentage of executable programs (% Ex.), accuracy for executable programs (Ex.
Acc.), and Accuracy (Acc.) for GPT4- O and O 1- MINI. To reduce costs, O 1- MINI was evaluated on
500 random sub-sequences of length 128. On average, both models have similar Accuracy. O 1- MINI
has higher accuracy for executable programs, but a lower percentage of executable programs.


sequence. We note that stronger compression baselines exist, and that the current state-of-the-art
CompressionRate for our text data from the Hutter Prize is around 0.11 (Hutter, 2009).
LM I C is a strong baseline, it outperforms G ZIP (with 1MB) on 5/6 modalities with a sequence
length of 1,024 and 4/6 modalities with a sequence length of 128. Our results on Audio-8-bit are


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            LM I C                   G ZIP
                      Sequence length    128     1024      128       1024    1MB
                      Audio-16-bit      0.697    0.639    1.147     1.014    0.920
                      Audio-8-bits      0.319    0.273    0.621     0.454    0.398
                      Audio MFCC        0.739    0.698    1.250     0.974    0.903
                      DNA               0.750    0.662    1.182     0.894    0.714
                      Text              0.611    0.463    0.782     0.525    0.357
                      Synthetic         0.449    0.450    0.943     0.819    0.593
                      Average           0.594    0.531    0.988     0.748    0.647

       Table 6: CompressionRate for G ZIP and LM I C with various input sequence lengths.


comparable to the G ZIP and C HINCHILLA -1B baseline from Deletang et al. (2024) (which reports
compression rates of 0.249 with LM I C and 0.364 for G ZIP with 1GB of data, both within a a 3.6-
point margin). On on text, our LM I C baseline is significantly weaker than the one in Deletang et al.
(2024). We attribute the difference to the different setting – we present the sequences as decimal
numbers (to enable model to identify mathematical patterns), while the original work presents se-
quences as ASCII characters. Moreover, G ZIP improves as we increase the input length, reaching
CompressionRate of 0.32 for 1GB of data, similar to Deletang et al. (2024).


Scaling S EQ C ODER models improves Accuracy on synthetic data. Fig. 7 presents the Accu-
racy for the different S EQ C ODER models on our held-out synthetic dataset. S EQ C ODER -1.5B and
S EQ C ODER -8B models are trained for 20K and 10K steps, respectively. S EQ C ODER -1.5B-10K
overfits and accuracy decreases with additional training. S EQ C ODER -1.5B (1M examples) signif-
icantly outperforms S EQ C ODER -1.5B-100K and the larger S EQ C ODER -8B performs better and
learns faster.


Scaling prompted models increases percentage of executable programs. Fig. 8 shows the per-
centage of programs that execute without error and terminate within five seconds, broken down
by model and dataset. Larger models generate more executable programs. Programs generated by
L LAMA -3.1-405B and GPT4- O are executable 77.2% and 89.9% of the time on average across
modalities.


                                                                                    L LAMA -3.1     GPT
                                                          Modality           8B        70B 405B     4- O
                                                          Audio-16-bit       25.6     67.2   69.3   88.2
                                                          Audio-8-bit        28.2     82.0   87.4   94.6
                                                          Audio-MFCC         25.9     71.0   76.6   94.4
                                                          DNA                33.7     93.9   91.9   93.1
                                                          Text                4.3     51.0   49.1   76.5
                                                          Synthetic          42.0     85.4   88.9   92.9
                                                          Average            26.6     75.1   77.2   89.9

                                                         Table 8: The percentage of executable pro-
Table 7: Accuracy on our synthetic held-out              grams for our prompted models.
set for the different S EQ C ODER models.



Strong priors are necessary for good compression. In §5, Fig. 4 we show that we can outperform
previous compression methods for our synthetic data using S EQ C ODER -1.5B and a uniform prior
over programs and arithmetic coding. The same programs achieve a compression rate of 5.26 and
0.59 with raw (the size of the programs saved as strings on the disk) and G ZIP encoding, showing
that strong priors are needed for good CompressionRate.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) S EQ C ODER -1.5B accuracy as a function of        (b) S EQ C ODER -1.5B accuracy as a function of
gold program lengths.                                  input sequence lengths.

Figure 11: S EQ C ODER -1.5B accuracy as a function of gold program and input sequence lengths.

       Model Input
       Generate a program whose execution results in the following sequence: [18, 149,
       19, 150, 20, 151, 21, 152, 22, 153, 23, 154, 24, 155, 25, 156, 26, 157, 27, 158,
       28, 159, 237, 160, 237, 161, 237, 162, 237, 163, 237, 164, 237, 165, 237, 166,
       237, 167, 237, 168, 237, 169, 237, 170, 237, 171, 237, 237, 237, 237, 237, 237,
       237, 237, 237, 237, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153,
       154, 155, 28, 27, 26, 25, 24, 23, 22, 21, 20, 19, 18, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153,
       154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 174, 166, 167, 168, 169,
       170, 171, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 177, 28, 177, 26, 25, 24, 23,
       22, 21, 20, 19, 18, 28, 177, 26, 25, 24, 23, 22, 21, 20, 19, 18, 149, 150, 151,
       152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167,
       168, 169, 170, 171]


       Gold Output (with in-line execution feedback)
       sequence_1 = range_func_up(149, 171) # [149, 150, ..., 170, 171]
       sequence_2 = range_func_up(18, 28)    # [18, 19, ..., 27, 28]
       sequence_3 = repeat_num(22, 237)      # [237, 237, ..., 237, 237]
       sequence_4 = range_func_up(142, 155) # [142, 143, ..., 154, 155]
       sequence_5 = reverse_list(sequence_2) # [28, 27, ..., 19, 18]
       sequence_6 = substitute(sequence_1, 165, 174) # [149, 150, ..., 170, 171]
       sequence_7 = substitute(sequence_2, 28, 177) # [18, 19, ..., 26, 177]
       sequence_8 = substitute(sequence_5, 27, 177) # [28, 177, ..., 19, 18]
       sequence_9 = concatenate(sequence_2, sequence_3) # [18, 19, ..., 237, 237]
       sequence_10 = concatenate(sequence_9, sequence_4) # [18, 19, ..., 154, 155]
       sequence_11 = concatenate(sequence_10, sequence_5) # [18, 19, ..., 19, 18]
       sequence_12 = concatenate(sequence_11, sequence_6) # [18, 19, ..., 170, 171]
       sequence_13 = concatenate(sequence_12, sequence_7) # [18, 19, ..., 26, 177]
       sequence_14 = concatenate(sequence_13, sequence_8) # [18, 19, ..., 19, 18]
       sequence_15 = interleave(sequence_14, sequence_1) # [18, 149, ..., 170, 171]
       sequence_16 = concatenate(sequence_15, sequence_8) # [18, 149, ..., 19, 18]
       sequence_17 = concatenate(sequence_16, sequence_1) # [18, 149, ..., 170, 171]
       output = sequence_17 # [18, 149, ..., 170, 171]



          Figure 12: An example program-sequence pair with in-line execution feedback.


B.3   A NALYSIS

Fig. 11a and Fig. 11b present accuracy for S EQ C ODER -1.5B as a function of program and sequence
length, respectively. Accuracy decreases with length of programs or sequences.
Fig. 12 presents an example for a synthetic program-sequence pair with in-line execution feedback.
Tab. 9 presents the percentage of repetitions in correct programs for L LAMA -3.1-405B and GPT4-
O . Fig. 13 presents an example where L LAMA -3.1-405B succeeds by repeating the input sequence.
Fig. 14 presents an example where L LAMA -3.1-405B repeats the input sequence in a complex


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Audio-16-bit           Audio-8-bit          Audio-MFCC                DNA               Text               Synthetic
                          Rep    No Rep         Rep    No Rep         Rep    No Rep        Rep     No Rep    Rep     No Rep        Rep     No Rep

     L LAMA -3.1-405B      84         16        96           4        100         4        100        0      96           4        20          80
     GPT4- O               96         4         96           4        100         0        100        0      100          0        20          80


Table 9: The percentage of repetitions in correct programs from a qualitative analysis of 25 programs
per modality for L LAMA -3.1-405B and GPT4- O. Most correct examples for natural sequences are
because of repetitions, but the contrary is true for synthetic sequences.

                        16-bit                  8-bit                 MFCC                   DNA                   Text                 Synthetic
                  Ex     Re      Un        Ex    Re     Un       Ex    Re        Un   Ex      Re      Un    Ex     Re         Un   Ex     Re      Un

   LMA-405B       80     20      0         96    4      0        72     28       0    40         60   0     24     56         20   92      8        0
   GPT4- O        72     28      0         88   12      0        40     60       0    36         64   0     44     48          8   96      4        0


Table 10: The percentage of execution (Ex), repetition (Re), and Unicode (Un) errors in erro-
neous programs from a qualitative analysis of 25 programs per modality for L LAMA -3.1-405B
and GPT4- O. More than a third of the errors for natural sequences are caused by repetition errors.


and verbose manner, which is sub-optimal for the G ZIP prior. Fig. 15 presents an example where
L LAMA -3.1-405B succeeds on a synthetic sequence by leveraging the induced patterns.
Tab. 10 presents our qualitative error analysis on 25 erroneous programs per modality for L LAMA -
3.1-405B and GPT4- O. Fig. 16, Fig. 17, Fig. 18, and Fig. 19 present examples where L LAMA -3.1-
405B errs due to a wrong execution on an Audio-8-bit, a wrong execution on a synthetic sequence,
repetition on an Audio-8-bit sequence, and conversion from text to bytes for a text sequence.

            Input Sequence                                        Generated Program                                       Produced Sequence

 [249, 252, 254, 255, 254, 249, 246, 250,        a = [249, 252, 254, 255]                                    [249, 252, 254, 255, 254, 249, 246, 250,
 254, 255, 255, 253, 252, 254, 255, 0,           b = [254, 249, 246, 250, 254,                               254, 255, 255, 253, 252, 254, 255, 0,
 1, 1, 3, 5, 3, 1, 1, 4, 6, 6, 4, 1, 0,               255, 255, 253, 252, 254, 255]                          1, 1, 3, 5, 3, 1, 1, 4, 6, 6, 4, 1, 0,
 1, 3, 3, 0, 254, 255, 255, 254, 254,            c = [0, 1, 1, 3, 5, 3, 1, 1, 4,                             1, 3, 3, 0, 254, 255, 255, 254, 254,
 253, 253, 254, 254, 253, 253, 253, 255,              6, 6, 4, 1, 0, 1, 3, 3, 0]                             253, 253, 254, 254, 253, 253, 253, 255,
 1, 0, 255, 255, 255, 0, 2, 2, 1, 1, 0,          d = [254, 255, 255, 254, 254,                               1, 0, 255, 255, 255, 0, 2, 2, 1, 1, 0,
 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 255, 254, 254, 255,             253, 253, 254, 254, 253, 253,                          1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 255, 254, 254, 255,
 255, 254, 253, 252, 254, 254, 255, 255,               253, 255]                                             255, 254, 253, 252, 254, 254, 255, 255,
 254, 253, 253, 255, 254, 255, 255, 255,         e = [1, 0, 255, 255, 255, 0, 2,                             254, 253, 253, 255, 254, 255, 255, 255,
 255, 255, 254, 255, 0, 0, 2, 4, 5, 4, 2,             2, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0,                          255, 255, 254, 255, 0, 0, 2, 4, 5, 4, 2,
 1, 2, 5, 6, 6, 3, 1, 0, 1, 2, 1, 1, 0,                0]                                                    1, 2, 5, 6, 6, 3, 1, 0, 1, 2, 1, 1, 0,
 255, 254, 253, 253, 254, 255, 255, 254,         f = [255, 254, 254, 255, 255,                               255, 254, 253, 253, 254, 255, 255, 254,
 251, 251, 253, 255, 0, 255, 255, 254,                254, 253, 252, 254, 254, 255,                          251, 251, 253, 255, 0, 255, 255, 254,
 254, 255, 1, 2]                                       255, 254]                                             254, 255, 1, 2]
                                                 g = [253, 253, 255, 254, 255,
                                                      255, 255, 255, 255, 254, 255]
                                                 h = [0, 0, 2, 4, 5, 4, 2, 1, 2,
                                                      5, 6, 6, 3, 1, 0, 1, 2, 1, 1,
                                                       0]
                                                 i = [255, 254, 253, 253, 254,
                                                      255, 255, 254, 251, 251, 253,
                                                       255]
                                                 j = [0, 255, 255, 254, 254, 255,
                                                      1, 2]
                                                 output = a + b + c + d + e + f +
                                                      g + h + i + j



Figure 13: An example generation for L LAMA -3.1-405B on Audio-8-bit where the model succeeds
by splitting the sequence to sub-sequences that are later concatenated.


                                                                            27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Input Sequence                           Generated Program                     Produced Sequence

 [250, 250, 251, 251, 251, 250, 248, 246,    a = 250                              [250, 250, 251, 251, 251, 250, 248, 246,
 244, 244, 243, 244, 245, 247, 249, 251,     b = [a, a]                           244, 244, 243, 244, 245, 247, 249, 251,
 251, 250, 248, 246, 243, 242, 241, 241,     c = [251, 251, 251]                  251, 250, 248, 246, 243, 242, 241, 241,
 241, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 245, 246,     b.extend(c)                          241, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 245, 246,
 246, 245, 245, 244, 244, 245, 245, 245,     d = [a, 248, 246, 244, 244, 243,     246, 245, 245, 244, 244, 245, 245, 245,
 246, 245, 246, 245, 244, 243, 243, 244,          244, 245, 247, 249]             246, 245, 246, 245, 244, 243, 243, 244,
 244, 245, 246, 247, 249, 255, 16, 34,       b.extend(d)                          244, 245, 246, 247, 249, 255, 16, 34,
 43, 40, 29, 27, 29, 23, 9, 252, 248, 250,   e = [251, 251, a, 248, 246, 243,     43, 40, 29, 27, 29, 23, 9, 252, 248, 250,
 248, 245, 250, 4, 11, 7, 2, 4, 12, 14,           242, 241, 241, 241,             248, 245, 250, 4, 11, 7, 2, 4, 12, 14,
 9, 4, 8, 16, 21, 22, 26, 31, 30, 22,             241, 242, 243, 244, 245,        9, 4, 8, 16, 21, 22, 26, 31, 30, 22,
 12, 7, 4, 252, 241, 234, 235, 239, 241,               245, 246, 246, 245,        12, 7, 4, 252, 241, 234, 235, 239, 241,
 243, 249, 255, 2, 1, 1, 4, 7, 6, 4,              245, 244, 244, 245, 245,        243, 249, 255, 2, 1, 1, 4, 7, 6, 4,
 5, 9, 13, 13, 11, 9, 6, 1, 249, 243,                  245, 246, 245, 246,        5, 9, 13, 13, 11, 9, 6, 1, 249, 243,
 241, 239, 236, 235, 237, 242, 248, 252,          245, 244, 243, 243, 244,        241, 239, 236, 235, 237, 242, 248, 252,
 255, 2, 4, 5, 5]                                      244, 245, 246, 247,        255, 2, 4, 5, 5]
                                                  249, 255, 16, 34, 43, 40,
                                                       29, 27, 29, 23, 9]
                                             b.extend(e)
                                             f = [252, 248, 250, 248, 245,
                                                  250, 4, 11, 7, 2, 4,
                                                  12, 14, 9, 4, 8, 16, 21, 22,
                                                        26, 31, 30, 22,
                                                  12, 7, 4]
                                             b.extend(f)
                                             g = [252, 241, 234, 235, 239,
                                                  241, 243, 249, 255, 2,
                                                  1, 1, 4, 7, 6, 4, 5, 9, 13,
                                                       13, 11, 9, 6, 1]
                                             b.extend(g)
                                             h = [249, 243, 241, 239, 236,
                                                  235, 237, 242, 248,
                                                  252, 255, 2, 4, 5, 5]
                                             b.extend(h)
                                             output = b



Figure 14: An example generation from L LAMA -3.1-405B for Audio-8-bit where the program
repeats the input sequence in a verbose way, i.e., by extracting the number 255 to a variable and
splitting to sub-sequences.


             Input Sequence                           Generated Program                     Produced Sequence

 [196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203,    output = (                           [196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203,
 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211,         list(range(196, 214))            204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211,
 212, 213, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 26,       + [80] * 7                       212, 213, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 26,
 26, 26, 26, 26, 108, 97, 19, 251, 31, 45,       + [26] * 5                       26, 26, 26, 26, 108, 97, 19, 251, 31, 45,
 93, 136, 249, 32, 162, 7, 184, 244, 191,        + [108, 97, 19, 251, 31, 45,     93, 136, 249, 32, 162, 7, 184, 244, 191,
 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185,              93, 136, 249, 32, 162, 7,   178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185,
 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193,               184, 244, 191]             186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193,
 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201,         + list(range(178, 202))          194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201,
 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80]                     + [80] * 7                       80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80, 80]
                                             )



Figure 15: An example synthetic sequence where L LAMA -3.1-405B succeeds in leveraging pat-
terns in the input sequence, i.e., repetitions and an increasing range, to generate a correct program.


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Input Sequence                   Generated Program                     Produced Sequence

 [6, 7, 7, 8, 10, 11, 11, 11,        # Predefined Constants               [6, 7, 7, 8, 10, 11, 11, 11,
 7, 3, 3, 6, 4, 254, 247, 246,       start_sequence = [6, 7, 7, 8, 10,    7, 3, 3, 6, 4, 254, 253, 252,
 248, 252, 252, 248, 245, 246,             11, 11, 11, 7, 3, 3, 6, 4]     251, 250, 245, 246, 247, 248,
 250, 254, 254, 253, 253, 254,       mid_sequence = [255, 0, 255, 255,    249, 254, 254, 254, 253, 253,
 255, 0, 255, 255, 255, 254,               255]                           254, 255, 255, 0, 255, 255,
 254, 254, 253, 253, 254, 255,       end_sequence = [0, 0, 0]             255, 254, 254, 254, 254, 253,
 254, 252, 252, 253, 254, 255,                                            252, 0, 0, 255, 254, 254,
 254, 253, 253, 254, 0, 0,           # Pattern 1: Decreasing by 1         254, 254, 253, 252, 251, 253,
 255, 254, 253, 254, 254, 254,       def decreasing_pattern(start,        253, 253, 254, 254, 254, 255,
 253, 253, 253, 254, 254, 254,            length):                        0, 2, 2, 2, 1, 2, 3, 4,
 255, 0, 2, 2, 2, 1, 2, 3,               return [start - i for i in       3, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 255,
 4, 3, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0,                      range(length)]              0, 255, 255, 255, 253, 253,
 255, 253, 253, 253, 253, 253,                                            253, 253, 253, 253, 253, 254,
 253, 253, 254, 255, 0, 0,           # Pattern 2: Increasing by 1         255, 0, 0, 1, 3, 4, 5, 6,
 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10,            def increasing_pattern(start,        7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 9, 6, 5,
 11, 12, 9, 6, 5, 7, 7, 2,                length):                        7, 7, 2, 252, 251, 250, 249,
 252, 249, 249, 251, 252, 249,           return [start + i for i in       246, 245, 247, 251, 252, 252,
 246, 245, 247, 251, 252, 252,                range(length)]              252, 253, 254, 255, 255, 0, 0, 0]
 252, 253, 254, 255, 255, 0, 0, 0]
                                     # Pattern 3: Repeating a number
                                     def repeat_pattern(num, times):
                                         return [num] * times

                                     # Generate the Sequence
                                     sequence = start_sequence
                                     sequence += decreasing_pattern
                                          (254, 5)
                                     sequence += increasing_pattern
                                          (245, 5)
                                     sequence += repeat_pattern(254,
                                          3)
                                     sequence += [253, 253, 254, 255]
                                     sequence += mid_sequence
                                     sequence += repeat_pattern(254,
                                          3)
                                     sequence += decreasing_pattern
                                          (254, 3)
                                     sequence += [0, 0, 255]
                                     sequence += repeat_pattern(254,
                                          3)
                                     sequence += decreasing_pattern
                                          (254, 4)
                                     sequence += [253, 253, 253, 254,
                                          254, 254, 255, 0]
                                     sequence += [2, 2, 2, 1, 2, 3, 4,
                                           3, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0]
                                     sequence += mid_sequence
                                     sequence += repeat_pattern(253,
                                          7)
                                     sequence += [254, 255, 0, 0, 1,
                                          3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12,
                                           9, 6, 5, 7, 7, 2]
                                     sequence += decreasing_pattern
                                          (252, 3)
                                     sequence += [249, 246, 245, 247,
                                          251, 252, 252, 252, 253, 254,
                                           255, 255]
                                     sequence += end_sequence

                                     # Final Output
                                     output = sequence



Figure 16: An example program for Audio-8-bit from L LAMA -3.1-405B where the model tries to
identify patterns in the input sequence, but the execution does not result in the input.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Input Sequence                         Generated Program                    Produced Sequence

 [140, 55, 142, 57, 144, 59, 146, 61,      a = 140                              [140, 142, 144, 146, 148, 150, 152,
 148, 63, 150, 65, 152, 67, 154, 69,       b = 55                               154, 156, 158, 55, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65,
 156, 71, 1, 73, 77, 75, 101, 77, 45,      c = 2                                67, 69, 71, 73, 1, 75, 77, 101, 45, 160,
 79, 160, 81, 29, 83, 187, 85, 236,        d = [a + i * c for i in range(10)    29, 187, 236, 65, 196, 18, 68, 139, 221,
 87, 65, 89, 196, 91, 18, 93, 68, 95,           ]                               165, 79, 81, 83, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170,
 139, 97, 221, 99, 165, 166, 167, 168,     e = [b + i * c for i in range(20)    171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 55, 57, 59,
 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175,             ]                               61, 63, 65, 67, 69, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79,
 176, 55, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67, 69,      f = [101, 45, 160, 29, 187, 236,     81, 83, 85, 87, 89, 91, 93, 95, 97, 99]
 71, 73, 75, 77, 79, 81, 83, 85, 87,            65,
 89, 91, 93, 95, 97, 99]                        196, 18, 68, 139, 221, 165]
                                           g = list(range(166, 177))
                                           h = [55 + i * 2 for i in range
                                                (23)]
                                           output = d[0:10] + e[0:10] + [1]
                                                + e[10:12]
                                                  + f + e[12:15] + g + h



Figure 17: An example program for a synthetic sequence from L LAMA -3.1-405B where the model
tries to identify patterns in the input sequence, but the execution does not result in the input.


             Input Sequence                         Generated Program                    Produced Sequence

 [235, 236, 240, 244, 248, 252, 255, 1,    a = [235, 236, 240, 244, 248,        [235, 236, 240, 244, 248, 252, 255, 1,
 4, 6, 8, 10, 10, 12, 14, 16,                   252, 255]                       4, 6, 8, 10, 10, 12, 14, 16,
 18, 16, 13, 9, 5, 4, 1, 254,              b = [1, 4, 6, 8, 10]                 18, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 16, 13,
 248, 244, 241, 240, 239, 239, 238, 236,   c = [10, 12, 14, 16, 18]             9, 5, 4, 1, 254, 248, 244, 241,
 234, 233, 234, 236, 237, 237, 237, 238,   d = [16, 13, 9, 5, 4, 1]             240, 239, 239, 238, 236, 234, 233, 234,
 241, 244, 246, 246, 246, 245, 245, 246,   e = [254, 248, 244, 241, 240,        236, 237, 234, 236, 237, 234, 236, 237,
 247, 248, 247, 246, 246, 246, 247, 247,        239]                            238, 241, 244, 246, 245, 245, 246, 247,
 246, 245, 243, 243, 244, 245, 246, 246,   f = [239, 238, 236, 234, 233]        248, 247, 246, 245, 245, 246, 247, 248,
 245, 245, 245, 247, 249, 249, 249, 250,   g = [234, 236, 237]                  247, 246, 243, 243, 244, 245, 246, 243,
 252, 254, 2, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14,             h = [238, 241, 244, 246]             243, 244, 245, 246, 249, 249, 249, 250,
 18, 22, 27, 30, 34, 37, 39, 40,           i = [245, 245, 246, 247, 248,        252, 254, 2, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14,
 41, 41, 40, 36, 28, 20, 17, 14,                247, 246]                       18, 22, 27, 30, 34, 37, 39, 40,
 10, 5, 1, 255, 252, 247, 244, 243,        j = [243, 243, 244, 245, 246]        41, 41, 40, 36, 28, 20, 17, 14,
 240, 235, 233, 234, 238, 242, 246, 249,   k = [249, 249, 249, 250, 252,        10, 5, 1, 255, 252, 247, 244, 243,
 253, 0, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15,            254]                            240, 235, 233, 234, 238, 242, 246, 249,
 19, 20, 19, 15, 12]                       l = [2, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14, 18, 22,     253, 0, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15,
                                                27, 30, 34, 37, 39, 40]         19, 20, 19, 15, 12]
                                           m = [41, 41, 40, 36, 28, 20, 17,
                                                14, 10, 5, 1]
                                           n = [255, 252, 247, 244, 243,
                                                240, 235]
                                           o = [233, 234, 238, 242, 246,
                                                249, 253]
                                           p = [0, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
                                                15, 19, 20]
                                           q = [19, 15, 12]

                                           output = a + b + c + c + d + e +
                                                f + g + g + g + h + i + i + j
                                                 + j + k + l + m + n + o + p
                                                + q



Figure 18: An example program for Audio-8-bit from L LAMA -3.1-405B where the model tries to
repeat the input sequence by breaking it to sub-sequences that are later concatenated but still errs.


                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Input Sequence                         Generated Program                    Produced Sequence

 [32, 102, 111, 114, 99, 101, 115, 32,    letters = ’                          [102, 111, 114, 99, 101, 115, 32, 105,
 105, 110, 32, 116, 104, 101, 32, 69,          abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz’     110, 32, 116, 104, 101, 32, 101, 97,
 97, 115, 116, 32, 116, 111, 32, 100,     numbers = ’0123456789’               115, 116, 32, 116, 111, 32, 100, 101,
 101, 97, 108, 32, 119, 105, 116, 104,    sentence = "Forces in the East to    97, 108, 32, 119, 105, 116, 104, 46,
 46, 32, 87, 101, 101, 107, 115, 32,            deal with. Weeks later         32, 119, 101, 101, 107, 115, 32, 108,
 108, 97, 116, 101, 114, 32, 74, 111,          Johnston would defy Jefferson   97, 116, 101, 114, 32, 106, 111, 104,
 104, 110, 115, 116, 111, 110, 32, 119,         Davis and surrender his        110, 115, 116, 111, 110, 32, 119, 111,
 111, 117, 108, 100, 32, 100, 101, 102,        forces to Sherman. Of course"   117, 108, 100, 32, 100, 101, 102, 121,
 121, 32, 74, 101, 102, 102, 101, 114,                                         32, 106, 101, 102, 102, 101, 114, 115,
 115, 111, 110, 32, 68, 97, 118, 105,     output = [ord(c.lower()) if c.       111, 110, 32, 100, 97, 118, 105, 115,
 115, 32, 97, 110, 100, 32, 115, 117,          lower() in letters else ord(c   32, 97, 110, 100, 32, 115, 117, 114,
 114, 114, 101, 110, 100, 101, 114, 32,        ) for c in sentence]            114, 101, 110, 100, 101, 114, 32, 104,
 104, 105, 115, 32, 102, 111, 114, 99,                                         105, 115, 32, 102, 111, 114, 99, 101,
 101, 115, 32, 116, 111, 32, 83, 104,                                          115, 32, 116, 111, 32, 115, 104, 101,
 101, 114, 109, 97, 110, 46, 32, 79,                                           114, 109, 97, 110, 46, 32, 111, 102,
 102, 32, 99, 111, 117, 114, 115, 101]                                         32, 99, 111, 117, 114, 115, 101]



Figure 19: An example program for the text modality from L LAMA -3.1-405B where the model
tries to produce the sequence by writing a text and converting it to Unicode bytes, but errs
slightly (the correct text being " forces in the East to deal with. Weeks later
Johnston would defy Jefferson Davis and surrender his forces to
Sherman. Of course").


                                                        31
