Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARDS ROBUST A LIGNMENT OF L ANGUAGE
M ODELS : D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUSTIFYING
D IRECT P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION
 Junkang Wu1вҲ— Yuexiang Xie2 Zhengyi Yang1 Jiancan Wu1вҖ 
 Jiawei Chen3 Jinyang Gao2 Bolin Ding2 Xiang Wang1 Xiangnan He4вҖ 
 1
   University of Science and Technology of China 2 Alibaba Group 3 Zhejiang University
 4
   MoE Key Lab of BIPC, University of Science and Technology of China
 {jkwu0909, wujcan, xiangnanhe}@gmail.com



                                                A BSTRACT

             This study addresses the challenge of noise in training datasets for Direct Prefer-
             ence Optimization (DPO), a method for aligning Large Language Models (LLMs)
             with human preferences. We categorize noise into pointwise noise, which includes
             low-quality data points, and pairwise noise, which encompasses erroneous data
             pair associations that affect preference rankings. Utilizing Distributionally Robust
             Optimization (DRO), we enhance DPOвҖҷs resilience to these types of noise. Our
             theoretical insights reveal that DPO inherently embeds DRO principles, confer-
             ring robustness to pointwise noise, with the regularization coefficient ОІ playing a
             critical role in its noise resistance. Extending this framework, we introduce Dis-
             tributionally Robustifying DPO (Dr. DPO), which integrates pairwise robustness
             by optimizing against worst-case pairwise scenarios. The novel hyperparameter
             ОІ вҖІ in Dr. DPO allows for fine-tuned control over data pair reliability, providing a
             strategic balance between exploration and exploitation in noisy training environ-
             ments. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that Dr. DPO substantially improves the
             quality of generated text and response accuracy in preference datasets, showcasing
             enhanced performance in both noisy and noise-free settings. The code is available
             at https://github.com/junkangwu/Dr_DPO.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Aligning Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Anil et al., 2023;
Bubeck et al., 2023) with human preferences is critical for their implementation in real-world
scenarios. Central to the alignment is the fine-tuning of LLMs using human feedback (Ouyang et al.,
2022), ensuring they adhere to human values and mitigate safety risks. Among the alignment methods,
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022) is becoming a widely
adopted technology. It initially learns a reward model on pairwise preference data, and optimizes
LLMs using the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) method. However,
its inherent reinforcement learning nature poses significant challenges to computational efficiency
and training stability (Rafailov et al., 2023a; Zhao et al., 2023). Addressing these, Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023a) eschews the explicit reward model learning, using human
preferences to train the LLMs directly. It achieves the same objectives (Azar et al., 2023) as RLHF
by learning an optimal proxy for each pointwise instance and simultaneously ranking preferences in
a pairwise manner, offering greater simplicity and training stability (Ivison et al., 2023).
While offering an effective solution by directly learning a policy from collected data, DPO inevitably
heightens the dependency on the data quality (Liu et al., 2023). However, training data is frequently
marred by noise, potentially posing a significant challenge to DPO. Here we delineate two primary
noise categories based on their origins:
    вҲ—
        Work done at Alibaba Group.
    вҖ 
        Jiancan Wu and Xiangnan He are the corresponding authors.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         : high quality review                     : low quality review

         : mistaken preferred review               : correct preferred review



          Review AпјҡвҖқFantastic experience                 Review BпјҡвҖқFantastic, uh,
          with delicious food and excellent              something food, and the service
          service!вҖқ                                      was... yeah."

                                                                      pointwise noise
  Prompt: Please rank the restaurant reviews dataset based on your experience:


         Review C: "The meal was                           Review D: "An amazing culinary
         quite good, and the staff                         adventure; the flavors were
                                          вүә
         was friendly."                                    extraordinary!"
                                                                                            Low ( Noisy )         High ( Clean )
    рқ’ҡрқ’Қ                                 incorrect   рқ’ҡрқ’ҳ
                                       ranking
                                                                          pairwise noise      Quality of pairwise preference


Figure 1: Left: An example illustrating pointwise and pairwise noise. Right: Comparison of gradients
between DPO and Dr. DPO under varying levels of pairwise noise.
вҖў Pointwise noise (Gunasekar et al., 2023) refers to low-quality data points containing irrelevant
  or incoherent information. Taking the movie reviews in Figure 1 (Left) as an example, it might
  manifest as reviews filled with meaningless chatter, thus rendering them uninformative.
вҖў Pairwise noise (Sharma et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2023), on the other hand, arises from erroneous
  associations between data pairs, leading to misjudged preference rankings. Revisiting the movie
  reviews in Figure 1 (Left), it is evident in misranked reviews where an inferior review (yl ) is
  incorrectly rated higher than a superior one (yw ).

The presence of noisy preferences naturally raises a critical question: How robust is DPO against
pointwise and pairwise noise? To answer this, we examine DPO through the lens of Distributionally
Robust Optimization (DRO) (Namkoong & Duchi, 2017; Duchi & Namkoong, 2018). At the core
of DRO is training a model across a distributional family, which is determined by an empirical
distribution within a robust radius О·. As a result, DRO endows the model with enhanced robustness
w.r.t. distributional uncertainty, usually caused by the data noise. By incorporating DRO principles,
we can assess the resilience of DPO to the pointwise and pairwise noise. Specifically, our DRO lens
on DPO offers insightful findings as follows:

 вҖў DPO is equivalent to applying DRO on the reward function. The principal contribution of
   DPO is deriving the optimal policy for PPO in a closed-form expression. This achievement
   facilitates the implicit determination of a worst-case distribution for optimization, guided by
   the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence criterion. Such an approach endows DPO with intrinsic
   pointwise robustness, enabling it to explore a better policy model rather than relying solely on the
   reference model.
 вҖў The DPOвҖҷs ОІ and DROвҖҷs О· share an inverse relationship, highlighting noise levels in the
   reference model. Through DRO theory, we establish that higher noise in the reference model
   necessitates a larger search radius, corresponding to a larger О· (or equivalently, a smaller ОІ). This
   inverse relationship provides a clear measure of the noise level in the reference model.

These findings elucidate the strengths of DPO in ensuring pointwise robustness. Recent effort
(Chowdhury et al., 2024) has started addressing pairwise noise in DPO frameworks; however, this
method relies on explicit noise estimation, a process that is computationally intensive and may
not fully capture noise complexities. Building on these insights, we introduce the Distributionally
Robustifying DPO (Dr. DPO) 1 framework, aiming to incorporate pairwise robustness within the DPO
paradigm. The core idea is optimizing against the worst-case pairwise scenarios, enabling the models
to implicitly adjust the importance of data pairs in the gradient space and eliminate the explicit noise
estimation. Towards the adjustment, Dr. DPO introduces a simple hyperparameter ОІ вҖІ вҲҲ (0, +вҲһ) to
modulate the loss function, balancing between exploration and exploitation of pairwise preferences.
ОІ вҖІ serves as a pivotal вҖңknobвҖқ, allowing the navigation from a conservative strategy that diminishes the
influence of potentially noisy pairs (e.g., ОІ вҖІ = 0.5) to a risk-tolerant stance that leverages such pairs
(e.g., ОІ вҖІ = 2). Consequently, Dr. DPO fosters a more resilient optimization process that effectively
mitigates the influence of both pointwise and pairwise noise.
    1
      The abbreviation вҖңDr. DPOвҖқ not only encapsulates вҖңDistributionally Robustifying DPOвҖқ but is playfully
intended to echo the abbreviation for вҖқDoctor,вҖқ adding a quirky element to the naming.


                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In a nutshell, our contribution is the development of Dr. DPO, which robustifies DPO with just a
single additional line of code. Empirical evaluations reveal that Dr. DPO significantly enhances
performance across diverse settings, such as controlling the sentiment in generated text and improving
the response quality in single-turn dialogues, under both noisy and noise-free conditions.

2   P RELIMINARIES
Bradley-Terry Model. Given a context x within a finite space of contexts X , we employ the
policy ПҖ(y|x) to independently generate a pair of actions (y1 , y2 ). These actions are presented to
human raters, who then indicate their preference, with the preferred action labeled as yw and the less
preferred as yl , satisfying yw вӘ° yl . Although we cannot directly observe the latent reward model
rвҲ— (x, y) that underlies these preferences, the Bradley-Terry (BT) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952)
offers a well-established approach for modeling pairwise comparisons, which is given as:
                                                       exp (rвҲ— (x, y1 ))
                           pвҲ— (y1 вӘ° y2 |x) =                                       .                   (1)
                                               exp(rвҲ— (x, y1 ) + exp(rвҲ— (x, y2 )))
                                  (i)    (i)                  вҲ—
Given the dataset O = (x(i) , yw , yl )Ni=1 sampled from p , we can parametrize a reward model
rП• (x, y) and estimate the parameters by optimizing the following logistic regression loss:
                    LR (rП• , O) = вҲ’E(x,yw ,yl )вҲјO [log Пғ(rП• (x, yw ) вҲ’ rП• (x, yl ))],       (2)
where Пғ(В·) is the sigmoid function. As the size of dataset O grows, the empirical distribution of the
dataset O converges to the underlying distribution pвҲ— , and the reward model rП• converges to the true
reward model rвҲ— .
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022). The standard
RLHF paradigm is composed of three phases: i) supervised fine-tuning, ii) reward modeling, and iii)
RL fine-tuning. Using the reward model rП• learned from the reward modeling, we can then fine-tune
the policy ПҖОё by optimizing the following objective:
                    max ExвҲјO,yвҲјПҖОё (y|x) [rП• (x, y)] вҲ’ ОІDKL [ПҖОё (y|x)||ПҖref (y|x)].                     (3)
                      ПҖОё

In practice, both the language model policy ПҖОё and the reference policy ПҖref are typically initialized to
the same supervised fine-tuning (SFT) model ПҖSFT . Here, ОІ is a parameter that controls the strength
of the regularization term, and DKL represents the KL divergence penalty used to regularize the policy
ПҖОё to be close to ПҖref .
Directed Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023a). DPO offers an alternative
approach to the RL paradigm described above. It establishes a functional mapping between the
reward model and the optimal policy under a KL divergence constraint with the following formulation:
                                                    ПҖОё (y|x)
                                 r(x, y) = ОІ log              + ОІ log Z(x),                            (4)
                                                    ПҖref(y|x)
               P
where Z(x) = y ПҖref (y|x) exp(r(x, y)/ОІ) is the partition function. By incorporating this reward
into the BT model, the DPO objective enables the comparison of response pairs, facilitating the
discrimination between preferred and dispreferred actions, given by:
                                                             ПҖОё (yw | x)           ПҖОё (yl | x)
          LDPO (ПҖОё ; ПҖref ) = вҲ’E(x,yw ,yl )вҲјO [log Пғ(ОІ log                 вҲ’ ОІ log               )].   (5)
                                                             ПҖref (yw | x)         ПҖref (yl | x)

Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) (Namkoong & Duchi, 2017; Duchi & Namkoong,
2018). DRO provides a strategic framework to effectively mitigate the uncertainty inherent in
training data. It achieves this by optimizing for the worst-case expected loss across a set of potential
distributions Q. These distributions are confined within a robustness radius О· anchored around the
empirical training distribution Q0 , and are bounded by a prescribed divergence metric DП• . The
formal formulation of DRO can be succinctly expressed as follows:
                           LDRO = max EQ [L(x; Оё)],           s.t. DП• (Q, Q0 ) вүӨ О·,                    (6)
                                     Q

where L(x; Оё) represents the training loss for an input x. Intuitively, models employing DRO exhibit
increased robustness due to the presence of Q that acts as an вҖңadversaryвҖқ, optimizing the model under
a distribution set with adversarial perturbations instead of a single training distribution.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     A NALYZING DPOвҖҷ S P OINTWISE ROBUSTNESS
In this section, we explore DPOвҖҷs robustness to pointwise noise, analyzing its response to noise to
identify key strengths and vulnerabilities. We assess how noise degrades performance and leverage
insights from DRO to understand DPOвҖҷs underlying resilience mechanisms.

3.1   P OINTWISE N OISE I MPAIRS DPO P ERFORMANCE
                                                                                  1.0
We begin by investigating the impact of pointwise noise on DPO                    0.9
through experiments on the IMDB sentiment dataset (Maas et al.,                   0.8


                                                                         Reward
2011). Following the setup in (Havrilla et al., 2023), we fine-tune the
                                                                                  0.7
GPT-2-large (Radford et al., 2019) model and use SiEBERT (Hart-                                     High data quality (DPO)
mann et al., 2023), a specialized variant of RoBERTa-large (Liu                   0.6               Low data quality (DPO)
et al., 2019), for reward calculation. Pointwise noise is introduced              0.5
exclusively during the SFT stage by incorporating responses gener-                      0   2   4      6    8      10   12    14
                                                                                                     KL( || ref)
ated by the unrefined GPT-2-large model, resulting in lower quality
data for this stage, while the data used in the DPO stage remains             Figure 2: Impact of pointwise
unchanged. To assess DPOвҖҷs robustness to this pointwise noise,                noise on the expected reward
we evaluate each algorithm by examining the trade-off between the             frontier and KL divergence in
achieved reward and the KL divergence from the reference policy.              DPO (ОІ = 0.1).
Figure 2 reveals that beyond a KL(ПҖОё ||ПҖref ) threshold of 10.0, both models converge in terms of
reward. Notably, the DPO model trained with high-quality data (blue points) significantly outperforms
its low-quality data counterpart (orange points), highlighting the critical impact of data quality on
optimizing model performance.

3.2   P OINTWISE ROBUSTNESS IN R EWARD M ODELING

In Section 3.1, we explore how pointwise noise negatively affects individual instance rewards. To
address this issue and enhance the robustness of LLMs, we propose integrating DRO during the
reward modeling stage. We define the Reward Modeling DRO (RM-DRO) objective, which optimizes
the expected reward under the worst-case noise distribution within a specified ambiguity set:
                  max ExвҲјO,yвҲјПҖОё (y|x) [rП• (x, y)] s.t. DП• (ПҖОё (y|x), ПҖref (y|x)) вүӨ О·.                                              (7)
                   ПҖОё

The direct consequence of pointwise noise is the resultant unreliability of the reference model (SFT).
By adopting RM-DRO, we aim to maximize a surrogate objective that accounts for various potential
distributions within a robustness radius О· around the reference distribution ПҖref (y|x), measured by
the distance metric DП• . With this formulation, we provide a fresh perspective on DPO.
A. DPO is Implicitly a Pointwise DRO.
Theorem 3.1 (Optimal Reward Function under KL Divergence). Let the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence
                    between
                            policy ПҖОё and reference policy ПҖref be defined as: DKL (ПҖОё |ПҖref ) =
R             ПҖОё (x)
  ПҖОё (x) log ПҖref (x) dx. Optimizing the RM-DRO objective as defined in Equation (7) yields an
optimal reward rKL (x, y) given by:
                                                            ПҖОё (y|x)
                                 rKL (x, y) = ОІ вҲ— (О·) log             вҲ’ Оұ.                                                         (8)
                                                            ПҖref(y|x)
Here, Оұ, ОІ are Lagrange multipliers, ОІ вҲ— (О·) denotes the optimal value of ОІ that minimizes Equation
(7), acting as the regularization coefficient in DPO. By deriving the optimal value of Оұ, given by:
                                                           rОё (y|x)
                              ОұвҲ— = вҲ’ОІ log ExвҲјO,yвҲјПҖref [exp(         )],                         (9)
                                                               ОІ
Equation 8 can be re-expressed to match the ultimate form of the reward function in Equation 4.

Please refer to Appendix B.1 for detailed proofs and Appendix B.2 for the formal proof. For a broader
discussion on optimal reward functions under general П•-divergences, see Appendix C.1.
Consistent with the reward function formulation in Rafailov et al. (2023a), Theorem 3.1 not only
reaffirms established results but also introduces several novel insights, as outlined below:


                                                    4
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         1.0
                                                                          64          noise ratio=10%
                                                                                      noise ratio=20%
         0.9                                                                          noise ratio=30%
                                                                          62          noise ratio=40%


                                                           Win Rate (%)
                    noise ratio=20%
Reward

         0.8                                                              60
                    noise ratio=40%
                    noise ratio=60%                                       58
                    noise ratio=80%
         0.7        noise ratio=100%
                                                                          56
         0.6 10 4          10 3        10 2     10 1                           10 4              10 3   10 2           10 1

           (a) Performance w/ different ОІ on IMDB.                             (b) Performance w/ different ОІ on HH.

 Figure 3: (a) Comparative analysis of the effect of pointwise noise on the expected reward frontier for
 different ОІ values on IMDB dataset. (b) Comparative analysis of the effect of pointwise noise on on
 the win rate for different ОІ values on HH dataset. The star (вӢҶ, вӢҶ, вӢҶ) indicates the optimal ОІ selection
 for the corresponding pointwise noise ratio.

Why DPO is Robust to Pointwise Noise. We propose that the reference distribution closely mirrors
the empirical training distribution, given the pre-training step (SFT) common to both RLHF and DPO
methods. This ensures the reference distribution in the DPO phase accurately reflects the training data
noise. In terms of DRO, while the reference model ПҖref may not be entirely reliable, the implicit robust
framework of DPO counters data perturbations effectively. Specifically, the вҖңworst-case distributionвҖқ
is defined as the distribution that maximizes risk within established divergence constraints, analogous
to an adversarial noise model in DRO. Varying ОІ enables DPO to exhibit varying search space for a
better ПҖОё , leading to improved performance. For more discussion about the connection between DPO
and DRO, please refer to Appendix C.2.
 Moreover, the incorporation of DRO provides a new interpretation of the coefficient ОІ in DPO,
 transforming it from a mere heuristic design into a вҖңnoise reflectorвҖқ. We provide Lemma 3.2 to
 disclose the relationship between ОІ and О·.
 B. The Optimal Value of ОІ Reflects the Noise within the SFT Model.
 Lemma 3.2. (Faury et al., 2020, Lemma 5) The optimal ОІ вҲ— (О·) in DPO is monotonically decreasing
 with respect to О· and obeys the following relationship:
                                                          q
                                              ОІ вҲ— (О·) =    VПҖref [r(x, y)]/2О·,                                                (10)

 where VПҖref [r(x, y)] = y ПҖref (x, y)(r(y|x) вҲ’ y ПҖref (y|x)r(x, y))2 denotes the variance of the
                        P                        P

 reward model r(x, y) under the reference distribution ПҖref .

 Lemma 3.2 elucidates the inverse correlation between the parameter ОІ and the robustness radius О·.
 Specifically, as noise within the model increases, the required search space expands, necessitating a
 larger О· and consequently a smaller optimal ОІ.
 To empirically validate this relationship, we conducted experiments on the IMDB dataset, as outlined
 in Section 3.1. In these experiments, the noise ratio is controlled by the proportion of low-quality
 pairs (yw , yl ) introduced into the training data, generated by the unrefined GPT-2 model. Figure 3a
 shows that models trained with lower ОІ values (e.g., 0.01) outperform those with higher ОІ values
 (e.g., 0.1) when trained on 100% low-quality data. This is because a lower ОІ allows for a larger
 search space to counteract significant pointwise noise in the SFT model.
We also conducted experiments on the HH dataset, injecting pointwise noise during the SFT phase by
incorporating rejected responses into the training samples. Importantly, during the DPO phase, the
positive and negative samples remained consistent, ensuring noise was introduced only during SFT.
The noise ratio is determined by the proportion of rejected responses used as training samples during
SFT. As shown in Figure 3b, the optimal value of ОІ decreases as the noise ratio increases, indicating
that higher noise levels in SFT require a smaller ОІ for optimal performance.
 For detailed experimental settings and procedures for both datasets, please refer to Appendix C.3,
 where more comprehensive explanations are provided.


                                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  1.0                                                      1.0
                  0.9                                                      0.9
                  0.8


         Reward


                                                                  Reward
                                                                           0.8
                  0.7                         0% Flipped pairs             0.7               10% Filpped pairs
                                              10% Flipped pairs                              20% Filpped pairs
                  0.6                         30% Flipped pairs            0.6               30% Filpped pairs
                  0.5                                                                        40% Filpped pairs
                        0   2       4     6     8   10 12 14                     10 4        10 3      10 2      10 1
                                        KL( || ref)
Figure 4: Left: Impact of pairwise noise on the expected reward frontier and KL divergence in
DPO (ОІ = 0.1). Right: Comparative analysis of the effect of pairwise noise on the expected reward
frontier for different ОІ values.

4     D R . DPO: T OWARD PAIRWISE ROBUSTNESS
In this section, we investigate the impact of pairwise noise and introduce Dr. DPO as a mitigation
strategy. We conclude with a theoretical examination of its robustness against such noise.

4.1   PAIRWISE N OISE I MPAIRS DPO C ONVERGENCE AND P ERFORMANCE

We previously explored DPOвҖҷs pointwise robustness, while recent work (Chowdhury et al., 2024) has
examined its resilience to pairwise noise. However, methods that rely on explicit noise estimation may
overlook complex noise behaviors. We thus empirically examine how pairwise noise affects DPOвҖҷs
performance. Similar to the experimental settings in Section 3.1, we corrupt the dataset with pairwise
                                                                                       (i) (i)
noise by randomly swapping pairs (yw , yl ) in the preference dataset O = {x(i) , yw , yl }N      i=1 . As
illustrated in Figure 4 (Left), when exposed to elevated levels of pairwise noise (specifically, 10% and
30% label flipping), DPO exhibits a diminished rate of increase in KL(ПҖОё ||ПҖref ) over an equivalent
number of training epochs (epoch = 1). This pattern is indicative of a decelerated convergence rate
in terms of reward value, especially when compared to the trend of the model trained on noise-free
data (0% flipped pairs). Thus the overall performance of DPO drops significantly.
Despite its effectiveness in mitigating pointwise noise through the adjustment of ОІ, DPO still suffers
from the issue of pairwise noise. As shown in Figure 4 (Right), the model trained with 40% flipped
data exhibits a significant performance degradation compared to the model trained with noise-free
data (0% flipped). Even when the model is trained with a lower ОІ value, it still fails to achieve the
same level of performance as the model trained with noise-free data. This observation reveals DPOвҖҷs
vulnerability to pairwise noise, motivating enhancements to its robustness against such interference.

4.2   D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUSTIFYING DPO

Building upon the principles of DRO, we introduce the Distributionally Robustifying DPO (Dr. DPO)
framework, designed to enhance DPOвҖҷs resilience to pairwise noise while preserving its inherent
robustness to pointwise noise. The Dr. DPO objective is formulated as follows:
                            max
                              вҖІ
                                E(x,yw ,yl )вҲјOвҖІ [h(x, yw , yl )]                  s.t. DП• (OвҖІ , O) вүӨ О· вҖІ .              (11)
                                O

Here, h(x, yw , yl ) = log Пғ(rП• (x, yw ) вҲ’ rП• (x, yl )) denotes the log-likelihood objective of dataset
point. The П•-divergence, denoted as DП• (OвҖІ , O), quantifies the discrepancy between the hypothetical
distribution OвҖІ and the dataset distribution O. Additionally, О· вҖІ signifies the robustness radius, which
quantifies the degree to which the model can withstand perturbations.
Theorem 4.1. Consider the scenario where the KL divergence is employed to measure the discrepancy
between the hypothetical distribution OвҖІ and dataset distribution O , we derive the ultimate loss
function for Dr. DPO as follows:

                                                                                        hDPO (x, yw , yl )
                            LDr. DPO (ПҖОё ; ПҖref ) = вҲ’ОІ вҖІ log EO [exp(                                      )].          (12)
                                                                                              ОІвҖІ

                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where hDPO represents the log-likelihood in the DPO framework, defined as:
                                                        ПҖОё (yw | x)           ПҖОё (yl | x)
                     hDPO (x, yw , yl ) = log Пғ(ОІ log                 вҲ’ ОІ log               ),             (13)
                                                        ПҖref (yw | x)         ПҖref (yl | x)
with ОІ and ОІ вҖІ being regularization coefficient respectively.

Please check Appendix B.3 for detailed proofs. In contrast to the objective function described in
Equation 7, our Dr. DPO method specifically targets the pairwise noise present within the dataset.
                                                                       (i) (i)
Rather than assigning a uniform weight of N1 to each instance (x(i) , yw , yl ) (Rafailov et al., 2023a),
Dr. DPO seeks to reweight these instances by an optimal distribution OвҖІ . This approach is driven
by the intention to capture the incorrect pairs in the data, thereby enhancing the robustness of the
resulting policy.
Theorem 4.2 (Upper Bound for Dr. DPO). Let hDPO вҲҲ [a, b] and LN         Dr. DPO represents the Dr. DPO
loss on N samples. Given a hypothetical distribution OвҖІ satisfying DKL (OвҖІ , O) вүӨ О· вҖІ to dataset
distribution O, we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:
                                                                   вҖІ
                                         LOвҖІ вүӨ LN
                                                Dr. DPO + B(Оҙ, N, ОІ ),                                     (14)
where:                                                                      r
                                     вҖІ    2b exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )                 N   1
                          B(Оҙ, N, ОІ ) =                                           ln .                     (15)
                                        N вҲ’ 1 + exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )              2   Оҙ

Please check Appendix B.4 for detailed proofs. In scenarios involving pairwise noise, consider OвҖІ
as the вҖңidealвҖқ distribution that discerns the correct ranking between pairwise instances accurately.
Theorem 4.2 suggests the ideal loss relative to OвҖІ is upper bounded by the proposed Dr. DPO loss.
This bound is achieved when B(Оҙ, N, ОІ вҖІ ) approaches zero, or in other words, the number of samples
N approaches infinity. Furthermore, this upper bound can offer guidance in real-world applications.
For instance, in conjunction with Lemma 3.2, we infer that increasing the robustness radius results in
a decrease in ОІ вҖІ , consequently increasing B(Оҙ, N, ОІ вҖІ ). In such a case, to ensure a tight upper bound,
it becomes necessary to enlarge the sample size N . This relationship between robustness radius, ОІ вҖІ ,
and N provides insights for guiding the training of LLM models to achieve desired performance.

4.3   W HY IS D R . DPO ROBUST TO PAIRWISE N OISE ?

Our approach extends the analysis presented in Rafailov et al. (2023a). To understand the resilience
of Dr. DPO to pairwise noise, we examine the gradient of its loss function, denoted вҲҮОё LDr. DPO :

вҲҮОё LDr. DPO (ПҖОё ; ПҖref ) = вҲ’ОІE(x,yw ,yl )вҲјO [ w(x, yw , yl ) Пғ(rМӮОё (x, yl ) вҲ’ rМӮОё (x, yw )) (вҲҮОё,yw вҲ’ вҲҮОё,yl )],
                                                                  Boost mismatched pair gradients.
                                                 Reduce incorrect pairвҖҷs impact.
where rМӮОё (x, y) = ОІ log ПҖПҖОё(y|x)
                              ref (y|x)
                                        represents the reward function implicitly learned by the policy ПҖОё ,
relative to a reference policy ПҖref . In this framework, вҲҮОё,yw and вҲҮОё,yl are gradients increasing the
probability of the вҖңchosenвҖқ action yw and decreasing it for the вҖңrejectedвҖқ action yl , respectively. The
factor Пғ(rМӮОё (x, yl ) вҲ’ rМӮОё (x, yw )) serves to amplify the gradient contributions from mismatched action
pairs, which is a principal aspect of the Dr. DPOвҖҷs design aimed at enhancing learning from compara-
                                                                                                          вҖІ
tive feedback. Conversely, the function w(x, yw , yl ), defined as w(x, yw , yl ) = EOexp(h(x,y w ,yl )/ОІ )
                                                                                        [exp(h(x,yw ,yl )/ОІ вҖІ )]
(cf. Appendix B.5), acts to mitigate the influence of these incorrect pairings. It achieves this by
preferentially weighting correct action pairs over incorrect ones, thus refining the policy update
mechanism. Moreover, the parameter ОІ вҖІ does not require intensive tuning; setting it to a default value
of 1 typically yields stable enhancements. Remarkably, Dr. DPO is straightforward to implement,
requiring only an additional line of code with negligible computational overhead.
A Toy Example of How Dr. DPO Works. Consider a training set that contains two samples
from both the unperturbed and perturbed datasets. Their corresponding values are assumed to
be [h(x1 , y1,w , y1,l ), h(x2 , y2,w , y2,l )] = [вҲ’0.1, вҲ’1.0]. According to the formula h(x, yw , yl ) =
log Пғ(r+ вҲ’ rвҲ’ ), the label flip in the second sample leads to h(x2 , y2,w , y2,l ) < log Пғ(0) = вҲ’0.6931.
(1) In the case of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), the sum is: вҲ’0.1 + (вҲ’1.0) = вҲ’1.1.
(2) Under Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO), when ОІ вҖІ = 0.1, we have the weights


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Preference accuracy and win-rate comparison on the Anthropic HH dataset with various
levels of noise. The columns indicate the performance on both the noise-free dataset and the datasets
with inverted response labels, denoted by their respective flip ratios. The performance improvements
of cDPO, IPO, and Dr. DPO over DPO are also presented.

                                   Preference Accuracy                                   Win Rate
 Models
           0% Flipped    10% Flipped 20% Flipped 30% Flipped       40% Flipped   0% Flipped   40% Flipped
     DPO   63.63         62.27         61.28         58.54         55.23         54.36         49.00
    cDPO   63.48вҲ’0.23%   62.67+0.64%   61.48+0.32%   58.69+0.27%   55.31+0.15%   51.46вҲ’5.33%   45.68вҲ’6.78%
     IPO   65.95+3.64%   64.82+4.10%   63.52+3.65%   61.45+4.98%   56.64+2.55%   50.81вҲ’6.53%   54.82+11.88%
    rDPO   64.37+1.16%   62.72+0.72%   62.53+2.04%   60.56+3.45%   57.11+3.40%   52.15вҲ’4.06%   53.54+9.26%
Dr. DPO    66.22+4.07%   65.38+5.00%   64.19+4.74%   62.65+7.02%   58.83+6.52%   56.67+4.25%   61.65+25.81%

[w(x1 , y1,w , y1,l ), w(x2 , y2,w , y2,l )] вүҲ [2.0, 0.0]. Therefore, the outcome is: (вҲ’0.1 Г— 2.0) + (вҲ’1.0 Г—
0.0) = вҲ’0.2, which is greater than вҲ’1.1. w(x, y) places more emphasis on the unperturbed sample,
making the weight allocation more reasonable and also qualifying as a worst-case distribution.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct an empirical assessment of Dr. DPO to evaluate its ability to mitigate noise
impacts in preference datasets and to improve performance in noise-free environments. We outline our
experimental design, including the datasets used, evaluation metrics, and comparative benchmarks.
Our results underscore Dr. DPOвҖҷs effectiveness, supporting its utility in relevant scenarios.

5.1    H OW W ELL CAN D R . DPO R ESIST THE PAIRWISE N OISE ?

Datasets and Setup. We conduct experiments on two datasets: IMDB (Maas et al., 2011) and
Anthropic HH (Bai et al., 2022). The IMDB dataset is widely utilized for sentiment analysis
tasks. The Anthropic HH dataset consists of approximately 170,000 dialogues between humans
and automated assistants. The objectives of these experiments were twofold: firstly, to evaluate the
robustness of the proposed Dr. DPO against pairwise noise; and secondly, to investigate whether
Dr. DPO exhibits superior performance on noise-free datasets. To achieve the first objective, we
introduce random inversions between selected and rejected responses in the training data at varying
noise levelsвҖ”specifically, with probabilities of 10%, 20%, 30%, and 40%. For the second objective,
we benchmark Dr. DPO against other DPO-related baselines to discern its relative advantages. Unless
stated otherwise, all experiments in this study were conducted using the Pythia-2.8B model (Biderman
et al., 2023). Please refer to Appendix D for more details.
Baselines. We compare Dr. DPO with four baseline methods: (i) The standard DPO, which is the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) method for directly optimizing the policy and reward model; (ii) Conservative
DPO (cDPO (Rafailov et al., 2023b)), a variant introduced by the authors of DPO to address scenarios
with probabilistically flipped labels by incorporating a binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss; and (iii) IPO
(Azar et al., 2023), an innovative approach that enables learning directly from preferences, bypassing
both the reward modeling phase and reliance on the BT model. (iv) rDPO (Chowdhury et al., 2024)
is a variant of DPO that de-biases the effect of preference noise and makes the policy robust.
Metrics. We adopt two metrics, Preference Accuracy, and Win-Rate, in the experiments. The
Preference Accuracy measures the proportion of test instances from the Anthropic HH dataset where
the modelвҖҷs predicted reward for the preferred response, r(x, yw ), exceeds that of the less preferred
alternative, r(x, yl ). We further draw on the evaluation framework introduced by Rafailov et al.
(2023a) to calculate the Win Rate. This metric assesses how often the GPT-4 model selects a response
generated by our model rather than the chosen response within the dataset. The Win-Rate computation
is specifically designed for the single-turn dialogue portion of HH datasetвҖҷs test subset.
Dr. DPO Outperforms Across Noise Levels. Table 1 illustrates the effect of noise on preference
accuracy, showing a decrease from 63.63% to 55.23% as the label flip ratio rises from 0% to 40%.
This indicates a deteriorated ability to distinguish between responses with increasing noise. In a
noise-free environment, cDPO achieves a preference accuracy of 63.48%, which falls to 55.31%
at a 40% noise level, highlighting the limited impact of BCE loss adjustments. In comparison, the
IPO method consistently outperforms DPO by an average of 3.78% in accuracy, proving its efficacy.


                                                     8
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        0% Flipped                              40% Flipped
                cDPO                                     7.5% vscDPO                                                 0.65
               vs DPO 8.8%                83.6%                  DPO 5.63%           86.3%     8.13%                            DPO ( =0.1)
                                                                                                                                DPO ( * )                                              0.64


                                                                                                                                                                 Preferencd Accuracy
                                                                                                                     0.60       Dr. DPO ( =0.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.62


                                                                                                          Win Rate
                  IPO                                            IPO 10.3% 76.9%
               vs DPO 16.8% 68.8%                       14.4% vs DPO                          12.5%                  0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.60                              0% Flipped
                                                                                                                     0.50                                                                                                10% Flipped
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.58                              20% Flipped
        Dr. DPO 18.2%                     70.4% 11.3% Dr.vsDPO
                                                           DPO 20.1% 71.1% 8.8%                                      0.45                                                                                                30% Flipped
         vs DPO                                                                                                                                                                        0.56                              40% Flipped
                             0    20     40 60 80 100          0 20 40 60 80 100                                      0.4              =0.3        =0.5   =0.7
                                                                                                                              JSD                                                              1.0    2.0         3.0                  5.0
                                  Win          Tie        Lose                Win       Tie        Lose                                   Divergence                                                                0


   Figure 5: MT-Bench evaluates DPO and its variants using GPT-4, showing Win, Tie, and Loss rates
   at 0% and 40% pairwise noise levels in Figures 1-2. Figure 3 illustrates Dr. DPOвҖҷs win rate across
   different П•-divergences, while Figure 4 presents its Preference accuracy for varying ОІ вҖІ values.
                                       10% Flipped                                   20% Flipped                       0.62
                                                                                                                                          30% Flipped                                   0.62               40% Flipped
Preference Accuracy


                      0.62                                             0.62
                                                                                                                       0.58                                                             0.58
                      0.58                                             0.58
                                              DPO
                      0.54                    Dr. DPO                  0.54                                            0.54                                                             0.54

                       0.5                                              0.5                                             0.5                                                              0.5
                                  20     40      60      80      100            20     40     60    80      100                      20       40     60   80     100                                  20     40         60    80       100
                                 Training Progress (%)                        Training Progress (%)                                 Training Progress (%)                                            Training Progress (%)

                             Figure 6: Preference accuracy across training steps for different levels of pairwise noise.
   rDPO reports a 3% accuracy gain over DPO. Notably, Dr. DPO exhibits outstanding noise resistance,
   achieving the highest preference accuracies of 66.22% in the absence of noise and 58.83% with 40%
   noise, superior to DPO, cDPO, IPO, and rDPO.
   Dr. DPO Surpasses Other Methods. We evaluated the response quality of various modelsвҖ”DPO,
   cDPO, IPO, rDPO, and Dr. DPOвҖ”across different noise levels. Table 1 shows that in a noiseless
   setting, DPO leads with a 56.67% win rate. However, as noise increases, both DPO and cDPOвҖҷs
   performance declines, whereas Dr. DPO excels, achieving a 61.65% win rate.
  Dr. DPOвҖҷs Performance in the 0% Flipped Case. The 0% flipped case indicates no intentional label
  flips were introduced, representing the original dataset. Nevertheless, this does not mean the dataset
  is free of label noise. Dr. DPO continues to outperform DPO and IPO in this scenario, suggesting
  the presence of inherent label noise in the dataset. This observation aligns with rDPOвҖҷs findings
  (Chowdhury et al., 2024), where a default flip rate of 0.1 improved performance on the HH dataset,
  further justifying the design of Dr. DPO.

    5.2                      C OMPARING D R . DPO WITH BASELINES ON MT-B ENCH

  To evaluate the generation quality of DPO and its variants, we conduct pairwise comparisons using
  the MT-Bench framework (Zheng et al., 2023). This framework, grounded in GPT-4, reliably aligns
  with human evaluative preferences, exhibiting an agreement rate exceeding 80% on the quality of
  outputs from LLMs. Adhering to the established MT-Bench guidelines (Zheng et al., 2023) 2 , our
  approach involves generating model responses at a controlled temperature of 0.7 and restricting the
  token count to a maximum of 1024. We systematically compare the outputs from the base DPO
  model and its variants, which have been fine-tuned with 0% and 40% flipped pairs on the HH dataset.
  Figure 5 (1,2) shows that Dr. DPO consistently outperforms DPO in both noise-free and noisy
  datasets, becoming the only method to exceed DPOвҖҷs performance in the MT-Bench evaluation.
  While IPO slightly improves over DPO in the noise-free dataset, it underperforms in the noisy dataset
  where DPO prevails. In contrast, Dr. DPO demonstrates robust, significant enhancements in both
  conditions, highlighting its superior ability to generate high-quality responses.

    5.3                      A BLATION S TUDIES ON D R . DPO

  We conduct ablation studies to investigate the impact of the П•-divergence and ОІ вҖІ on the performance
  of Dr. DPO, and provide the convergence analysis. More ablation studies are listed in Appendix D.
     2
       https://github.com/lm-sys/FastChat/blob/main/fastchat/llm_judge/gen_
   model_answer.py


                                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Comparison of KL Divergence and Win Table 3: Comparison of Model Performance via
Rate of Model Performance at Different Noise Ratios Win Rate on the LLaMA2-13B.

Noise Ratio   Loss Function   Win Rate   KL      ОІ                     Loss Function    Win Rate
              DPO             54.36      19.68   0.1                   DPO              59.05
    0%
              Dr.DPO          56.67      20.01   0.1                   cDPO             53.52
                                                        Llama2-13b
              DPO             49.00      8.32    0.1                   rDPO             60.54
    40%
              Dr.DPO          61.65      7.96    0.1                   Dr.DPO           63.67



Evaluating the Impact of П•-divergence on Dr. DPO. Figure 5 (3) explores Dr. DPOвҖҷs performance
with various П•-divergences, including Jensen-Shannon (JS) and Оұ-divergence. Demonstrated results
indicate that Dr. DPO consistently outperforms the baseline DPO when ОІ вҖІ is set to 1.0, serving as
a viable default without requiring further adjustments. This is in contrast to the baseline ОІ = 0.1
setting, where although improvements can be realized by manually tuning ОІ вҲ— , the process becomes
time-consuming and impractical for regular use.
Evaluating the Impact of ОІ вҖІ . Figure 5 (4) illustrates how varying ОІ вҖІ across different noise levels
affects preference accuracy. The experimental results reveal a trend wherein increased noise levels
correspond to a reduced optimal value for ОІ вҖІ , which is consistent with our theoretical analysis
provided in Section 3. Consequently, we propose a default setting of ОІ вҖІ = 1.0 for balancing accuracy
and robustness in the presence of noise.
Convergence Analysis. Figure 6 shows that Dr. DPO not only converges faster but also surpasses
DPO in the early training stage, attributed to its superior management of flipped noisy pairs. This
enhancement meets our goal of boosting DPOвҖҷs robustness in noisy environments.
Dr. DPO does not increase KL divergence. A potential concern is that Dr. DPO might improve
performance by increasing the KL divergence. To address this, we computed the KL divergence
of models trained under two noise ratios: 0% and 40%. As shown in Table 2, the KL divergence
does not increase with DRDPO for the same ОІ settings. This comparison demonstrates that DRDPO
maintains a stable KL divergence, effectively mitigating the concern that performance gains are
achieved through increased divergence.
Comparing Dr. DPO with Baselines on LLaMA2-13B. We further evaluate the performance of Dr.
DPO on the LLaMA2-13B dataset, which is a large-scale language model. Table 3 shows that Dr.
DPO outperforms DPO, cDPO, and rDPO, achieving a win rate of 63.67% compared to 59.05% for
DPO, 53.52% for cDPO, and 60.54% for rDPO. These results demonstrate the superior performance
of Dr. DPO in generating high-quality responses on the LLaMA2-13B dataset.



6   D ISCUSSION

Conclusion. In this study, we analyze DPOвҖҷs robustness from a DRO perspective, highlighting
its resilience to pointwise noise. We establish a link between DPOвҖҷs regularization and DROвҖҷs
robustness, showing that a smaller regularization parameter ОІ enhances stability against uncertain
data. Our experiments confirm the crucial role of ОІ in noise resistance but uncover DPOвҖҷs weakness
against pairwise noise. To address this, we introduce a novel Distributionally Robustifying DPO
framework with an additional parameter ОІ вҖІ that balances data pair importance in training to enhance
model robustness. The Dr. DPOвҖҷs fine-tuning of exploration and exploitation could markedly improve
the alignment of language models, assuring reliable performance in the presence of real-world noise.
Limitations and future work. The current work introduces Dr. DPO, an enhancement to DPO that
addresses label flipping noise in training datasets through an additional hyperparameter ОІ вҖІ . Despite
the robust performance indicated by empirical results with a default ОІ вҖІ value of 1.0, the need for
parameter tuning in different applications remains. The sensitivity of ОІ вҖІ to data and task specifics
may require a search process to fully leverage Dr. DPOвҖҷs potential. Additionally, we aim to explore
adaptive mechanisms that allow Dr. DPO to adjust robustness dynamically during training, reducing
the need for manual parameter tuning and enhancing its practical applicability across diverse tasks.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the National Science and Technology Major Project (2023ZD0121102),
National Natural Science Foundation of China (92270114, U24B20180, 62121002, 62302321). This
research was also supported by the advanced computing resources provided by the Supercomputing
Center of the USTC.

R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut,
  Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M. Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, David Silver, Slav Petrov, Melvin
  Johnson, Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Amelia Glaese, Jilin Chen, Emily Pitler,
  Timothy P. Lillicrap, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, James Molloy, Michael Isard, Paul Ronald
  Barham, Tom Hennigan, Benjamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds, Yuanzhong Xu, Ryan
  Doherty, Eli Collins, Clemens Meyer, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira, Kareem Ayoub, Megha
  Goel, George Tucker, Enrique Piqueras, Maxim Krikun, Iain Barr, Nikolay Savinov, Ivo Danihelka,
  Becca Roelofs, AnaДұМҲs White, Anders Andreassen, Tamara von Glehn, Lakshman Yagati, Mehran
  Kazemi, Lucas Gonzalez, Misha Khalman, Jakub Sygnowski, and et al. Gemini: A family of
  highly capable multimodal models. CoRR, abs/2312.11805, 2023.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Bilal Piot, Daniel Guo, Daniele Calandriello, Michal
 Valko, and ReМҒmi Munos. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human
 preferences. CoRR, abs/2310.12036, 2023.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion,
  Tom Conerly, Sheer El Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan
  Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei,
  Tom B. Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Benjamin Mann, and Jared Kaplan.
  Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. CoRR,
  abs/2204.05862, 2022.
Aharon Ben-Tal and Marc Teboulle. An old-new concept of convex risk measures: the optimized
  certainty equivalent. Mathematical Finance, 2007.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle OвҖҷBrien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya
  Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar van der Wal. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language
  models across training and scaling. In ICML, 2023.
Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324вҖ“345, 1952.
SeМҒbastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
   Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott M. Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco TuМҒlio
   Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4.
   CoRR, abs/2303.12712, 2023.
Xi Chen, Simai He, Bo Jiang, Christopher Thomas Ryan, and Teng Zhang. The discrete moment
  problem with nonconvex shape constraints. Oper. Res., 69(1):279вҖ“296, 2021.
Sayak Ray Chowdhury, Anush Kini, and Nagarajan Natarajan. Provably robust DPO: aligning
  language models with noisy feedback. In ICML, 2024.
Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback. CoRR,
  abs/2310.01377, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum, and
  Tong Zhang. RAFT: reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment. CoRR,
  abs/2304.06767, 2023.
John C. Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Learning models with uniform performance via distribu-
  tionally robust optimization. CoRR, abs/1810.08750, 2018.
Louis Faury, Ugo Tanielian, Elvis Dohmatob, Elena Smirnova, and Flavian Vasile. Distributionally
  robust counterfactual risk minimization. In AAAI, 2020.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio CeМҒsar Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, Adil Salim, Shital
  Shah, Harkirat Singh Behl, Xin Wang, SeМҒbastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Adam Tauman Kalai,
  Yin Tat Lee, and Yuanzhi Li. Textbooks are all you need. CoRR, abs/2306.11644, 2023.
Jochen Hartmann, Mark Heitmann, Christian Siebert, and Christina Schamp. More than a feeling:
  Accuracy and application of sentiment analysis. International Journal of Research in Marketing,
  2023.
Alexander Havrilla, Maksym Zhuravinskyi, Duy Phung, Aman Tiwari, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman,
  Quentin Anthony, and Louis Castricato. trlx: A framework for large scale reinforcement learning
  from human feedback. In EMNLP, 2023.
Jean-Baptiste Hiriart-Urruty and Claude LemareМҒchal. Fundamentals of convex analysis. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2004.
Ruomin Huang, Jiawei Huang, Wenjie Liu, and Hu Ding. Coresets for wasserstein distributionally
  robust optimization problems. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Hamish Ivison, Yizhong Wang, Valentina Pyatkin, Nathan Lambert, Matthew Peters, Pradeep Dasigi,
  Joel Jang, David Wadden, Noah A. Smith, Iz Beltagy, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Camels in a
  changing climate: Enhancing LM adaptation with tulu 2. CoRR, abs/2311.10702, 2023.
Binbin Jin, Defu Lian, Zheng Liu, Qi Liu, Jianhui Ma, Xing Xie, and Enhong Chen. Sampling-
  decomposable generative adversarial recommender. NeurIPS, 2020.
Henry Lam, Zhenyuan Liu, and Xinyu Zhang. Orthounimodal distributionally robust optimiza-
  tion: Representation, computation and multivariate extreme event applications. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.07894, 2021.
Defu Lian, Qi Liu, and Enhong Chen. Personalized ranking with importance sampling. In WWW,
  2020.
Tianqi Liu, Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, Peter J. Liu, and Jialu Liu.
  Statistical rejection sampling improves preference optimization. CoRR, abs/2309.06657, 2023.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In ACL, 2011.
Paul Michel, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Graham Neubig. Modeling the second player in distribution-
  ally robust optimization. In ICLR, 2021.
Paul Michel, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Graham Neubig. Distributionally robust models with
  parametric likelihood ratios. In ICLR, 2022.
Hongseok Namkoong and John C. Duchi. Variance-based regularization with convex objectives. In
 NeurIPS, 2017.
XuanLong Nguyen, Martin J. Wainwright, and Michael I. Jordan. Estimating divergence functionals
  and the likelihood ratio by convex risk minimization. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2010.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
Yonatan Oren, Shiori Sagawa, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  language modeling. In EMNLP/IJCNLP (1), pp. 4226вҖ“4236. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2019.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In NeurIPS,
  2022.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In NeurIPS,
  2023a.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. A note on dpo with noisy preferences and relationship to ipo. 2023b. URL ericmitchell.
  ai/cdpo.pdf.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh, Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani, and Daniel Kuhn. Distributionally
  robust logistic regression. In NeurIPS, 2015.
Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David Duvenaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R. Bowman,
 Newton Cheng, Esin Durmus, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R. Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Timothy
 Maxwell, Sam McCandlish, Kamal Ndousse, Oliver Rausch, Nicholas Schiefer, Da Yan, Mi-
 randa Zhang, and Ethan Perez. Towards understanding sycophancy in language models. CoRR,
 abs/2310.13548, 2023.
Aman Sinha, Hongseok Namkoong, and John C. Duchi. Certifying some distributional robustness
 with principled adversarial training. In ICLR, 2018.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian
  Canton-Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin
  Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar
  Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann,
  Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana
  Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor
  Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan
  Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang,
  Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang,
  Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, AureМҒlien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey
  Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. CoRR,
  abs/2307.09288, 2023.
Chaoqi Wang, Yibo Jiang, Chenghao Yang, Han Liu, and Yuxin Chen. Beyond reverse KL: generaliz-
  ing direct preference optimization with diverse divergence constraints. ICLR, 2024.
Chenwang Wu, Defu Lian, Yong Ge, Zhihao Zhu, and Enhong Chen. Influence-driven data poisoning
  for robust recommender systems. TPAMI, 2023.
Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. RRHF: rank
  responses to align language models with human feedback without tears. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, J. Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Ravikumar. DORO: distributional and outlier
  robust optimization. In ICML, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J. Liu. Slic-hf:
  Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. CoRR, abs/2305.10425, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. CoRR, abs/2306.05685, 2023.
Wenxuan Zhou, Ravi Agrawal, Shujian Zhang, Sathish Reddy Indurthi, Sanqiang Zhao, Kaiqiang
 Song, Silei Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. WPO: enhancing RLHF with weighted preference optimiza-
 tion. In EMNLP, pp. 8328вҖ“8340. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
Dixian Zhu, Yiming Ying, and Tianbao Yang. Label distributionally robust losses for multi-class
  classification: Consistency, robustness and adaptivity. In ICML, 2023.


A     R ELATED W ORK
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback. RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022;
Touvron et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022) has emerged as a key method for aligning language
models with human values and preferences, mitigating the generation of biased or factually incorrect
outputs. Compared to supervised learning, RLHF is rather complex, less stable, and requires more
memory resources. These challenges have motivated the development of alternatives to the RLHF
pipeline. For example, RAFT (Dong et al., 2023) uses an existing reward model to select the best
set of training samples based on the model outputs, while RRHF (Yuan et al., 2023) leverages a
much simpler ranking loss to align human preferences and retain the performance of PPO. DPO
(Rafailov et al., 2023a) is another alternative to RLHF that uses a preference loss function to directly
optimize the LLMs, and has been shown to be more stable and less computationally intensive than
RLHF. Despite these efforts, all the methods ignore the noise in the training data, which can lead to
suboptimal performance. In a recent advancement, WPO has been introduced as a novel strategy to
simulate on-policy learning with off-policy preference data, effectively addressing the distributional
gap problem and enhancing the optimization process without incurring additional costs (Zhou et al.,
2024).
Distributionally Robust Optimization. DRO differs from traditional robust optimization methods
(Jin et al., 2020; Lian et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2023) by minimizing the worst-case error within
an uncertainty set defined by constraints like П•-divergence (Namkoong & Duchi, 2017; Duchi &
Namkoong, 2018), Wasserstein distance (Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al., 2015; Sinha et al., 2018; Huang
et al., 2022), and shape (Lam et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021). (Michel et al., 2021; 2022) introduced
parametrization to the uncertainty set for greater architectural flexibility. Separately, (Zhai et al.,
2021) addressed sensitivity to outliers in DRO, diverging from the other studies. And (Oren et al.,
2019) introduced a novel approach to language modeling that enhances robustness by optimizing
against the worst-case topic mixture, aligning with the overarching theme of minimizing maximum
losses within predefined uncertainty sets.

B     A PPENDIX OF P ROOFS
B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

Theorem 3.1 (Optimal Reward Function under KL Divergence). Let the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence
                    between
                            policy ПҖОё and reference policy ПҖref be defined as: DKL (ПҖОё |ПҖref ) =
R             ПҖОё (x)
  ПҖОё (x) log ПҖref (x) dx. Optimizing the RM-DRO objective as defined in Equation (7) yields an
optimal reward rKL (x, y) given by:
                                                           ПҖОё (y|x)
                                rKL (x, y) = ОІ вҲ— (О·) log             вҲ’ Оұ.                           (8)
                                                           ПҖref(y|x)
Here, Оұ, ОІ are Lagrange multipliers, ОІ вҲ— (О·) denotes the optimal value of ОІ that minimizes Equation
(7), acting as the regularization coefficient in DPO. By deriving the optimal value of Оұ, given by:
                                                              rОё (y|x)
                               ОұвҲ— = вҲ’ОІ log ExвҲјO,yвҲјПҖref [exp(           )],                         (9)
                                                                  ОІ

                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Equation 8 can be re-expressed to match the ultimate form of the reward function in Equation 4.

Proof.
Definition B.1 (П•-divergence (Nguyen et al., 2010)). For any convex function П• with П•(1) = 0, the
П•-divergence between Q and Q0 is:
                                                              ПҖОё
                                 DП• (ПҖОё , ПҖref ) := EПҖref [П•(      )]                       (16)
                                                              ПҖref
where DП• (Q, Q0 ) = вҲһ if Q is not absolutely continuous with respect to Q0 . Specially, when
П•(x) = x log x вҲ’ x + 1, П•-divergence degenerates to the well-known KL divergence.
Definition B.2 (Convex conjugate (Hiriart-Urruty & LemareМҒchal, 2004)). We consider a pair (A, B)
of topological vector spaces and a bilinear form вҹЁВ·, В·вҹ© вҶ’ R such that (A, B, вҹЁВ·, В·вҹ©) form a dual pair.
For a convex function f : R вҶ’ R, domf := {x вҲҲ R : f (x) < вҲһ} is the effective domain of f . The
convex conjugate, also known as the Legendre-Fenchel transform, of f : A вҶ’ R is the function
f вҲ— : B вҶ’ R defined as
                               f вҲ— (b) = sup{ab вҲ’ f (a)}, b вҲҲ B                                  (17)
                                           a

Theorem B.3 (Interchange of minimization and integration (Ben-Tal & Teboulle, 2007)). Let (в„Ұ, F)
be a measurable space equipped with Пғ-algebra F, Lp (в„Ұ, F, P ) be the linear space of measurable
real valued functions f : в„Ұ вҶ’ R with ||f ||p < вҲһ, and let X := Lp (в„Ұ, F, P ), p вҲҲ [1, +вҲһ]. Let
g : R Г— в„Ұ вҶ’ R be a normal integrand, and define on X . Then,
                           Z                       Z
                       min   g(x(Пү), Пү) dP (Пү) =       min g(s, Пү) dP (Пү)                   (18)
                        xвҲҲX   в„Ұ                         в„Ұ sвҲҲR


To ease the derivation, we denote the likelihood ratio L(y|x) = ПҖОё (y|x)/ПҖref (y|x). Note that the
П•-divergence between ПҖОё and ПҖref is constrained, and thus L(.) is well-defined. For brevity, we usually
short L(y|x) as L. And in terms of Definition B.1 of П•-divergence, the expression of RM-DRO (cf.
Equation equation 7) becomes:
               LП•RM-DRO = max ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [rОё (y|x)L]        s.t. EПҖref [П•(L(y|x))] вүӨ О·           (19)
                              L

Note that EПҖref [rОё (y|x)L] and EПҖref [П•(L(y|x))] are both convex in L. We use the Lagrangian function
solver:
LП•RM-DRO = min max {ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [rОё (y|x)L(y|x)] вҲ’ ОІ[EПҖref [П•(L(y|x))] вҲ’ О·] + Оұ(EПҖref [L(y|x)] вҲ’ 1)}
            ОІвүҘ0,Оұ L(y|x)
                                               rОё (y|x) + Оұ
         = min   ОІО· вҲ’ Оұ + ОІ max {ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [              L(y|x) вҲ’ П•(L(y|x))]}
          ОұвүҘ0,ОІ             L(y|x)                   ОІ
                                               rОё (y|x) + Оұ
         = min ОІО· вҲ’ Оұ + ОІExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [ max {                L(y|x) вҲ’ П•(L(y|x))}]
          ОІвүҘ0,Оұ                       L(y|x)         ОІ
                                           rОё (y|x) + Оұ
         = min ОІО· вҲ’ Оұ + ОІExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [П•вҲ— (

                                                         )]
          ОІвүҘ0,Оұ                                  ОІ
                                                                                              (20)
The first equality holds due to the strong duality (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). The second equality
is a re-arrangement for optimizing L(y|x). The third equation follows by the Theorem B.3. The
last equality is established based on the definition of convex conjugate B.2. When we choose KL-
divergence, we have П•KL (x) = x log x вҲ’ x + 1. It can be deduced that П•вҲ—KL (x) = ex вҲ’ 1. Then, we
have:
                                                                 rОё (y|x) + Оұ
                LKL                  ОІО· вҲ’ Оұ + ОІExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [П•вҲ— (

                  RM-DRO = min                                                )]
                            ОІвүҘ0,Оұ                                      ОІ
                                                                                              (21)
                                                                  rОё (y|x) + Оұ
                          = min ОІО· вҲ’ Оұ + ОІExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [exp(                    ) вҲ’ 1]
                            ОІвүҘ0,Оұ                                       ОІ
and the maximum of term L(y|x) in Equation equation 20 is achieved when
                                                   rОё (y|x) + Оұ
                                   L(y|x) = exp(                ).                                (22)
                                                         ОІ

                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We differentiate the Lagrangian function w.r.t. Оұ and set it to zero:
                      вҲӮ                              rОё (y|x) + Оұ
                         ОІО· вҲ’ Оұ + ОІExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [exp(              ) вҲ’ 1] = 0                      (23)
                     вҲӮОұ                                    ОІ
Then, we have:
                                                            rОё (y|x)
                              ОұвҲ— = вҲ’ОІ log ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [exp(          )]                           (24)
                                                                ОІ
Substituting the optimal ОұвҲ— into the Lagrangian function equation 21, we have:
                                                                   rОё (y|x) + Оұ
               LKL

                RM-DRO = min        ОІО· вҲ’ Оұ + ОІExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [exp(                 ) вҲ’ 1]
                            ОІвүҘ0,Оұ                                        ОІ
                                                                 rОё (y|x)
                         = min ОІО· + ОІ log ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [exp(               )]                      (25)
                           ОІвүҘ0                                       ОІ
                                                         rDPO (x, y)
                         = ОІ вҲ— (О·) log ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [exp(             )] + C,
                                                           ОІ вҲ— (О·)
where ОІ вҲ— (О·) signifies the optimal value of ОІ that minimizes the Lagrangian function and C = ОІО· .
Besides, if we plug the optimal ОұвҲ— into the optimal L(y|x), we have:
                                                   rОё (y|x) + ОұвҲ—
                                    LвҲ— (y|x) = exp(              )
                                                         ОІвҲ—
                                                                                                  (26)
                                                   rОё (y|x) 1
                                            = exp(          )
                                                      ОІвҲ—      Z(x)

where Z(x) = ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [exp( rОё (y|x)
                                     ОІ   )]. Here, we rearrange Equation equation 26 and obtain the
expression of rKL (x, y):
                                                                 ПҖОё
            rKL (x, y) = ОІ вҲ— log LвҲ— (y|x) + ОІ log Z(x) = ОІ вҲ— log      + ОІ log Z(x)             (27)
                                                                 ПҖref
The theorem is proven. In comparison to the proofs presented in DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023a), our
proof is comprehensive and direct, applicable to any П•-divergence constraints in the general PPO
objective. DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023a) represents a specific case that employs strategies to construct
an objective in the form of KL-divergence.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2     F ORMAL P ROOF

Step 1: Definition of П•-divergence      The П•-divergence between ПҖОё and ПҖref is defined as:

                                                          ПҖОё (y|x)
                               DП• (ПҖОё , ПҖref ) = EПҖref П•                ,
                                                          ПҖref (y|x)
where П• is a convex function with П•(1) = 0. For KL-divergence, П•(t) = t log t вҲ’ t + 1.

Step 2: Reformulating the RM-DRO Objective Using the Lagrangian dual form to incorporate
the robustness constraint, the RM-DRO objective becomes:
      min max {ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref [rОё (y|x)L(y|x)] вҲ’ ОІ[EПҖref [П•(L(y|x))] вҲ’ О·] + Оұ(EПҖref [L(y|x)] вҲ’ 1)}
   ОІвүҘ0,Оұ L(y|x)

where ОІ, Оұ are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the robustness constraint, L(y|x) =
ПҖОё (y|x)/ПҖref (y|x).

Step 3: Solving for Optimal Policy According to the proof of Theorem 3.1, solving this Lagrange
function with KL-divergence yields:
                                                        ПҖОё (y|x)
                                  rП• (x, y) = ОІ log                вҲ’ Оұ,
                                                        ПҖref (y|x)
where Оұ is a normalization constant ensuring that ПҖОё is a valid probability distribution:

                                                          rП• (x, y)
                             Оұ = вҲ’ОІ log EyвҲјПҖref exp                    .
                                                              ОІ

Step 4: Connection to DPO The reward function derived above matches the closed-form expression
for the reward function in DPO:
                                                ПҖОё (y|x)
                              r(x, y) = ОІ log              + ОІ log Z(x),
                                                ПҖref (y|x)
where Z(x) is the partition function defined as:

                                        X                         r(x, y)
                               Z(x) =        ПҖref (y|x) exp                     .
                                         y
                                                                    ОІ

Step 5: Robustness to Pointwise Noise The DRO formulation inherently considers the worst-case
distribution within the robustness radius О·. By solving the constrained optimization problem under
KL-divergence, DPO implicitly optimizes for the worst-case distributional perturbation. Thus, DPO
achieves robustness to pointwise noise, as the DRO mechanism mitigates the impact of noisy data
points by optimizing over a family of perturbed distributions.
By aligning the RM-DRO objective with the reward function formulation in DPO, we establish that
DPO implicitly operates as a pointwise DRO framework under KL-divergence. This demonstrates its
inherent robustness to pointwise noise.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

Theorem 4.1. Consider the scenario where the KL divergence is employed to measure the discrepancy
between the hypothetical distribution OвҖІ and dataset distribution O , we derive the ultimate loss
function for Dr. DPO as follows:

                                                         hDPO (x, yw , yl )
                       LDr. DPO (ПҖОё ; ПҖref ) = вҲ’ОІ вҖІ log EO [exp(            )].                          (12)
                                                                ОІвҖІ
where hDPO represents the log-likelihood in the DPO framework, defined as:
                                                       ПҖОё (yw | x)           ПҖОё (yl | x)
                    hDPO (x, yw , yl ) = log Пғ(ОІ log                 вҲ’ ОІ log               ),            (13)
                                                       ПҖref (yw | x)         ПҖref (yl | x)

with ОІ and ОІ вҖІ being regularization coefficient respectively.

Proof. To solve the optimization problem in Equation equation 11, we first introduce the Lagrangian
function:
                           O(OвҖІ , ОІ вҖІ , ОұвҖІ ) = E(x,yw ,yl )вҲјOвҖІ [h(x, yw , yl )]
                                                                  OвҖІ                           (28)
                            + ОІ вҖІ (DП• (OвҖІ , O) вҲ’ О· вҖІ ) + ОұвҖІ (EO [ ] вҲ’ 1).
                                                                   O
Then, we can obtain the optimal distribution OвҖІ,вҲ— by solving the following saddle-point problem:
                                   OвҖІ,вҲ— = arg max min
                                                   вҖІ вҖІ
                                                       O(Q, ОІ вҖІ , ОұвҖІ ).                                  (29)
                                               OвҖІ      ОІ ,Оұ

Specifically, when the KL divergence is selected as the measure of П•-divergence, that is, KL(OвҖІ , O) =
PN       вҖІ      вҖІ                                  вҖІ,вҲ—
  i=1 Oi log(Oi /Oi ), the optimal distribution OKL can be derived as follows:

                                   вҖІ,вҲ—     1          h(x, yw , yl )
                                 OKL   = вҲ— exp                         ,                           (30)
                                          Z                ОІвҖІ
where Z вҲ— = E(x,yw ,yl )вҲјO [exp(h(x, yw , yl )/ОІ вҖІ )] denotes the partition function. In this case, we can
                                                                   вҖІ,вҲ—
derive a closed-form expression of the ultimate objective O(OKL        , О»вҖІ ) as follows:

                                вҖІ,вҲ—                               h(x, yw , yl )
                             O(OKL  , ОІ вҖІ ) = ОІ вҖІ log EO [exp(                   )]                      (31)
                                                                       ОІвҖІ
In order to attain a Distributionally Robustifying DRO objective that encompasses both pointwise
and pairwise robustness, we consider the previously established fact that the DPO approach confers
pointwise robustness. Consequently, by substituting the term h(x, yw , yl ) in Equation equation 31
with the DPO objective from Equation equation 5, we can derive a comprehensive objective that
integrates the strengths of both methods:
                    LDr. DPO (ПҖОё ; ПҖref ) = вҲ’ОІ вҖІ log EO [exp(hDPO (x, yw , yl )/ОІ вҖІ )].                  (32)
                                 w |x)         ПҖОё (yl |x)
Here hDPO = log Пғ(ОІ log ПҖПҖrefОё (y
                               (yw |x) вҲ’ ОІ log ПҖref (yl |x) ) denotes the optimal policy using in DPO.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2

Theorem 4.2 (Upper Bound for Dr. DPO). Let hDPO вҲҲ [a, b] and LN      Dr. DPO represents the Dr. DPO
loss on N samples. Given a hypothetical distribution OвҖІ satisfying DKL (OвҖІ , O) вүӨ О· вҖІ to dataset
distribution O, we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:
                                                               вҖІ
                                   LOвҖІ вүӨ LN Dr. DPO + B(Оҙ, N, ОІ ),                               (14)
where:                                                             r
                                 вҖІ       2b exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )       N     1
                       B(Оҙ, N, ОІ ) =                             вҖІ
                                                                         ln .                    (15)
                                      N вҲ’ 1 + exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ ) 2           Оҙ

Proof. Firstly, we assume that the optimal policy OвҖІ satisfies the following constraint:
                                   OвҖІ вҲҲ {Q | DKL (OвҖІ , O) вүӨ О· вҖІ }                                       (33)
Under this assumption, the loss function LOвҖІ can be bounded as:
                             LOвҖІ = EOвҖІ [h(x, yw , yl )]
                                  вүӨ       max         EOвҖІ [h(x, yw , yl )]
                                     DKL (O вҖІ ,O)вүӨО· вҖІ

                                                           h(x, yw , yl )
                                                                                                        (34)
                                  = ОІ вҖІ log EO exp
                                                                ОІвҖІ
                                  = LDr. DPO .
We now introduce McDiarmidвҖҷs inequality as a foundational result:
Theorem B.4 (McDiarmidвҖҷs Inequality). Let X1 , ..., XN вҲҲ X N be a set of N вүҘ 1 independent
random variables and assume that there exists c1 , ..., cN > 0 such that f : X N вҶ’ R satisfies:
                          |f (x1 , ..., xi , ..., xN ) вҲ’ f (x1 , ..., xвҖІi , ..., xN )| вүӨ ci .           (35)
For all i вҲҲ 1, 2, ...N and any points x1 , ...xN , xвҖІi вҲҲ X . Let f (S) denote f (X1 , ..., XN ), then for all
Пө > 0, the following inequalities hold:
                                                                                       !
                                                                              вҲ’2Пө2
                             P[f (S) вҲ’ E{f (S)} вүҘ Пө] вүӨ exp PN                            .              (36)
                                                                                     2
                                                                                i=1 ci

Given a dataset with N samples, for any pair of samples: (x, yw , yl ), (xвҖІ , yw  вҖІ
                                                                                    , ylвҖІ ), we have:
                                                          вҖІ вҖІ      вҖІ      вҖІ вҖІ       вҖІ
                     |w(x, yw , yl )h((x, yw , yl )) вҲ’ w(x , yw , yl )h((x , yw , yl ))|
                   вүӨ2 sup |w(x, yw , yl )h(x, yw , yl )|
                           O                                                                            (37)
                         2b exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )
                     вүӨ                            ,
                       N вҲ’ 1 + exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )
                                                                              вҖІ
where the second inequality holds as w(x, yw , yl ) = EOexp(h(x,yw ,yl )/ОІ )
                                                         [exp(h(x,yw ,yl )/ОІ вҖІ )] and hDPO вҲҲ [a, b].

By applying McDiarmidвҖҷs inequality, we obtain:
                                                  2
                                                                              вҖІ
                                                                                   2 !
                                               2Оө     N вҲ’ 1 + exp  ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ   )
         P LDr. DPO вҲ’ LN

                       Dr. DPO вүҘ Оө вүӨ exp вҲ’                                             .                (38)
                                                N       2b exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )

Setting:
                                                                               2 !
                                    2Оө2          N вҲ’ 1 + exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )

                          Оҙ = exp вҲ’                                                  ,                  (39)
                                     N             2b exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )
we can solve for Оө as:                                             r
                                    2b exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )              N   1
                               Оө=                                        ln .                           (40)
                                  N вҲ’ 1 + exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )           2   Оҙ
Thus, for any Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), we conclude that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:
                                                                           r
                                    N             2b exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ )      N   1
                LOвҖІ вүӨ LDr. DPO вүӨ LDr. DPO +                                    ln .                     (41)
                                              N вҲ’ 1 + exp ((b вҲ’ a)/ОІ вҖІ ) 2       Оҙ



                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.5    P ROOF OF w(x, yw , yl )

In this section, we present the derivation of the gradient for the Dr. DPO objective function as follows:

                                                   вҖІ            hDPO (x, yw , yl )
                  вҲҮОё LDr. DPO (ПҖОё ; ПҖref ) = вҲ’вҲҮОё ОІ log EO exp                         .                  (42)
                                                                      ОІвҖІ

The right-hand side of Equation equation 42 can be rewritten as:

                       вҖІ                hDPO (x, yw , yl )
                  вҲҮОё ОІ log EO exp
                                              ОІвҖІ
                                                                                                         (43)
                                       вҖІ                   hDPO (x, yw , yl )
                  = вҲҮhDPO (x,yw ,yl ) ОІ log EO exp                                вҲҮОё hDPO .
                                                                 ОІвҖІ

Considering the gradient with respect to the function hDPO (x, yw , yl ) yields:

                                                                            hDPO (x,yw ,yl )

                                        hDPO (x, yw , yl )
                                                                    exp           ОІ вҖІ
     вҲҮhDPO (x,yw ,yl ) ОІ вҖІ log EO exp                          =                                i .      (44)
                                              ОІвҖІ
                                                                     h
                                                                              hDPO (x,yw ,yl )
                                                                 E exp O              вҖІОІ


Focusing on the gradient with respect to Оё, we have:

                                                                            Пғ вҖІ (u)

                                      ПҖОё (yw |x)           ПҖОё (yl |x)
             вҲҮОё hDPO = вҲҮОё log Пғ ОІ log              вҲ’ ОІ log                =         вҲҮОё u,                (45)
                                      ПҖref (yw |x)         ПҖref (yl |x)     Пғ(u)
                         w |x)         ПҖОё (yl |x)
where u = ОІ log ПҖПҖrefОё (y
                       (yw |x) вҲ’ ОІ log ПҖref (yl |x) . Leveraging the properties of the sigmoid function, where
 вҖІ                                  вҖІ
Пғ (x) = Пғ(x)(1 вҲ’ Пғ(x)) and Пғ (вҲ’x) = 1 вҲ’ Пғ(x), we derive the final gradient expression:

                                    hDPO (x, yw , yl )
          вҲ’ вҲҮОё ОІ вҖІ log EO exp
                                           ОІвҖІ

               exp hDPO (x,y
                          ОІвҖІ
                             w ,yl )
                                                         ПҖ (y |x)

                                                                       ПҖ (y |x)

                                                                                                         (46)
         =вҲ’     h                        i ОІПғ ОІ log Оё l (yl |x) вҲ’ ОІ log Оё w
            EO exp hDPO (x,y    w ,yl )                    ПҖref        ПҖref (yw |x)
                             ОІвҖІ

            В· [вҲҮОё log ПҖОё (yw |x) вҲ’ вҲҮОё log ПҖОё (yl |x)] .

Here, a crucial indicator that distinguishes Dr. DPO from traditional DPO is encapsulated by the
weight term:
                                                exp hDPO (x,y
                                                          ОІ  вҖІ
                                                               w ,yl )

                             w(x, yw , yl ) =    h                        i ,               (47)
                                                       hDPO (x,yw ,yl )
                                              EO exp           ОІ вҖІ


which gravitates towards a uniform distribution as the parameter ОІ вҖІ approaches infinity. In such a
scenario, the gradient of Dr. DPO aligns with that of the standard DPO. This relationship furnishes a
deeper insight into how Dr. DPO can be linked and differentiated from DPO through the incorporation
of a dynamic tuning parameter ОІ вҖІ , enhancing the adaptability of policy optimization in varied
environments.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A NALYSIS
C.1   A NALYSIS ABOUT GENERAL П•- DIVERGENCE .

Lemma C.1 (Optimal Reward Function under General П•-Divergence). (Wang et al., 2024, Theorem
1) Given a П•-divergence DП• with corresponding derivative П•вҖІ , the optimal reward function rП• (x, y)
under the RM-DRO framework is defined by:
                                                            ПҖОё (y|x)
                                  rП• (x, y) = ОІ вҲ— (О·)П•вҖІ (             ) вҲ’ Оұ,                      (48)
                                                            ПҖref(y|x)
where Оұ is Lagrange multiplier.

Proof. To determine the optimal expression for rП• (x, y), one must identify the optimal L(y|x). As
established in Theorem 3.1, the optimal L(y|x) is given by:

                                              rОё (y|x) + Оұ
                   ОІ arg max ExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref                    L(y|x) вҲ’ П•(L(y|x))
                      L(y|x)                        ОІ
                                 "                                                #
                                                rОё (y|x) + Оұ
                 =ОІExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref arg max                       L(y|x) вҲ’ П•(L(y|x))               (49)
                                    L(y|x)            ОІ

                                    вҲ—   rОё (y|x) + Оұ
                 =ОІExвҲјD,yвҲјПҖref П•                          .
                                               ОІ
To find this maximum, we differentiate the convex function w.r.t. L(y|x) and equate the derivative to
zero:
                             вҲӮ    rОё (y|x) + Оұ
                                               L(y|x) вҲ’ П•(L(y|x)) = 0.                           (50)
                            вҲӮL          ОІ
Solving for rОё (y|x) yields the optimal expression:
                                     rОё (y|x) = ОІП•вҖІ (L(y|x)) вҲ’ Оұ.                                 (51)
                                                                                   вҖІ
Given that Оұ is a constant, the critical component of the expression is ОІП• (L(y|x)). While this result
aligns with Theorem 1 from (Wang et al., 2024), our approach is grounded in a comprehensive
DRO framework, providing a more direct and complete theoretical justification. Thus, the lemma is
substantiated.

Comparison with Wang et al. (2024). Since Оұ is a constant that does not affect the optimization
process, Lemma C.1 reveals that the reward function r(x, y) is influenced not only by the choice
of П•-divergence but also by the parameter ОІ. This observation suggests an intuitive understanding
that various П•-divergences enforce constraints with unique geometric characteristics, which, in
turn, dictate the optimal value of ОІ вҲ— (О·) within DRO. Interestingly, our findings contradict the
conclusions presented in Wang et al. (2024), which suggest that various П•-divergences lead to
different alignment accuracy. Instead, our results demonstrate that by fine-tuning the parameter ОІ,
comparable performance can be achieved across different divergences (cf. Table 4). This underscores
the critical role of the robust radius in determining the efficacy of DRO frameworks. For detailed
experimental settings, please refer to Section 5.1. Moreover, a thorough analysis of the behavior of
diverse П•-divergences can be found in Appendix D.
                                                                       w |x)
We compute the gradients w.r.t. the chosen likelihood ratios, ПҖПҖrefОё (y
                                                                     (yw |x) , and the rejected ratios,
ПҖОё (yl |x)
ПҖref (yl |x) . As depicted in Figure 7, the choice of П•-divergence influences the gradient update rules

      Table 4: Comparison of win rates across various П•-divergences with adjustments to ОІ.

                           П•-divergence     win rate     ОІ       win rate      ОІ
                           KL               54.36        0.1     55.40         0.15
                           JSD              54.36        0.1     54.75         5e-2
                           Оұ = 0.3          45.02        0.1     54.59         1e-4
                           Оұ = 0.5          44.06        0.1     56.60         1e-6
                           Оұ = 0.7          41.17        0.1     58.45         1e-6


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in a consistent manner, though the performance varies with the scaling parameter ОІ. With an
optimal selection of ОІ, the disparities between the performances of different П•-divergences diminish
significantly (refer to Table 4 for a comparative analysis).

                                    Gradient of chosen logratios                       Gradient of rejected logratios
                                                                          0.10
                          0
                                                                                                  KL( = 0.1)
                                                                          0.08
                                                                                                  FKL( = 1e 3)
                          1                                                                       JS( = 0.05)
                                                                                                  alpha=0.7( = 0.01)
                                                                          0.06
                          2
                                                                          0.04

                          3
                                                                          0.02

                          4
                                                                          0.00
                              0.0      0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8      1.0           0.0      0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0


                  Figure 7: Gradient analysis with respective to different П•-divergence.


C.2        C OMPARISON BETWEEN DPO AND DRO

The fundamental principle of the DRO framework is to guard against the worst possible distribution
within a defined ambiguity set. Notably, the вҖңminвҖқ operation manifests implicitly outside of the loss
function LDPO . To provide a more insightful examination of the min-max component, it is instructive
to trace DPOвҖҷs genesis back to its roots in RLHF. A two-phase process within RLHF elucidates this
mechanism:
1. Reward Modeling Phase: In this phase, we integrate human preferences via a negative log-
likelihood loss:
                   minL(r, O) = min вҲ’ E(x,yw ,yl )вҲјO [log Пғ(rП• (x, yw ) вҲ’ rП• (x, yl ))]
                    rП•                        rП•

It optimizes for a reward function rП• by minimizing the predicted disparity in preferences between
winning and losing outcomes yw and yl , as determined through interaction instances (x, yw , yl )
gathered from the training set O.
2. Reinforcement Learning (RL) Fine-Tuning Phase: This stage leverages the learned reward
function to generate feedback for the language model, adopting a policy improvement step that
embodies our вҖҷmaxвҖҷ operation perceived during the fine-tuning phase:
                         maxExвҲјO,yвҲјПҖОё (y|x) [rП• (x, y)] вҲ’ ОІDKL [ПҖОё (y|x)||ПҖref (y|x)].
                          ПҖОё


As elucidated in the introduction of DPO in preliminaries,

            This allows for the direct optimization of the policy by reparameterizing the
            reward function using the policy (i.e., the language model) in a supervised manner.

Subsequently, the closed-form solution from the RL phase is substituted into the Reward Modeling
Phase, and the reparameterization of rП• into ПҖОё yields:
                                                                                         ПҖОё (yw | x)           ПҖОё (yl | x)
   minLDPO (ПҖОё ; ПҖref ) = min вҲ’ E(x,yw ,yl )вҲјO [log Пғ(ОІ log                                            вҲ’ ОІ log               )].   (52)
      ПҖОё                            ПҖОё                                                   ПҖref (yw | x)         ПҖref (yl | x)

Comparing DPO and DRO enhances understanding:
DPO

вҖў Motivation: Suboptimal initial distribution of SFT model (reference model).
вҖў Max Part: Explore maximization criterion around the reference model, here aiming for maximal
  reward.


                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


вҖў Min Part: Optimize the BT model on the novel reward function.

DRO

вҖў Motivation: Suboptimal initial training set distribution.
вҖў Max Part: Explore maximization criterion around the initial training set distribution, traditionally a
  loss, but varies in different applications.
вҖў Min Part: Optimize the model on this novel distribution.

In conclusion, our methodology faithfully embodies the essence of DRO by instituting a protective
mechanism against the distribution determined by a select ambiguity set and a specific criterion.
The вҖңminвҖқ operation, though indirectly represented in Equation equation 5, is an integral part of our
modelвҖҷs optimization process, fitting well within the DRO frameworkвҖҷs intent.

C.3     S ETUP IN POINTWISE N OISE

To introduce the concept of pointwise noise, we first clarify the stages of DPO training:

вҖў SFT Stage: Prior to alignment, both DPO and RLHF require supervised fine-tuning (SFT).
  Typically, in the SFT stage, a prompt x is paired with a chosen response yw .
вҖў DPO Stage: DPO uses the model trained in the SFT stage as both the initialization and reference
  model. Training samples consist of a prompt x paired with a chosen response yw and a rejected
  response yl . In most cases, the chosen response remains consistent with that of the SFT stage.

The term вҖңpointwise noiseвҖқ in this context refers to the impact of poor data quality. In the IMDB
dataset, we generate training data of varying quality by using samples from a fine-tuned GPT-2-large
(Radford et al., 2019) as high-quality samples and from an unfine-tuned GPT-2-large as low-quality
samples. By adjusting the ratio of these two sets, we create different noise ratios (e.g., a 20%
noise ratio indicates that 20% of the training data consists of low-quality samples generated by the
unfine-tuned GPT-2-large).
In the HH scenario, positive and negative samples are predetermined. To create an unreliable
reference model ПҖref , we replace the chosen responses in the SFT stage with their corresponding
rejected responses. The DPO stage pairs remain unchanged, affecting only the SFT distribution,
aligning with the intent described in Section 3.1.



                                      SFT                              DPO



                                                Chosen                    rejected
                   Prompt x
                                             response рқ’ҡрқ’ҳ                response рқ’ҡрқ’Қ
                                                                                      Prompt x
 IMDB


                     вӢ®                               вӢ®
                                                                                         вӢ®
           Response generated by an         Response generated by an
            fine-tuned GPT-2-large          unfine-tuned GPT-2-large                  response in SFT


                                                                                      Prompt x
 HH


                    вӢ®                                вӢ®
                                                                                         вӢ®
                 Chosen response                 Rejected response
                                                                                      response in SFT


                   Figure 8: Pointwise Noise Data Construction in IMDB and HH
                                                23
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Note: In our experiments, we ensure that the data used during the DPO phase remains consistent
     across both datasets. This consistency ensures that the only variable influencing the outcomes is the
     noise introduced to the SFT model. By maintaining the DPO data unchanged, we isolate the effect of
     noise on the SFT modelвҖҷs performance, allowing for a clear analysis of its impact.


     D     A PPENDIX OF E XPERIMENTS

 1 # pi_logps            : policy logprobs, shape (B,)
 2 # ref_logps           : reference model logprobs, shape (B,)
 3 # yw_idxs             : preferred completion indices in [0, B-1], shape (T,)
 4 # yl_idxs             : dispreferred completion indices in [0, B-1], shape (T,)
 5 # beta                : regularization coefficient
 6 # beta_1              : regularization coefficient for pairwise robustness
 7
 8 pi_yw_logps, pi_yl_logps = pi_logps[yw_idxs], pi_logps[yl_idxs]
 9 ref_yw_logps, ref_yl_logps = ref_logps[yw_idxs], ref_logps[yl_idxs]
10 pi_logratios = pi_yw_logps - pi_yl_logps
11 ref_logratios = ref_yw_logps - ref_yl_logps
12 losses = -F.logsigmoid( beta * ( pi_logratios - ref_logratios))
13
14   #DPO
15   DPO_loss = losses.mean()
16
17   #Dr. DPO
18   DrDPO_loss = - beta_1 * torch.log(torch.mean(torch.exp( - losses / beta_1)))


           Figure 9: Pseudocode for our proposed Dr. DPO, as well as the original DPO objective.

     Figure 9 presents a PyTorch-style pseudocode comparison between the standard objective and our
     proposed Dr. DPO objective. The implementation simplicity of the Dr. DPO loss is highlighted, as
     it necessitates no additional lines of code beyond what is required for the standard objective. This
     ease of integration underscores the practicality of adopting Dr. DPO in existing machine learning
     workflows without the need for extensive code modifications.

     D.1   E XPERIMENTS S ETUP ON HH

     For our preliminary research, we conducted experiments on the Anthropic HH dataset (Bai et al.,
     2022), which comprises 170,000 human-automated assistant dialogues. Each dialogue concludes
     with two large language model-generated responses and an accompanying preference label denoting
     the humanвҖҷs favored choice. Our training regimen was in line with the DPO-established protocol
     (Rafailov et al., 2023a). We built upon the Pythia 2.8B model, as described in (Biderman et al.,
     2023), to develop our Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) model. The SFT model was fine-tuned on the
     Anthropic HH dataset over the course of one epoch, employing a batch size of 64 and a learning rate
     of 5 Г— 10вҲ’7 . In addition, we further refined the model using the Anthropic HH dataset and the DPO
     loss function (or other baseline approaches) through an additional epoch of fine-tuning. To test the
     modelвҖҷs resilience to noise, we introduced random inversions between selected and rejected responses
     in the training data with probabilities of 10%, 20%, 30%, and 40%. Throughout these experiments,
     we consistently set the ОІ parameter to 0.1 and adopted the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence as the
     metric for П•-divergence. We carried out all computational tasks on a suite of four 80GB A100 GPUs.

     D.2   E XPERIMENTS ON R EDDIT TL;DR DATASET

     For a fair comparison with DPO, we maintained the parameters ОІ = 0.5 and lr = 1e вҲ’ 6, and chose
     ОІ вҖІ = 1.0 without extensive tuning. This approach ensures that our evaluation of the proposed Dr.
     DPO framework is consistent and comparable to the existing baseline.
     Finally, the table below presents the win-rate comparison on the TL;DR dataset under various
     sampling temperatures, further supporting our claims:


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 5: Comparison of DPO and Dr. DPO across various sampling temperatures.

                 Sampling Temperature        0.0      0.25     0.5     0.75        1.0
                 DPO                        45.06    46.74    46.70    39.50      21.28
                 Dr. DPO                    62.36    67.34    71.29    63.91      27.75


As evidenced by Table 5, Dr. DPO consistently outperforms DPO across different sampling tempera-
tures, particularly at lower temperatures which are crucial for complex tasks such as summarization.

D.3   E XPERIMENTS ON A MBIGUOUS DATASETS

To incorporate the feedback regarding the evaluation of our approach on datasets with ambiguity-
induced noise, we conducted additional experiments. These were aimed at understanding how
performs under varying conditions of data perturbation, specifically through token masking and
substitution. The comparative analysis between the traditional DPO and Dr. DPO was carried out
under consistent experimental conditions to ensure the validity and reliability of the results.
Experimental Setup. To simulate ambiguous datasets, we introduced randomness in the form of
token masking and substitution at different ratios, thereby increasing the difficulty of the dataset. The
intention was to assess the resilience and adaptability of our Dr. DPO method under challenging
conditions that are akin to real-world scenarios. The experiments were conducted using the HH
dataset, known for its complexity and relevance in evaluating data processing algorithms.
The configurations for both DPO and Dr. DPO were kept consistent with previous experiments
to maintain comparability. Specifically, we set ОІ = 0.1 and the learning rate lr = 5e вҲ’ 7 for
both approaches. For Dr. DPO, an additional hyperparameter, ОІ вҖІ , was introduced and set to 1.0.
Notably, we did not undertake extensive hyperparameter tuning, opting instead for a straightforward
comparison.
Experimental Results. The results of our experiments are summarized in the table below, illustrating
preference accuracies under varying noise conditions:

            Table 6: Preference Accuracy on the HH Dataset with Varying Noise Ratios

      Masking Ratio      0.05     0.10     0.15      Replacing Ratio      0.05      0.10     0.15
          DPO            58.77    56.64    54.39          DPO             57.84     54.43    52.40
        Dr. DPO          59.21    58.44    56.10        Dr. DPO           58.45     55.60    53.37


Discussion. The results indicate that Dr. DPO consistently outperforms DPO across different levels of
induced noise, whether through masking or replacing tokens. Notably, the improvement in preference
accuracy becomes more pronounced as the noise ratio increases, suggesting that Dr. DPO is more
robust to ambiguity-induced noise compared to DPO. These findings validate our hypothesis that Dr.
DPO can better handle the complexities and uncertainties inherent in real-world datasets.
It is also important to note that these results were obtained without extensive tuning of the Dr. DPO-
specific hyperparameter, ОІ вҖІ . Future work could involve a more detailed exploration of hyperparameter
settings to potentially unlock further improvements in performance.
In conclusion, the additional experiments conducted in response to feedback have not only rein-
forced the effectiveness of our Dr. DPO approach but also opened avenues for future research into
optimization strategies for processing ambiguous datasets.

D.4   R EWARD

Reward. The reward metric is computed on the IMDB dataset, which is selected for the availability
of a ground-truth reward function provided by a sentiment classifier. Figure 10 demonstrates that
the Dr. DPO algorithm achieves enhanced stability and superior reward performance under varying
pairwise noise and different ОІ. Additionally, by setting ОІ вҖІ to a fixed value of 1, we address the issue
of DPOвҖҷs sensitivity to the parameter ОІ. This consistent setting of ОІ вҖІ eliminates the need for extensive
parameter tuning, which significantly benefits practical applications.


                                                    25
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        30% Flipped                                                                40% Flipped
                                              0.9                                                                     0.75



                                     Reward
                                                                                                                      0.70
                                              0.8
                                                                                              32%                                                                          30%
                                                                                             Improv.                  0.65                                                Improv.
                                              0.7              DPO
                                                               Dr. DPO                                                0.60
                                                               0.1       0.2        0.3            0.4         0.5                        0.1          0.2    0.3               0.4          0.5


                                                     Figure 10: Evaluation of IMDB at 0% and 40% flipped pair ratios.
                                           10% Flipped                                   20% Flipped                  0.62
                                                                                                                                         30% Flipped                                        40% Flipped
                                                                                                                                                                   0.58
                      0.63
Preference Accuracy


                                                                      0.62                                            0.60
                      0.62
                      0.61
                                                     DPO              0.60                                            0.58
                                                                                                                                                                   0.56
                                                     Dr. DPO
                      0.60                                                                                            0.56                                         0.54
                                                                      0.58
                      0.59
                             0.1     0.2       0.3       0.4    0.5          0.1   0.2       0.3         0.4    0.5          0.1   0.2       0.3       0.4   0.5          0.1         0.2       0.3       0.4   0.5



  Figure 11: Preference accuracy across varying ОІ for different levels of pairwise noise on the Anthropic
  HH dataset.



   D.5                             I MPACT OF VARYING ОІ

Concomitantly, we have carried out an evaluation of the performance enhancement of Dr. DPO
relative to DPO under diverse beta values, as shown in Figure 11. The aforementioned Dr. DPO
assures a stable performance augmentation regardless of beta selection, further attesting to the efficacy
of the Dr. DPO methodology. Notably, the attained results are based on the default value of ОІ вҖІ , set at
1.0, negating the necessity of additional parameter adjustments to ОІ вҖІ for a steady performance uplift.


   D.6                             I MPACT OF D IFFERENT T EMPERATURE

 Ultimately, we ventured to experiment with the temperature coefficient evaluation for GPT-4 (cf. Table
 7), where, at a value of 0.7, the Dr. DPO method consistently outperforms its baseline counterparts,
 henceforth, reaffirming the methodвҖҷs validity and effectiveness.
 Table 7: Comparison of Win Rate Performance on the Anthropic HH Dataset at 0% and 40% Flipped
 Pair Ratios (Temperature=0.7).

                                                                      Models             0% Flipped                   40% Flipped                  Improv.
                                                                      DPO                     48.30                           48.49                +0.39
                                                                      cDPO                    47.96                           46.14                вҲ’3.79
                                                                      IPO                     51.20                           52.39                +2.32
                                                                      Dr. DPO                 53.62                           56.71                +5.76



   D.7                             D ISCUSSION

  Comparison with LDR Zhu et al. (2023): Unlike LDR, which applies DRO for robust multi-
  class classification, Dr. DPO is tailored for preference learning tasks. While LDR offers pointwise
  robustness by adjusting weights for individual class labels per instance x, Dr. DPO provides pairwise
  robustness by optimizing weights for each pair of responses (yw , yl ) within dataset O. Furthermore,
  LDR seeks to reduce overfitting by decreasing the weights of selected instances, whereas Dr. DPO
  counters mismatched pair effects by up-weighting chosen response pairs.


                                                                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E   G ENERATED S AMPLES FROM DPO-T RAINED M ODELS AND D R .
    DPO-T RAINED M ODELS
In this section, we present some examples to showcase the pairwise comparison between DPO-
trained models and Dr. DPO-trained ones. Some comparisons on Anthropic HH and Reddit TL;DR
summarization dataset come with reference answers, to save space, we omit the reference answers
here.
Table 8: A qualitative pairwise comparison of samples generated by DPO and Dr. DPO, where Dr.
DPO wins.

 Prompt            What are some easy to make Christmas decorations I can make for inside the house?
 DPO               There are so many easy Christmas decorations to make, here are some ideas -
                   ornaments to hang on the Christmas tree, lights to hang on the light fixtures in
                   the house, ornaments to put on the doors and windows. You can make these
                   decorations from a selection of holiday-themed objects, such as silver Christmas
                   balls, crystal Christmas balls, mini glass Christmas figures, Christmas ornaments,
                   paper Christmas trees, Christmas banners, silver tinsel, mini silver lights.
                   Some ideas for decorations to put up on the Christmas tree - Christmas trees with
                   mini Christmas lights, Christmas ornaments - mini Christmas trees, mini Christmas
                   lights, Christmas banners, paper Christmas trees, mini tinsel garlands.
                   If you add a Christmas tree to your house decorations, there are also many different
                   types of Christmas trees to choose from, you can choose from Christmas trees with
                   lighted branches, Christmas trees with hanging lights, Christmas trees with mini
                   lights on the top, Christmas trees decorated with tiny ornaments.

 Dr. DPO           You want to make holiday decorations inside the house, for Christmas? Would these
                    be OK for you? What I have available would make for a fun experience: - garland
                   - candles - pine cones - Christmas lights I can also offer to help you choose what
                    kind of decoration you like best, to give you specific ideas for what you want to
                    make. If you have any questions about materials or decorating, or about the process,
                    feel free to ask. I will help you make the decorations, but also provide suggestions
                    and ideas for you.
                   - pine cone garland - easy and fun decoration, to hang on your door, or inside your
                   windows, and include some small pieces for each guest, or you can make them
                    from whole pinecones and some string to attach them to. Decorate the sides of your
                    home with a green garland on a wooden stick. For the garland, you could:
                   - make pine cone garland from a whole pinecone and string. To make each pinecone:
                   - Cut a pinecone in half.
                   - Cut each half in half.
                   - Take the center of one half, and put the other half on top of it. Repeat with all the
                    pinecones. If the pinecones are large, you can stack them, then use extra pinecones
                    to вҖңtieвҖқ them all together.
                   - Cut a few small circles out of the center of each pinecone for heads and arms. I
                    recommend using pinewood sticks, such as Christmas tree ornaments. Attach them
                    to the pinecone by sticking them into the center of each cone. You may need to add
                    string to attach each stick to the pinecone by wrapping it around and through the
                    center of the cone. Practice making garland before you start, to get used to how the
                    pinecones and sticks are arranged, to make sure you have the hang of it.
                   - Cut green grass cutouts to put on the garland, to decorate your doors.

 Judgment          Response of DPO provides a couple of simple decoration ideas, while Response of
                   Dr. DPO offers a detailed step-by-step guide on how to make a specific decoration,
                   along with offering further assistance.
 Verdict results   DR. DPO wins.


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: A qualitative pairwise comparison of samples generated by DPO and Dr. DPO, where Dr.
DPO wins.

 Prompt            SUBREDDIT: r/personalfinance TITLE: Helping empty nesting parents, what to
                   do? POST: xpost from /r/legaladvice as they suggest /r/personalfinance would have
                   good insights
                   IвҖҷm at a phase in life where IвҖҷm helping take care of many matters for my parents. I
                   need to find who would be the right set of people to consult with (tax attorney? real
                   estate attorney? cfa?) in Chicago, IL. Regarding my parents situation:
                   - Only social security income (addl: help with everything i can) - 50-75k in credit
                   card debt - Owe 300k on primary home (unable to sell, been trying) - Inherited
                   175k property (rented it out in past - no remaining mortgage - very sellable)
                   I need to understand the best way for them to sell both properties (tax and other
                   implications) and protect $ from rental property sale to use towards general debt +
                   retirement. Thank you so much!!!

 DPO               Parents are empty nesters with a lot of debt and a property to sell. Need to
                   understand what the best way to proceed is.

 Dr. DPO           parents are struggling with huge debt, need to understand best way to utilize their
                   assets and income streams to pay off debt. They are empty nesters and have no
                   retirement savings. What should they do?

 Judgment          Dr. DPO does a better job of summarizing the post because it includes more details
                   about the parentsвҖҷ financial situation and the need for advice on how to manage
                   their assets and debts.
 Verdict results   DR. DPO wins.


                                                28
