Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L IVE C ODE B ENCH : H OLISTIC AND C ONTAMINATION
F REE E VALUATION OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
FOR C ODE

 Naman Jain†       King Han†        Alex Gu* $   Wen-Ding Li*‡        Fanjia Yan*†     Tianjun Zhang*†

              Sida I. Wang        Armando Solar-Lezama$       Koushik Sen†       Ion Stoica†
                              †                    $           ‡
                                  UC Berkeley          MIT         Cornell

 {naman_jain,kingh0730,fanjiayan,tianjunz,ksen,istoica}@berkeley.edu
 {gua,asolar}@csail.mit.edu wl678@cornell.edu sidawang88@gmail.com


                                            A BSTRACT

         Large Language Models (LLM S) applied to code-related applications have emerged
         as a prominent field, attracting significant interest from academia and industry.
         However, as new and improved LLM S are developed, existing evaluation bench-
         marks (e.g., H UMAN E VAL, MBPP) are no longer sufficient for assessing their
         capabilities suffering from data contamination, overfitting, saturation, and focus
         on merely code generation. In this work, we propose L IVE C ODE B ENCH, a compre-
         hensive and contamination-free evaluation of LLM S for code, which collects new
         problems over time from contests across three competition platforms, L EET C ODE,
         AT C ODER, and C ODE F ORCES. Notably, our benchmark also focuses on a broader
         range of code-related capabilities, such as self-repair, code execution, and test
         output prediction, beyond just code generation. Currently, L IVE C ODE B ENCH hosts
         over six hundred coding problems that were published between May 2023 and
         Aug 2024. We evaluate over 50 LLM S on L IVE C ODE B ENCH (LCB for brevity)
         presenting the largest evaluation study of code LLM S on competition problems.
         Based on the study, we present novel empirical findings on contamination, over-
         fitting, and holistic evaluations. We demonstrate that time-segmented evaluations
         serve as a robust approach to evade contamination; they are successful at detecting
         contamination across a wide range of open and closed models including GPT-4-O,
         C LAUDE, D EEP S EEK, and C ODESTRAL. Next, we highlight overfitting and satu-
         ration of traditional coding benchmarks like H UMAN E VAL and demonstrate LCB
         allows more reliable evaluations. Finally, our holistic evaluation scenarios allow
         for measuring the different capabilities of programming agents in isolation.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Code has emerged as an important application area for LLM S, with a proliferation of code-specific
models (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Nijkamp et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b; Roziere et al.,
2023; Guo et al., 2024; Ridnik et al., 2024; Lozhkov et al., 2024) and their applications across various
tasks such as program repair (Zheng et al., 2024; Olausson et al., 2023), optimization (Madaan et al.,
2023a), test generation (Steenhoek et al., 2023), documentation (Luo et al., 2024), SQL (Sun et al.,
2023). In contrast with these rapid advancements, evaluations have remained relatively stagnant, and
current benchmarks like H UMAN E VAL and MBPP paint a misleading picture. Firstly, while coding
is a multi-faceted skill, these benchmarks only focus on code generation, thus overlooking broader
code-related capabilities. Moreover, these benchmarks suffer from contamination or overfitting, as
benchmark samples are present in the training datasets.
   1
     Note that for model comparisons – performances are averaged across multiple months and platforms
achieving a larger sample size.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Left. L IVE C ODE B ENCH comprises problems marked with release dates, allowing evaluations
over different time windows. The figure depicts performances of D EEP S EEK, GPT-4-O, and C LAUDE -
3 S models over bimonthly time windows (∼ 40 L EET C ODE problems) showcasing a stark drop after
their cutoff dates, highlighting contamination. Thus, we can detect and avoid contamination by
evaluating models only on time-windows after the model’s cutoff date (green region)1 . Right. We
evaluate LLM S across four scenarios that capture key coding capabilities necessary for building
programming agents: code generation, repair, testing, and comprehension. The figure depicts various
model performances across the scenarios available in L IVE C ODE B ENCH in a radial plot – highlighting
relative differences changing across the scenarios.

Motivated by these shortcomings, we introduce L IVE C ODE B ENCH, built on the following principles:

      1. Live updates to prevent contamination. LLM S are trained on massive inscrutable corpora
         and current benchmarks suffer from the risk of data contamination as they could be included
         in those training datasets. While previous works have attempted decontamination using
         both exact and fuzzy matches (Li et al., 2023b;d), it can be a non-trivial task (Team,
         2024; Yang et al., 2023). Existing competition programming benchmarks (like APPS and
         C ODE S COPE) are already contaminated and may fail to provide reliable evaluation of code
         LLM capabilities. In L IVE C ODE B ENCH, to prevent the risk of problem contamination, we
         evaluate models on new problems tagged with a release date. Next, for newer models, we
         only consider problems released after the model’s cutoff date to ensure that the model has
         not been trained on it as demonstrated in Figure 1 left.
      2. Holistic Evaluation. Current code evaluations primarily focus on natural language to code
         generation. However, programming is a multi-faceted task that requires capabilities beyond
         those measured by code generation. These broader capabilities are even more relevant
         for constructing programming agents that can interact with the execution environment.
         Therefore, we evaluate the execution-feedback-based multi-turn coding using the self-repair
         scenario (Olausson et al., 2023), assess code comprehension capabilities using the code
         execution scenario (Gu et al., 2024), and introduce the test output prediction scenario to
         evaluate the models’ test generation capabilities.
      3. High-quality problems and tests. High-quality problems and tests are crucial for reliable
         evaluation of LLM S. However, existing benchmarks suffer from multiple deficiencies.
         First, existing competitive programming benchmarks (APPS, C ODE -C ONTESTS, X C ODE E VAL,
         C ODE S COPE) contain problems not amenable to input-output-based auto-grading. For
         example, C ODE -C ONTESTS (Li et al., 2022) (page 39, second-to-last paragraph) reports that
         about twenty-five percent of the problems in the benchmark accept multiple correct outputs
         for a single input. This incorrectly penalizes correct solutions, adding noise to a considerable
         fraction of the benchmark. Next, prior benchmarks like H UMAN E VAL and APPS contain
         insufficient tests, further exacerbating noise in evaluations ( Liu et al. (2023a) reports 8%
         drop in model performance). In L IVE C ODE B ENCH, we source high-quality problems from
         reputable platforms and implement heuristics to detect and remove problems not amenable
         to input-output-based auto-grading. Finally, for every problem, we provide a substantial
         number of tests (over 18 on average) for reliable and efficient evaluations. In contrast to


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 1: Comparing LCB with existing coding and competition programming benchmarks.

                                        Contamination   Problem    Robust Test     Varied          Not      Broader Eval.   Comp. Analysis
   Benchmark                             Prevention     Curation   Based Eval.   Difficulties   Saturated     Scenarios      across Models
   H UMAN E VAL (Chen et al., 2021)          ✗             ✓           ✗              ✓            ✗             ✗                ✓
   H UMAN E VAL + (Liu et al., 2023b)        ✗             ✓           ✓              ✓            ✗             ✗                ✓
   MBPP (Austin et al., 2021)                ✗             ✓           ✗              ✓            ✗             ✗                ✓
   APPS (Hendrycks et al., 2021)             ✗             ✗           ✗              ✓            ✓            ✗                 ✗
   C ODE -C ONTESTS (Li et al., 2022)        ✗             ✗           ✓              ✗            ✓            ✗                 ✗
   X C ODE E VAL (Khan et al., 2023)         ✗             ✗           -              ✗            ✓            ✓2                ✗
   C ODE S COPE (Yan et al., 2023)           ✗             ✗           -              ✗            ✓            ✓2                ✗
   TACO (Li et al., 2023c)                   ✗             ✗           ✗              ✗            ✓            ✗                 ✗
   USCAOB ENCH (Shi et al., 2024)            ✗             ✓           ✓              ✓            ✓            ✗                 ✗
   L IVE C ODE B ENCH (Ours)                 ✓             ✓           ✓              ✓            ✓             ✓                ✓



          prior works, we also include several large tests designed for stress-testing solutions ensuring
          weak or worse complexity solutions do not pass test harnesses.
       4. Difficulty Guided Problem Curation. Competitive programming is a challenging domain
          even for strong LLM S. As a result, these problems can be unsuitable for meaningfully com-
          paring today’s open LLM S, because the variance in performance is low, often relying on less
          than 1% performance differences (within the margin of error). Therefore, we use problem
          difficulty ratings (sourced from the competition websites) to curate our problems, avoiding
          those that are too difficult for current models. In particular, we avoid collecting C ODE -
          F ORCES problems used by prior works (C ODE -C ONTESTS, C ODE S COPE, X C ODE E VAL) since
          we find they do not sufficiently distinguish models due to model performances (PASS @1)
          tending to zero. Indeed, LCB easy and medium problems can separate 7B models that are
          indistinguishable on the hard subset (see DS-7B vs SC2-7B).

With these principles in mind, we build L IVE C ODE B ENCH, a continuously updated benchmark that
avoids data contamination. Particularly, we collect 612 problems from contests occurring between
May 2023 and Aug 2024 and use them to construct the different scenarios.

Empirical Findings. We have evaluated over 50 (18 base models and 34 instruction-tuned)
models across different L IVE C ODE B ENCH scenarios. Based on this study and following analysis, we
present novel empirical findings which have not been revealed in prior benchmarks.
       1. Contamination. We observe a stark drop in the performance of D EEP S EEK, GPT-4-O,
          C ODESTRAL and C LAUDE -3 S on L EET C ODE problems released after Aug 2023, Oct 2023, Jan
          2024, and April 2024 (Figure 1 left). These results highlight likely contamination in older
          problems and time-segmented evaluations prove effective for performing fair comparisons
          across varied set of models from both open and closed domains.
       2. Holistic Evaluation. Our evaluations reveal that model performances are correlated across
          tasks, but the relative differences do vary. For example, in Figure 1 right, the gap between
          open and closed models further increases on tasks like self-repair or test output prediction.
          Similarly, C LAUDE -3-O PUS surpasses GPT-4 on the test output prediction scenario.
       3. H UMAN E VAL Overfitting. Upon comparing L IVE C ODE B ENCH with H UMAN E VAL, we find
          that models cluster into two groups, ones that perform well on both benchmarks, and others
          that perform well on H UMAN E VAL but not on L IVE C ODE B ENCH (see Figure 4). The latter
          group primarily comprises fine-tuned open-access models while the former comprises base
          and closed models. This indicates some level of overfitting to H UMAN E VAL.
       4. Model Comparisons (Figure 3). We provide model comparisons across different groups
          like base, instruct, open, and closed models and across groups like open vs closed models.
Concurrent Work. (Huang et al., 2023) also evaluate LLM S in a time-segmented manner. However,
they only focus on C ODE F ORCES problems, while we combine problems across platforms and
additionally propose a holistic evaluation across multiple code-related scenarios. Liu et al. (2024)
evaluate the code comprehension capabilities of LLM S using execution. (Singhal et al., 2024) also
evaluates LLM S on more tasks but focus on non-functional-correctness aspects of programming. Shi
et al. (2024) evaluate LLM S on USACO problems while we focus on simple competition scenarios.
   2
     L IVE C ODE B ENCH considers different evaluation scenarios compared to X C ODE E VAL and C ODE S COPE
focusing on settings where reliable evaluation is possible.


                                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Problem Statement                                                            User Solution
                       You are given a positive integer                                       def count(nums):
                       array `nums`. Return the total                                           freq = Counter(nums)
                                                                                                cnts = freq.values()
                       frequencies of elements in                                               max_freq = max(cnts)
                       `nums` such that those                           Input                   return (
                       elements all have the                                                      cnts.count(max_freq)*
                       maximum frequency.                                                         max_freq
                                                                nums = [1,3,3,4,4]              )


            Code Generation                               Self Repair            Test Output Prediction                 Code Execution
                                                                                Step 1. 3 and 4 have the
         def count(nums):                        def count(nums):                                                count([1,3,3,4,4])==??
           freq = Counter(nums)                    freq = Counter(nums)
                                                                                maximum frequencies              Ans is 4
           max = freq.values()                     max = freq.values()          Step 2. max frequency is 2
           count = len([                           count = len([                Step 3. 2*2 is 4
              k for k, v in                           k for k, v in             Step 4. Ans is 4
              freq.items()                            freq.items()
              if v == max                             if v == max
           ])                                      ])
           return count                            return count * max


                  Figure 2: Overview of the four scenarios present in L IVE C ODE B ENCH.
2    H OLISTIC E VALUATION

Code capabilities of LLM S are evaluated and compared using natural language to code generation
tasks. However, this only captures one dimension of code-related capabilities. AlphaCodium (Ridnik
et al., 2024) developed an intricate LLM pipeline for solving competition coding problems. By
combining natural language reasoning, test case generation, code generation, and self-repair, they
achieve significant improvements over a naive direct code generation baseline, showcasing the
importance of these broader capabilities. Motivated by this, we propose a holistic evaluation of LLM S
using a suite of evaluation setups that capture a broader range of code-related capabilities.
Specifically, we evaluate code LLM S in four scenarios, namely code generation, self-repair, code
execution, and test output prediction. Our selection criterion was to pick settings that are useful
components in code LLM workflows and in addition, have clear and automated evaluation metrics.
Following we describe each of these scenarios in detail.
Code Generation. The code generation scenario follows the standard setup for generating code
from natural language. The model is given a problem statement, which includes a natural language
description and example tests (input-output pairs), and is tasked with generating a correct solution.
The evaluation is performed based on functional correctness, using a set of unseen test cases. We
use the PASS @1 metric measured as the fraction of the problems for which the model was able to
generate a program passing all tests. Figure 2 (left) provides an example of this scenario.
Self Repair. The self-repair scenario is based on previous works that tested the self-repair capabilities
of LLM S (Olausson et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Here, the model is given
a problem statement from which it generates a candidate program (similar to the single-step code
generation scenario above). However, in case of a mistake, the model is additionally provided with
error feedback (either the exception message or a failing test case) and is tasked with generating the
fixed solution. Similar to the code generation scenario, the evaluation is performed via functional
correctness on the final program, i.e. either the single-step correct generation or the attempted repair.
We use the PASS @1 metric to measure the combined performance after the repair step. Figure 2
(mid-left) provides an example of this scenario.
Code Execution. The code execution scenario is based on the output prediction setup used in
CRUXE VAL (Gu et al., 2024). The model is provided a program snippet consisting of a function (f)
along with a test input to the program and is tasked with predicting the output of the program on the
input test case. The evaluation is performed via an execution based on an exact match correctness
metric. Figure 2 (right) provides an example of the code execution scenario.
Test Case Output Prediction. Finally, we introduce a new task that is designed to study natural
language reasoning and test generation. In this task, the model is given the problem statement along
with a test case input, and it is tasked with generating the expected output for that input. This task
follows a setup similar to the one used in C ODE T (Chen et al., 2022), where tests are generated solely


                                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from problem statements, without the need for the function’s implementation. A key difference is
that we provide a fixed set of test inputs for each problem in our dataset, and the models are then
prompted to only predict the expected output for those specific inputs. This approach allows for
a straightforward evaluation of the test generation capabilities by avoiding test input prediction, a
hard-to-evaluate task. Figure 2 (mid-right) provides an example of this scenario.

3     B ENCHMARK C URATION

We curate our problems from three coding competition websites: L EET C ODE, AT C ODER, and C ODE -
F ORCES. These websites periodically host contests containing problems that assess the coding and
problem-solving skills of participants. The problems consist of a natural language problem statement
along with example input-output examples, and the goal is to write a program that passes a set of
hidden tests. Further, thousands of participants participate, solving these problems thus ensuring that
the problems are vetted for clarity.

3.1   DATA C OLLECTION

We have written automated HTML scrapers for each of the above websites to collect problems and
the corresponding metadata. To ensure quality and consistency, we parse mathematical formulas
and exclude problems with images. We also exclude problems that are not suitable for grading by
input-output examples, such as those that accept multiple correct answers or require the construction
of data structures. Specifically, we use keyword-based heuristic filters to filter interactive problems
and problems accepting multiple correct solutions. Besides parsing the problem descriptions, we
also collect associated ground truth solutions and test cases whenever directly available. Thus for
each problem, we collect tuples of natural language problem statement P , test cases T , and ground
truth solution S . Finally, we associate the contest date D to mark the release date of each problem
and use the collected attributes to construct problems for our four scenarios (detailed in Section C.2
ahead). Note that this process is completely automated and human involvement is only involved in
modifying high-level design decisions such as updating problem difficulty settings and improving the
keyword-based heuristics for filtering problems over different “live updates”.
Scrolling through time. As noted, we associate the contest date D for each problem. The release
date allows us the measure the performance of LLM S over different time windows by filtering
problems based on whether the problem release date falls within a time window (referred to as
“scrolling” through time). This is crucial for evaluating and comparing models trained at different
times. Specifically, for a new model and the corresponding cutoff date (normalized to the release
date if the training cutoff date is not published), we can measure the performance of the model on
benchmark problems released after the cutoff date. We have developed a UI that allows comparing
models on problems released during different time windows (Figure 10).
Test collection. Tests are crucial for assessing the correctness of the generated outputs and are used
in all four scenarios. We collect tests available on platform websites whenever possible and use them
for the benchmark. Otherwise, following (Liu et al., 2023b), we use a LLM (here GPT-4-T URBO)
to generate test inputs for the problems. A key difference between our test generation approach is
that instead of generating inputs directly using the LLM, we construct generators that sample inputs
based on the problem specifications using in-context learning. Details of this approach can be found
in Section A.2. Finally, we collect a small fraction of failing tests from the platforms for robust
adversarial tests. Section A.4 describes our design decisions to determine the number of tests.
Problem difficulty. Competition programming has remained a challenge for LLM S, with GPT-4
achieving an average C ODE F ORCES rating (ELO) of 392, placing it in the bottom 5 percentile (OpenAI,
2023). This makes it difficult to compare LLM S, as the variation in performance across models is low.
In L IVE C ODE B ENCH, we collect problems of diverse difficulties as labeled in competition platforms,
excluding problems that are rated above a certain threshold that are likely too difficult for even the
best models3 . Further, we use these ratings to classify problems as E ASY, M EDIUM, and H ARD for
more granular model comparisons, estimating difficulty roughly based on H UMAN E VAL scores.
We defer the platform and scenario specific curation details to the Appendix (Section C)
   3
     From our early explorations, we find C ODE F ORCES problems being considerably more difficult than AT C ODER
and L EET C ODE problems and thus focus primarily on the latter platforms.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     E XPERIMENT S ETUP
We describe the experimental setup in this section. First, we provide the common setup across the
scenarios, followed by the scenario-specific setups in Section 4.1.
Models. We evaluate 52 models across various sizes, ranging from 1.3B to 70B, including base
models, instruction models, and both open and closed models. Our experiments include models from
different classes, such as GPT S, C LAUDES, G EMINIS, M ISTRAL, LL A M A -3 S, D EEP S EEKS, C ODE LL A -
M AS, S TAR C ODER 2, C ODE Q WEN and their variants. Appendix D.1 provides the list of models.
Evaluation Metrics. We use the PASS @1 (Kulal et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021) metric for our
evaluations. Specifically, we generate 10 candidate answers for each problem from model providers
or using V LLM (Kwon et al., 2023). We use nucleus sampling with temperature 0.2 and top_p 0.95
and calculate the fraction of correct solutions.

4.1   S CENARIO - SPECIFIC SETUP

The setup for each scenario is presented below. Note that the base models are only used in the code
generation scenario since they do not easily follow the format for the other scenarios.
Code Generation. For the instruction-tuned models, we use a zero-shot prompt and follow the
approach of Hendrycks et al. (2021) by adding appropriate instructions to generate solutions in either
functional or stdin format (one-shot for base-models). Section D.2 depicts the prompt.
Self Repair. Similar to prior work Olausson et al. (2023), we use the programs generated during the
code generation scenario along with the corresponding error feedback to build the zero-shot prompt
for the self-repair scenario. The error feedback can be syntax errors, runtime errors, wrong answers,
and time-limit errors. Section D.3 provides error feedback and the corresponding prompt.
Code Execution. We use few-shot prompts for the code execution scenario, both with and without
chain-of-thought prompting (COT). Particularly, we use a 2-shot prompt without COT and a 1-shot
prompt with COT with manually detailed steps. The prompts are detailed in Section D.4.
Test Output Prediction. We use a zero-shot prompt that queries the model to complete assertions,
given the problem, function signature, and test input. We provide the prompt in Section D.5.

5     R ESULTS
We first describe how L IVE C ODE B ENCH helps detect and avoid benchmark contamination in Sec-
tion 5.1. Next, we present the findings from our evaluations on L IVE C ODE B ENCH in Section 5.2.

5.1   AVOIDING C ONTAMINATION

Contamination in D EEP S EEK and GPT-4-O. L IVE C ODE B ENCH curates problems released since May
2023. However, D EEP S EEK was released Sep 2023 and GPT-4-O’s official cutoff date is Nov 2023.
We can measure the performance of these models on the benchmark problems released after these
dates, thereby estimating the performance of the model on previously unseen problems. Figure 1
shows the performance of these models on L EET C ODE problems released in different months from
May 2023 and Aug 2024. First, we notice stark drops in model performance – DS-I NS -33B model
after Aug. 2023, GPT-4-O model after Nov. 2023, C LAUDE -3 S model after Apr. 2023. These drops
align with their release or cutoff dates which suggests that the earlier problems might indeed be
contaminated. This trend is consistent across other L IVE C ODE B ENCH scenarios like repair and code
execution, as depicted in Figure 11. Concurrently, (Guo et al., 2024) (Section 4.1, last paragraph)
also acknowledge the possibility of L EET C ODE contamination, noting that “models achieved higher
scores in the LeetCode Contest held in July and August”.
Interestingly, we find that this drop in performance primarily occurs for the L EET C ODE problems
only and that the model performance is relatively smooth across the months for problems from other
platforms. Figure 12 shows a relatively stable performance for all models on AT C ODER problems.
Performances of other models. We study performance variations in other models released more
recently. Particularly, GPT-4-T URBO, M ISTRAL -L, and C LAUDE -3 S models were released in Nov’2023,


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Figure 3: Model performances across the four scenarios available in L IVE C ODE B ENCH .
Feb’2024, and Mar’2024 respectively. Empirically, we do not observe significant performance
variations across the months, as shown in Figure 13.Interestingly, we find that even the DS-BASE -33B
model also suffers from contamination dropping from PASS @1 ∼ 60 in May problems to PASS @1 ∼ 0
in September L EET C ODE problems. Finally, C ODESTRAL achieves PASS @1 36.5 on problems released
between May’23 and Jan’24 and PASS @1 28.3 on problems post Jan’24.

5.2   P ERFORMANCE AND M ODEL C OMPARISONS

We provide our model comparison findings here (and in Appendix E). To overcome contamination
issues in D EEP S EEK models, we only consider problems released since Sep 2023 for all evaluations
below. Figure 3 shows the performance of a subset of models across the four scenarios.
Holistic Evaluations. We have evaluated the models across the four scenarios currently available
in L IVE C ODE B ENCH. Figure 1 displays the performance of models on all scenarios along the axes
of the polar chart. First, we observe that the relative order of models remains mostly consistent
across the scenarios. This is also supported by high correlations between PASS @1 metric across the
scenarios – over 0.88 across all pairs as shown in Figure 14. However, despite the strong correlation,
the relative differences in performance do vary across the scenarios. For example, GPT-4-T URBO
further gains performance gap over GPT-4 in the self-repair scenario after already leading in the code
generation scenario. Similarly, C LAUDE -3-O PUS and M ISTRAL -L perform well in tasks involving COT,
particularly in the code execution and test output prediction scenarios. For instance, C LAUDE -3-O PUS
even outperforms GPT-4-T URBO in the test output prediction scenario. These differences highlight
the need for holistic evaluations beyond measuring code generation capabilities.
Comparison to H UMAN E VAL. Next, we compare how code generation performance metrics translate
between L IVE C ODE B ENCH and H UMAN E VAL, the primary benchmark used for evaluating coding
capabilities. Note that we use H UMAN E VAL + providing more accurate evaluations. Figure 4 shows a
scatter plot of PASS @1 on H UMAN E VAL + versus LCB-Easy code generation scenario. We find only a
moderate correlation of 0.72, with much larger performance variations on LCB-Easy.
Additionally, we observe that the models cluster into two groups, shaded in red and green. The models
in the green-shaded region lie close to the x = y line, indicating that they perform similarly on both


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Scatter plot comparing PASS @1 of models on H UMAN E VAL + versus LCB-Easy (time-window
Sep 2023 to May 2024). We find that the models are separated into two groups – the green-shaded
region where performances on the two datasets are aligned and the red-shaded region where models
perform well on H UMAN E VAL + but perform poorly on L IVE C ODE B ENCH. This indicates potential
overfitting on H UMAN E VAL + and primarily occurs in the fine-tuned variants of open-access models.
For example, DS-I NS -1.3B achieves PASS @1 of 60 and 26 on H UMAN E VAL + and LCB-Easy subset.
Thus, while it ranks above CMD-R+ (∼ 100x larger!) on H UMAN E VAL +, it performs significantly
worse on the LCB. Similarly, DS-I NS -6.7B and C ODE Q WEN outperform S ONNET on H UMAN E VAL +
but are > 20 points behind on LCB-Easy.
benchmarks. On the other hand, models in the red shaded region perform well on H UMAN E VAL +
but not as well on L IVE C ODE B ENCH. Interestingly, the green-shaded cluster contains base models
or closed-access models, while the red-shaded cluster primarily comprises fine-tuned variants of
open-access models. The well-separated clusters suggest that many models that perform well on
H UMAN E VAL might be overfitting on the benchmark, and their performances do not translate well
to problems from other domains or difficulty levels like those present in L IVE C ODE B ENCH. Indeed,
H UMAN E VAL has small and isolated programming problems and thus easier to overfit. In contrast,
L IVE C ODE B ENCH problems are sourced from reputable coding platforms offering more challenging
problems with higher diversity and difficulty levels. We detail instances of this overfitting (DS-I NS -
1.3B, DS-I NS -6.7B, and C ODE Q WEN) in Figure 4 caption.
Comparing Base Models. We use four families of base models and compare them on the code
generation scenario. A one-shot prompt is used for all models to avoid any formatting and answer
extraction issues. We find L3-BASE and DS-B models are significantly better than both C ODE LL A M A
and S TAR C ODER 2 base models with a DS-BASE -6.7B model even outperforming both CL-BASE -34B
and SC2-BASE -15B models. Note that some LCB specific differences can potentially be attributed to
data curation approaches. For instance, SC models (and potentially DS as discussed in Section 5.1)
use competition problems during pre-training.
Role of Post Training. Post-training improves performance on both H UMAN E VAL + and L IVE -
C ODE B ENCH for the code generation scenario. Particularly, on LCB L3-I NS -70B, DS-I NS -33B and
P HIND -34B improve PASS @1 over their base models by 8.2, 7.3 and 9.5 points respectively. This
highlights the importance of good post-training datasets for building strong LLM S. At the same time,
we note that the base models have aligned performances on LCB code generation and H UMAN E VAL +
benchmarks and lie within or close to the green shaded region in Figure 4. However, the fine-tuned
open models exhibit a larger performance gap, with much better performances on H UMAN E VAL +. On
the other hand, the closed-access models are still aligned across both benchmarks. This suggests the
necessity of more diverse post-training data mixtures.
Open-Access vs Closed-Access Models. In general, closed (API) access model families generally
outperform the open access models. The gap is only closed by three models, namely L3-I NS -70B,
M IXTRAL, and DS-I NS -33B which reach the performance levels of the closed models. For instance, in


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Comparison of open access and (closed) API access models on L IVE C ODE B ENCH code
generation scenario. We find that closed-access models consistently outperform the open models
with only strong instruction-tuned variants of > 30B models (specifically L3-I NS -70B, M IXTRAL and
DS-I NS -33B models) crossing the performance gap.

the code generation scenario (Figure 5), these models reach close to or even outperform closed access
models like G EMINI -P RO, GPT-3.5- TURBO, and C LAUDE -3-S ONNET. The performances vary across
scenarios with the closed-access models faring better in test output and code execution scenarios.
Highlighting gap between SoTA One distinct observation from our evaluations is the large gap
between SoTA models and open models across all scenarios. Particularly, GPT-4-T URBO, GPT-4,
G EMINI -P RO -1.5 and C LAUDE -3-O PUS lead across the benchmarks with wide performance margins
over other models. This distinguishes L IVE C ODE B ENCH from prior benchmarks (like H UMAN E VAL)
where various open models have achieved similar or better performance. For example, DS-I NS -33B
is merely 4.3 point behind GPT-4-T URBO on H UMAN E VAL + but 16.2 points (69%) on LCB code
generation scenario. This gap either holds or sometimes even amplifies across other scenarios.
Comparing open-access instruction-tuned models. Here, we compare various fine-tuned variants
of the L3-BASE, D EEP S EEK and C ODE LL A M A base models across different model sizes. We find
that fine-tuned L3-BASE and D EEP S EEK models lead in performance, followed by P HIND -34B and
C ODE LL A M A models across most scenarios. Broadly, we find that model performances correlate with
model sizes. For example, P HIND -34B model outperforms the 6.7B models across all scenarios.

6    R ELATED W ORK

Language Models for Code Generation. Starting with Codex (Chen et al., 2021), there are
over a dozen code LLM S. These include CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021; 2023), CodeGen (Nijkamp
et al., 2022), SantaCoder (Allal et al., 2023), StarCoder (Li et al., 2023b; Lozhkov et al., 2024),
InCoder (Fried et al., 2022), CodeGeeX (Zheng et al., 2023), L3-BASE, D EEP S EEK (Bi et al., 2024)
and C ODE LL A M A (Roziere et al., 2023).
Code Generation Benchmarks. Many benchmarks have been proposed to compare and evaluate
these models. These primarily focus on natural language to Python code generation: H UMAN E VAL
(Chen et al., 2021), H UMAN E VAL + (Liu et al., 2023b), APPS (Hendrycks et al., 2021), C ODE -C ONTESTS
(Li et al., 2022), MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), L2CEval (Ni et al., 2023). Their variants have been
proposed to cover more languages, (Wang et al., 2022a; Zheng et al., 2023; Cassano et al., 2022;
Athiwaratkun et al., 2022). Many benchmarks have focused on code generation in APIs. Benchmarks
like DS-1000 (Lai et al., 2023), ARCADE (Yin et al., 2022), NumpyEval (Zhang et al., 2023b), and
PandasEval (Jain et al., 2022) focus on data science APIs. Other benchmarks measure using broader
APIs or general software engineering tasks, such as JuICe (Agashe et al., 2019), APIBench (Patil
et al., 2023), RepoBench (Liu et al., 2023c), ODEX (Wang et al., 2022b), SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al.,


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023), GoogleCodeRepo (Shrivastava et al., 2023), RepoEval (Zhang et al., 2023a), ClasEval (Du
et al., 2023) and Cocomic-Data (Ding et al., 2022).
A few benchmarks specifically measure competitive programming, such as APPS (Hendrycks et al.,
2021), CodeContests (Li et al., 2022), CodeScope (Yan et al., 2023), xCodeEval (Khan et al., 2023),
and LeetCode-Hard (Shinn et al., 2023), and TACO (Li et al., 2023c). Table 1 highlights differences
between them. Methods such as AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022), AlphaCode 2 (Gemini Team et al.,
2023), ALGO (Zhang et al., 2023d), Parsel (Zelikman et al., 2022), code cleaning (Jain et al., 2023),
code explainations (Li et al., 2023a), analogical reasoning (Yasunaga et al., 2023), and AlphaCodium
(Ridnik et al., 2024) have focused on improving LLM S.



6.1   H OLISTIC TASKS AND C ONTAMINATION

Code Repair. (Chen et al., 2023; Olausson et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023b; Peng et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023c) have investigated self-repair for existing code LLM benchmarks. These methods
use error feedback for models to improve inspiring our code repair scenario.
Code Execution. Code execution was first studied in (Austin et al., 2021; Nye et al., 2021) L IVE -
C ODE B ENCH’s execution scenario is particularly inspired by CRUXEval (Gu et al., 2024), a recent
benchmark measuring the reasoning and execution abilities of code LLM S. We differ from CRUXEval
in that our benchmark is live, and our functions are more complex and human-produced.
Test Generation. Test generation using LLM S has been explored in (Yuan et al., 2023; Schäfer et al.,
2024; Tufano et al., 2022; Watson et al., 2020). Here, we decouple the test inputs and outputs for
fair evaluations. Finally, some works have additionally studied other tasks and scenarios like type
prediction (Mir et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023; Malik et al., 2019), code summarization (LeClair et al.,
2019; Iyer et al., 2016; Barone & Sennrich, 2017; Hasan et al., 2021; Alon et al., 2018), code security
(Liguori et al., 2022; Pearce et al., 2022; Tony et al., 2023), etc.
Contamination. Data contamination and test-case leakage have received considerable attention
Oren et al. (2024); Golchin & Surdeanu (2023); Weller et al. (2023); Roberts et al. (2024) recently.
(Sainz et al., 2023) demonstrated contamination by simply prompting the model to highlight its
contamination. Some detection methods have also been built to avoid these cases (Shi et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2023). For code, (Riddell et al., 2024) use edit distance and AST-similarity to detect
contamination. (Ma et al., 2021; Li et al., 2024) have explore “live” benchmark in other domains.



7     L IMITATIONS AND C ONCLUSION

We describe key limitations here and provide a deeper discussion in Appendix G.
Evaluation Noise. We anticipate noise from benchmark size, prompts, and sampling. For benchmark
size, while 612 problems is fairly larger than existing code benchmarks (e.g. 164 problems in
H UMAN E VAL), this set reduces on “scrolling” over the more recent problems. Next, prompting can
cause large variations in model performance and we do not tune prompts across models. For sampling,
we use bootstrapped PASS @1 using 10 completions, which should limit this noise considerably.
Problem Domain. L IVE C ODE B ENCH comprises competition programming problems which might not
correlate with how LLM S are used in practice. Even then, our results are well correlated with findings
from human evaluations like Chatbot-Arena Chiang et al. (2024) thus providing useful signal.
Conclusion. In this work, we propose L IVE C ODE B ENCH, a new benchmark for evaluating LLM S
for code. L IVE C ODE B ENCH provides an extensible framework that will keep on updating with new
problems. Our benchmark mitigates contamination issues in existing benchmarks by introducing live
evaluations and emphasizing scenarios beyond code generation to account for the broader coding
abilities of LLM S. Our evaluations reveal novel findings such as contamination detection, holistic
evaluations, and potential overfitting on H UMAN E VAL. We hope L IVE C ODE B ENCH with serve to
advance understanding of current code LLM S and also guide future research through our findings.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was supported in part by NSF grants CCF:1900968, CCF:1908870 and by SKY Lab
industrial sponsors and affiliates Astronomer, Google, IBM, Intel, Lacework, Microsoft, Mohamed
Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Nexla, Samsung SDS, Uber, and VMware. A. Gu is
supported by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 2141064. A. Solar-Lezama
is supported by the NSF and Intel Corporation through NSF Grant CCF:2217064. Any opinions,
findings, conclusions, or recommendations in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the position of the sponsors.
Finally, we thank Manish Shetty, Wei-Lin Chiang, Jierui Li, Horace He, Federico Cassano, Pengcheng
Yin, Kexun Zhang, Rishabh Singh, and Aman Madaan for helpful feedback at various stages of
the work. We particularly thank Kexun Zhang for providing results for C++ and Nikhil Thakur for
helping maintain the benchmark.

R EFERENCES
Rajas Agashe, Srinivasan Iyer, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Juice: A large scale distantly supervised
  dataset for open domain context-based code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02216, 2019.

Loubna Ben Allal, Raymond Li, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Christopher Akiki, Carlos Munoz
  Ferrandis, Niklas Muennighoff, Mayank Mishra, Alex Gu, Manan Dey, et al. Santacoder: don’t
  reach for the stars! arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03988, 2023.

Uri Alon, Shaked Brody, Omer Levy, and Eran Yahav. code2seq: Generating sequences from
  structured representations of code. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.01400, 2018.

Ben Athiwaratkun, Sanjay Krishna Gouda, Zijian Wang, Xiaopeng Li, Yuchen Tian, Ming Tan,
  Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Shiqi Wang, Qing Sun, Mingyue Shang, et al. Multi-lingual evaluation of
  code generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14868, 2022.

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.

Antonio Valerio Miceli Barone and Rico Sennrich. A parallel corpus of python functions and
  documentation strings for automated code documentation and code generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1707.02275, 2017.

Xiao Bi, Deli Chen, Guanting Chen, Shanhuang Chen, Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Honghui Ding,
  Kai Dong, Qiushi Du, Zhe Fu, et al. Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models with
  longtermism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02954, 2024.

Federico Cassano, John Gouwar, Daniel Nguyen, Sydney Nguyen, Luna Phipps-Costin, Donald
  Pinckney, Ming-Ho Yee, Yangtian Zi, Carolyn Jane Anderson, Molly Q Feldman, et al. Multipl-e:
  A scalable and extensible approach to benchmarking neural code generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.08227, 2022.

Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen.
  Codet: Code generation with generated tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10397, 2022.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li, Dacheng
 Li, Hao Zhang, Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Chatbot arena:
 An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference, 2024.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yangruibo Ding, Zijian Wang, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, Ramesh Nallapati,
  Parminder Bhatia, Dan Roth, and Bing Xiang. Cocomic: Code completion by jointly modeling
  in-file and cross-file context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10007, 2022.
Xueying Du, Mingwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Hanlin Wang, Junwei Liu, Yixuan Chen, Jiayi Feng,
  Chaofeng Sha, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. Classeval: A manually-crafted benchmark for evaluating
  llms on class-level code generation, 2023.
Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi Zhong, Wen
  tau Yih, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Incoder: A generative model for code infilling and
  synthesis. preprint arXiv:2204.05999, 2022.
A Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Shahriar Golchin and Mihai Surdeanu. Time travel in llms: Tracing data contamination in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08493, 2023.
Alex Gu, Baptiste Rozière, Hugh Leather, Armando Solar-Lezama, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Sida I
  Wang. Cruxeval: A benchmark for code reasoning, understanding and execution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.03065, 2024.
Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao
  Bi, Y Wu, YK Li, et al. Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets programming–the
  rise of code intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196, 2024.
Masum Hasan, Tanveer Muttaqueen, Abdullah Al Ishtiaq, Kazi Sajeed Mehrab, Md Mahim Anjum
 Haque, Tahmid Hasan, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Anindya Iqbal, and Rifat Shahriyar. Codesc: A large
 code-description parallel dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14220, 2021.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021.
Yiming Huang, Zhenghao Lin, Xiao Liu, Yeyun Gong, Shuai Lu, Fangyu Lei, Yaobo Liang, Yelong
  Shen, Chen Lin, Nan Duan, et al. Competition-level problems are effective llm evaluators. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.02143, 2023.
Srinivasan Iyer, Ioannis Konstas, Alvin Cheung, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Summarizing source code
  using a neural attention model. In 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics 2016, pp. 2073–2083. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016.
Naman Jain, Skanda Vaidyanath, Arun Iyer, Nagarajan Natarajan, Suresh Parthasarathy, Sriram
  Rajamani, and Rahul Sharma. Jigsaw: Large language models meet program synthesis. In
  Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 1219–1231, 2022.
Naman Jain, Tianjun Zhang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Joseph E Gonzalez, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica.
  Llm-assisted code cleaning for training accurate code generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14904,
  2023.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.06770, 2023.
Mohammad Abdullah Matin Khan, M Saiful Bari, Xuan Long Do, Weishi Wang, Md Rizwan Parvez,
 and Shafiq Joty. xcodeeval: A large scale multilingual multitask benchmark for code understanding,
 generation, translation and retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03004, 2023.
Sumith Kulal, Panupong Pasupat, Kartik Chandra, Mina Lee, Oded Padon, Alex Aiken, and Percy S
  Liang. Spoc: Search-based pseudocode to code. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
 Systems Principles, 2023.
Yuhang Lai, Chengxi Li, Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Ruiqi Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, Wen-tau Yih,
  Daniel Fried, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. Ds-1000: A natural and reliable benchmark for data science
  code generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18319–18345. PMLR,
  2023.
Alexander LeClair, Siyuan Jiang, and Collin McMillan. A neural model for generating natural
  language summaries of program subroutines. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference
  on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 795–806. IEEE, 2019.
Jierui Li, Szymon Tworkowski, Yingying Wu, and Raymond Mooney. Explaining competitive-level
   programming solutions using llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05337, 2023a.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023b.
Rongao Li, Jie Fu, Bo-Wen Zhang, Tao Huang, Zhihong Sun, Chen Lyu, Guang Liu, Zhi Jin, and
  Ge Li. Taco: Topics in algorithmic code generation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14852,
  2023c.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023d.
Yucheng Li, Frank Guerin, and Chenghua Lin. Latesteval: Addressing data contamination in language
  model evaluation through dynamic and time-sensitive test construction. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 18600–18607, 2024.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
Pietro Liguori, Erfan Al-Hossami, Domenico Cotroneo, Roberto Natella, Bojan Cukic, and Samira
  Shaikh. Can we generate shellcodes via natural language? an empirical study. Automated Software
  Engineering, 29(1):30, 2022.
Changshu Liu, Shizhuo Dylan Zhang, and Reyhaneh Jabbarvand. Codemind: A framework to
  challenge large language models for code reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09664, 2024.
Hanmeng Liu, Ruoxi Ning, Zhiyang Teng, Jian Liu, Qiji Zhou, and Yue Zhang. Evaluating the logical
  reasoning ability of chatgpt and gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03439, 2023a.
Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. Is your code generated by
   chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2305.01210, 2023b.
Tianyang Liu, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley. Repobench: Benchmarking repository-level code
  auto-completion systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03091, 2023c.
Anton Lozhkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Federico Cassano, Joel Lamy-Poirier, Nouamane
 Tazi, Ao Tang, Dmytro Pykhtar, Jiawei Liu, Yuxiang Wei, Tianyang Liu, Max Tian, Denis Kocetkov,
 Arthur Zucker, Younes Belkada, Zijian Wang, Qian Liu, Dmitry Abulkhanov, Indraneil Paul,
  Zhuang Li, Wen-Ding Li, Megan Risdal, Jia Li, Jian Zhu, Terry Yue Zhuo, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii,
  Nii Osae Osae Dade, Wenhao Yu, Lucas Krauß, Naman Jain, Yixuan Su, Xuanli He, Manan
  Dey, Eduardo Abati, Yekun Chai, Niklas Muennighoff, Xiangru Tang, Muhtasham Oblokulov,
  Christopher Akiki, Marc Marone, Chenghao Mou, Mayank Mishra, Alex Gu, Binyuan Hui, Tri
  Dao, Armel Zebaze, Olivier Dehaene, Nicolas Patry, Canwen Xu, Julian McAuley, Torsten Scholak,
  Sebastien Paquet, Jennifer Robinson, Carolyn Jane Anderson, Nicolas Chapados, Mostofa Patwary,
  Nima Tajbakhsh, Yacine Jernite, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Lingming Zhang, Sean Hughes, Thomas
 Wolf, Arjun Guha, Leandro von Werra, and Harm de Vries. Starcoder 2 and the stack v2: The next
  generation. 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qinyu Luo, Yining Ye, Shihao Liang, Zhong Zhang, Yujia Qin, Yaxi Lu, Yesai Wu, Xin Cong, Yankai
  Lin, Yingli Zhang, et al. Repoagent: An llm-powered open-source framework for repository-level
  code documentation generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16667, 2024.
Zhiyi Ma, Kawin Ethayarajh, Tristan Thrush, Somya Jain, Ledell Wu, Robin Jia, Christopher
  Potts, Adina Williams, and Douwe Kiela. Dynaboard: An evaluation-as-a-service platform for
  holistic next-generation benchmarking. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  10351–10367, 2021.
Aman Madaan, Alexander Shypula, Uri Alon, Milad Hashemi, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Yiming
 Yang, Graham Neubig, and Amir Yazdanbakhsh. Learning performance-improving code edits.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07867, 2023a.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023b.
Rabee Sohail Malik, Jibesh Patra, and Michael Pradel. Nl2type: inferring javascript function types
  from natural language information. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software
  Engineering (ICSE), pp. 304–315. IEEE, 2019.
Amir M Mir, Evaldas Latoškinas, Sebastian Proksch, and Georgios Gousios. Type4py: Practical
 deep similarity learning-based type inference for python. In Proceedings of the 44th International
 Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 2241–2252, 2022.
Ansong Ni, Pengcheng Yin, Yilun Zhao, Martin Riddell, Troy Feng, Rui Shen, Stephen Yin, Ye Liu,
  Semih Yavuz, Caiming Xiong, et al. L2ceval: Evaluating language-to-code generation capabilities
  of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17446, 2023.
Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
  and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program
  synthesis. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show your work:
 Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00114,
 2021.
Theo X Olausson, Jeevana Priya Inala, Chenglong Wang, Jianfeng Gao, and Armando Solar-Lezama.
  Demystifying gpt self-repair for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09896, 2023.
R OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arxiv 2303.08774. View in Article, 2023.
Yonatan Oren, Nicole Meister, Niladri Chatterji, Faisal Ladhak, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Proving
  test set contamination for black-box language models. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  KS8mIvetg2.
Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
  connected with massive apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.
Hammond Pearce, Baleegh Ahmad, Benjamin Tan, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Ramesh Karri. Asleep
  at the keyboard? assessing the security of github copilot’s code contributions. In 2022 IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 754–768. IEEE, 2022.
Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Pengcheng He, Hao Cheng, Yujia Xie, Yu Hu, Qiuyuan Huang, Lars
  Liden, Zhou Yu, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Check your facts and try again: Improv-
  ing large language models with external knowledge and automated feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12813, 2023.
Martin Riddell, Ansong Ni, and Arman Cohan. Quantifying contamination in evaluating code
 generation capabilities of language models, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tal Ridnik, Dedy Kredo, and Itamar Friedman. Code generation with alphacodium: From prompt
  engineering to flow engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08500, 2024.
Manley Roberts, Himanshu Thakur, Christine Herlihy, Colin White, and Samuel Dooley. To the
 cutoff... and beyond? a longitudinal perspective on LLM data contamination. In The Twelfth
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
 net/forum?id=m2NVG4Htxs.
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Oscar Sainz, Jon Ander Campos, Iker García-Ferrero, Julen Etxaniz, and Eneko Agirre. Did
  chatgpt cheat on your test?, Jun 2023. URL https://hitz-zentroa.github.io/
  lm-contamination/blog/.
Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. An empirical evaluation of using large
 language models for automated unit test generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
 50(1):85–105, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2023.3334955.
Quan Shi, Michael Tang, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Can language models solve olympiad
  programming?, 2024.
Weijia Shi, Anirudh Ajith, Mengzhou Xia, Yangsibo Huang, Daogao Liu, Terra Blevins, Danqi Chen,
 and Luke Zettlemoyer. Detecting pretraining data from large language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.16789, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Disha Shrivastava, Hugo Larochelle, and Daniel Tarlow. Repository-level prompt generation for large
  language models of code. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 31693–31715.
  PMLR, 2023.
Manav Singhal, Tushar Aggarwal, Abhijeet Awasthi, Nagarajan Natarajan, and Aditya Kanade.
 Nofuneval: Funny how code lms falter on requirements beyond functional correctness. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2401.15963, 2024.
Benjamin Steenhoek, Michele Tufano, Neel Sundaresan, and Alexey Svyatkovskiy. Reinforce-
  ment learning from automatic feedback for high-quality unit test generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.02368, 2023.
Ruoxi Sun, Sercan O Arik, Hootan Nakhost, Hanjun Dai, Rajarishi Sinha, Pengcheng Yin, and
  Tomas Pfister. Sql-palm: Improved large language modeladaptation for text-to-sql. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.00739, 2023.
Gemini Team. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of con-
  text, 2024. URL https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/gemini/
  gemini_v1_5_report.pdf.
Catherine Tony, Markus Mutas, Nicolás E Díaz Ferreyra, and Riccardo Scandariato. Llmseceval: A
  dataset of natural language prompts for security evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09384,
  2023.
Michele Tufano, Shao Kun Deng, Neel Sundaresan, and Alexey Svyatkovskiy. Methods2test: A
 dataset of focal methods mapped to test cases. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
 on Mining Software Repositories, pp. 299–303, 2022.
Shiqi Wang, Zheng Li, Haifeng Qian, Chenghao Yang, Zijian Wang, Mingyue Shang, Varun Kumar,
  Samson Tan, Baishakhi Ray, Parminder Bhatia, et al. Recode: Robustness evaluation of code
  generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10264, 2022a.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven CH Hoi. Codet5: Identifier-aware unified pre-
  trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8696–8708, 2021.
Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Nghi DQ Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven CH Hoi.
  Codet5+: Open code large language models for code understanding and generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.07922, 2023.
Zhiruo Wang, Shuyan Zhou, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Execution-based evaluation for
  open-domain code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10481, 2022b.
Cody Watson, Michele Tufano, Kevin Moran, Gabriele Bavota, and Denys Poshyvanyk. On learn-
  ing meaningful assert statements for unit test cases. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd
  International Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 1398–1409, 2020.
Jiayi Wei, Greg Durrett, and Isil Dillig. Typet5: Seq2seq type inference using static analysis. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2303.09564, 2023.
Orion Weller, Marc Marone, Nathaniel Weir, Dawn Lawrie, Daniel Khashabi, and Benjamin
  Van Durme. " according to..." prompting language models improves quoting from pre-training
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13252, 2023.
Weixiang Yan, Haitian Liu, Yunkun Wang, Yunzhe Li, Qian Chen, Wen Wang, Tingyu Lin, Weishan
 Zhao, Li Zhu, Shuiguang Deng, et al. Codescope: An execution-based multilingual multitask
 multidimensional benchmark for evaluating llms on code understanding and generation. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2311.08588, 2023.
Shuo Yang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Rethinking
  benchmark and contamination for language models with rephrased samples, 2023.
Michihiro Yasunaga, Xinyun Chen, Yujia Li, Panupong Pasupat, Jure Leskovec, Percy Liang,
 Ed H Chi, and Denny Zhou. Large language models as analogical reasoners. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.01714, 2023.
Pengcheng Yin, Wen-Ding Li, Kefan Xiao, Abhishek Rao, Yeming Wen, Kensen Shi, Joshua Howland,
  Paige Bailey, Michele Catasta, Henryk Michalewski, et al. Natural language to code generation in
  interactive data science notebooks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09248, 2022.
Zhiqiang Yuan, Yiling Lou, Mingwei Liu, Shiji Ding, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, and Xin Peng.
  No more manual tests? evaluating and improving chatgpt for unit test generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.04207, 2023.
Eric Zelikman, Qian Huang, Gabriel Poesia, Noah D Goodman, and Nick Haber. Parsel: A unified
  natural language framework for algorithmic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10561, 2022.
Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu
  Chen. Repocoder: Repository-level code completion through iterative retrieval and generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12570, 2023a.
Kechi Zhang, Ge Li, Jia Li, Zhuo Li, and Zhi Jin. Toolcoder: Teach code generation models to use
  apis with search tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04032, 2023b.
Kechi Zhang, Zhuo Li, Jia Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. Self-edit: Fault-aware code editor for code
  generation. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 769–787, Toronto, Canada, July 2023c. Association for
  Computational Linguistics.
Kexun Zhang, Danqing Wang, Jingtao Xia, William Yang Wang, and Lei Li. Algo: Synthesizing
  algorithmic programs with generated oracle verifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14591, 2023d.
Qinkai Zheng, Xiao Xia, Xu Zou, Yuxiao Dong, Shan Wang, Yufei Xue, Zihan Wang, Lei Shen,
  Andi Wang, Yang Li, et al. Codegeex: A pre-trained model for code generation with multilingual
  evaluations on humaneval-x. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17568, 2023.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tianyu Zheng, Ge Zhang, Tianhao Shen, Xueling Liu, Bill Yuchen Lin, Jie Fu, Wenhu Chen, and
  Xiang Yue. Opencodeinterpreter: Integrating code generation with execution and refinement.
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14658, 2024.
Kun Zhou, Yutao Zhu, Zhipeng Chen, Wentong Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin,
  Ji-Rong Wen, and Jiawei Han. Don’t make your llm an evaluation benchmark cheater. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.01964, 2023.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     DATASET

A.1   L EGAL COMPLIANCE AND L ICENSE

Our benchmark does not comprise and personal identifiable information or offensive content.
Similar to (Hendrycks et al., 2021), we scrape only the problem statements, ground-truth solutions,
and test cases from competition websites – L EET C ODE, AT C ODER, and C ODE F ORCES. Further, we
primarily scrape publicly visible portions of websites, avoiding any data collection that might be
pay-walled or require login or interaction with the website. Following, (Hendrycks et al., 2021) we
abide by Fair Use §107: “the fair use of a copyrighted work, including such use by ... scholarship,
or research, is not an infringement of copyright”, where fair use is determined by “the purpose
and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit
educational purposes”, “the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted
work as a whole”, and “the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted
work.” Finally, we use the collected problems for academic purposes only and in addition, do not
train on the collected problems.

A.2   G ENERATOR BASED T EST G ENERATION

We use GPT-4-T URBO to construct input generators. The following prompts (Figures 6 and 7) provide
one-shot prompt templates used for synthesizing random and adversarial input generators. These
generators define a function returns the arguments sampled in some distribution. These generators
are then executed to construct inputs which validated on the collected correct programs. We use
separate generators for random and adversarial setting since often times programming problems have
corner cases which might not be captured by randomly sampling over the inputs. We build 2 random
input generators, 4 adversarial input generators and check if the sampled inputs work for the correct
programs. Finally, the number of collected inputs is thresholded to 100 for efficient grading (using
random selection). We find that our generators can already function well but future work can study
the design space of constructing such generators.
Note that for C ODE F ORCES, we construct the generators in semi-autonomous manner since only 9
problems were used.

A.3   C ODE E XECUTION

The code execution split of LiveCodeBench consists of 479 samples from 85 distinct problems. To
encourage diversity in our benchmark while keeping our benchmark small and usable, we place a
limit of six samples for each given problem. These sample programs and corresponding test cases are
chosen uniformly at random from all those passing the filter.
Filtering Criteria: The specific filtering criteria are as follows:

       • Compile time: length of code is between 100 and 500 characters, no syntax errors, all
         necessary imports are included
       • Runtime: no floating point operations, true division, exp, other integer operations must have
         at least one argument ≤ 3, string and list operations must have at least one argument with
         length ≤ 3, finish running in 2 seconds, “reasonable” number of steps (roughly, under 1000
         Python bytecode operations).

We give two examples of two programs that are filtered out in the Listings below. Our final benchmark
consists of 479 samples from 85 problems, but will increase in size due to its live nature.
Dataset Statistics: As mentioned, we filter for codes between 100 and 500 characters, as well as
below 1000 steps. The statistics for programs in our dataset are shown in Fig. 8.

A.4   N UMBER OF TESTS

We can sample large amounts of diverse inputs using our generator-based input sampling approach.
However, the number of inputs produces a tradeoff in terms of the usability of the benchmark, slowing


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 You are an expert python competitive programmar and your goal is to
     ,→ construct input-generators for testing programming contest
     ,→ problems. You will write relevant generators and finally
     ,→ construct ‘construct_inputs‘ function that returns a list of
     ,→ diverse inputs sampled from the generator. Remember to strictly
     ,→ follow the instructions and constraints present in the problem
     ,→ statement

 <USER>
 {EXAMPLE_PROBLEM}

 Construct a random input generator.
 </USER>

 <ASSISTANT>
 import numpy as np
 def random_input_generator(weight_min, weight_max, size_min, size_max):
      weights_size = np.random.randint(size_min, size_max+1)
      weights = np.random.randint(weight_min, weight_max, size=
     ,→ weights_size).tolist()
      k = np.random.randint(1, len(weights)+1)
      return weights, k

 def construct_inputs():
     inputs_list = []
     ## small inputs
     for i in range(15):
         inputs_list.append(random_input_generator(1, 10**3, 1, 10))
     ## medium inputs
     for i in range(15):
         inputs_list.append(random_input_generator(1, 10**6, 1, 10**3))
     ## large inputs
     for i in range(15):
         inputs_list.append(random_input_generator(1, 10**9, 1, 10**5))
     return inputs_list
 </ASSISTANT>

 <USER>
 {PROBLEM}

 Construct a random input generator. Use the format used in the above
     ,→ example by returning a single function that builds diverse
     ,→ inputs named ‘construct_inputs‘
 </USER>

 Prompt for random input generation

                            Figure 6: Random Input Generator Prompt


down the evaluation process. Hence, we threshold the number of sampled inputs to less than 25 based
on problem length, difficulty, and number of inputs.
We base this decision by estimating model performances when using different sets of inputs
at random for testing in Figure 9. Particularly, we vary the number of private tests between
0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 and observe an exponentially decaying curve. We find
the ∼ 20 inputs provides a good threshold which balances evaluation time with evaluation rigor.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 You are an expert python competitive programmar and your goal is to
     ,→ construct input-generators for testing programming contest
     ,→ problems. You will write relevant generators and finally
     ,→ construct ‘construct_inputs‘ function that returns a list of
     ,→ diverse inputs sampled from the generator. Remember to strictly
     ,→ follow the instructions and constraints present in the problem
     ,→ statement

 <USER>
 {EXAMPLE_PROBLEM}

 Construct an adversarial input generator.
 </USER>

 <ASSISTANT>
 import numpy as np
 ## case 1 - alternating large and small weights
 def generate_adversarial_inputs_1(weight_size, max_weight, k):
     weights = [1 if i%2==0 else max_weight for i in range(weight_size)]
     return weights, k

 ## case 2 - equal_weights
 def adversarial_input_generator_2(weight_size, max_weight, k):
     weights = [max_weight for _ in range(weight_size)]
     return weights, k

 # Case 3 - Large weights at the ends
 def adversarial_input_generator_3(weight_size, max_weight, k):
     pass ## truncatede
 def construct_inputs():
     inputs_list = []

      weight_sizes = [10, 1000, 100000]
      max_weights = [10**3, 10**6, 10**9]

      for weight_size in weight_sizes:
          for max_weight in max_weights:
              ks = [1, 2, 5, weight_size//2, weight_size-1, weight_size]
              for k in ks:
                  inputs_list.append(generate_adversarial_inputs_1(
     ,→ weight_size, max_weight, k))
                  # truncated
      return inputs_list
 </ASSISTANT>

 <USER>
 {PROBLEM}

 Construct an adversarial input generator. Use the format used in the
     ,→ above example by returning a single function that builds diverse
     ,→ inputs named ‘construct_inputs‘
 </USER>

 Prompt for adversarial input generation

                         Figure 7: Adversarial Input Generator Prompt


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 def check(x, t):
     if x == ’’:
         return t == 0
     if t < 0:
         return False
     for i in range(len(x)):
         if check(x[:i], t - int(x[i:])):
             return True
     return False

 @cache
 def punishmentNumber(n: int) -> int:
     if n == 0:
         return 0
     ans = punishmentNumber(n-1)
     if check(str(n * n), n):
         ans += n * n
     return ans
 assert punishmentNumber(n = 37) == 1478

 Program filtered because of multiplication


 dp = [True for _ in range(int(1e6 + 5))]
 MAXN = int(1e6 + 5)
 p = []
 dp[0] = False
 dp[1] = False
 for i in range(2, MAXN):
     if not dp[i]: continue
     p.append(i)
     for j in range(2 * i, MAXN, i):
         dp[j] = False
 def findPrimePairs(n: int) -> List[List[int]]:
     res = []
     for i in range(1, n):
         if n % 2 == 1 and i > n//2: break
         if n % 2 == 0 and i > n//2: break
         if dp[i] and dp[n - i]:
              res.append([i, n - i])
     return res
 assert findPrimePairs(n = 2) == []

 Program filtered because of control flow


                         Distribution of Execution Step Count                                   Distribution of Code Lengths (characters)

              80                                                                    60

                                                                                    50
              60
  Frequency


                                                                        Frequency


                                                                                    40

              40                                                                    30

                                                                                    20
              20
                                                                                    10

              0                                                                     0
                   500   600        700        800       900    1000                     100   150   200    250    300   350    400    450   500
                               Number of "Steps"                                                            Code Length

                         Figure 8: Distribution of code lengths and number of execution steps


                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Model performance with varying counts of private inputs used for evaluation. We find the
PASS @1 tends to stabilize when sampling about 20 inputs providing a good tradeoff in evaluation
time and rigor.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    UI


Figure 10: UI of L IVE C ODE B ENCH showing two views – May-Jan and Sep-Jan. The contaminated
models are blurred and the performance difference is visible across the two views. The scroller on
the top allows selecting different periods of time highlighting the live nature of the benchmark.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     C URATION

C.1   P LATFORM S PECIFIC C URATION

We describe the curation process for each platform.
L EET C ODE. We collect problems from all weekly and biweekly contests on L EET C ODE that have
taken place after April’23. For each problem, we collect the problems, public tests, and user solutions.
The platform also provides a difficulty label for each problem which we use to tag the problems as
E ASY, M EDIUM, and H ARD. Since L EET C ODE provides a starter code for each problem, we also collect
it and provide it to the LLM in the STDIN format. Since the hidden tests are not directly available,
we use our generator-based test input generation approach (Section A.2) and also collect the auto
grader failing tests for some of the recent problems.
AT C ODER. We collect problems from the abc (beginner round) contests on AT C ODER that have taken
place after April’23. We deliberately avoid the more challenging arc and agc contests which are
designed for more advanced Olympiad participants. The problems are assigned numeric difficulty
ratings, and we exclude abc problems with a rating of more than 500. We also use these numeric
ratings to tag the problems as E ASY, M EDIUM, and H ARD. Specifically, we use the rating brackets
[0 − 200), [200 − 400), and [400 − 500] to perform the classification. AT C ODER provides public and
hidden tests for each problem which we directly use in the benchmark.
C ODE F ORCES. We have collected problems from the Division 3 and Division 4 contests on C ODE -
F ORCES. Notably, we find that even with this filter, the problems are harder than the other two
platforms. C ODE F ORCES also provides difficulty ratings for the problems which we use to tag the prob-
lems as E ASY, M EDIUM, and H ARD using the rating brackets {800}, (800 − 1000], and (1000 − 1300]
respectively. Due to the higher difficulty, we only consider a small fraction of problems from C ODE -
F ORCES and semi-automatically construct test case generators, as they do not provide complete tests
on the platform (long tests are truncated).
Table 2 provides various statistics about the problems that we have collected for L IVE C ODE B ENCH.

C.2   S CENARIO - SPECIFIC BENCHMARK CONSTRUCTION

Code Generation and Self-Repair. We use the natural language problem statement as the problem
statement for these scenarios. For L EET C ODE, as noted above, an additional starter code is provided
for the functional input format. For AT C ODER and C ODE F ORCES problems, we use the standard input
format (similar to (Hendrycks et al., 2021)). The collected or generated tests are then used to evaluate
the correctness of the generated programs. Our final dataset consists of 511 problem instances across
the three platforms.
Code Execution. We draw inspiration from the benchmark creation procedure used in (Gu et al.,
2024). First, we collect a large pool of ∼ 2000 correct, human-submitted solutions from the


          Platform            Total Count     #Easy    #Medium      #Hard     Average Tests
          LCB (May-end)           511          182       206         123          17.0
          LCB (Sep-end)           349          125       136          88          18.0
          AT C ODER               267           99        91          77          15.6
          L EET C ODE             235           79       113          43          19.0
          C ODE F ORCES            9            4         2           3           11.1
          LCB-Easy                182          182        0           0           16.1
          LCB-Medium              206           0        206          0           17.4
          LCB-Hard                123           0         0          123          18.0

Table 2: The statistics of problems collected in L IVE C ODE B ENCH (LCB). We present the number of
problems, their difficulty distributions and the average number of tests per problem. We present the
results on the following subsets of L IVE C ODE B ENCH (used throughout this manuscript) - (a) problems
in the May-Feb and Sep-Feb time windows, (b) problems sourced from the three platforms, and (c)
problems in the LCB-Easy, LCB-Medium, and LCB-Hard subsets.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EET C ODE subset. However, many of these programs have multiple nested loops, complex numerical
computations, and a large number of execution steps. Therefore, we apply compile-time and run-time
filters to ensure samples are reasonable, and we double-check this with a manual inspection. More
details on the filtering criteria and statistics of the dataset can be found in Appendix A.3. Our final
dataset consists of 479 samples from 85 problems.
Test Case Output Prediction. We use the natural language problem statement from the L EET C ODE
platform and the example test inputs to construct our test case output prediction dataset. Since
the example test inputs in the problems are reasonable test cases for humans to reason about and
understand the problems, they also serve as ideal test inputs for LLM S to process. Our final dataset
consists of 442 problem instances from a total of 181 L EET C ODE problems.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
D.1   M ODELS

We describe the details of models considered in our study in Table 3.

 Model ID                         Short Name               Approximate   Link
                                                           Cutoff Date
 deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-      DSCoder-33b-Ins          08/30/2023    deepseek-coder-33b-
 33b-instruct                                                            instruct
 deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-      DSCoder-6.7b-Ins         08/30/2023    deepseek-coder-6.7b-
 6.7b-instruct                                                           instruct
 deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-      DSCoder-1.3b-Ins         08/30/2023    deepseek-coder-1.3b-
 1.3b-instruct                                                           instruct
 codellama/CodeLlama-70b-         CodeLlama-70b-Ins        01/01/2023    CodeLlama-70b-Instruct-hf
 Instruct-hf
 openbmb/Eurus-70b-sft            Eurus-70B-SFT (n=1)      01/01/2023    Eurus-70b-sft
 openbmb/Eurux-8x22b-nca          Eurux-8x22b-NCA          04/30/2023    Eurux-8x22b-nca
                                  (n=1)
 codellama/CodeLlama-34b-         CodeLlama-34b-Ins        01/01/2023    CodeLlama-34b-Instruct-hf
 Instruct-hf
 codellama/CodeLlama-13b-         CodeLlama-13b-Ins        01/01/2023    CodeLlama-13b-Instruct-hf
 Instruct-hf
 codellama/CodeLlama-7b-          CodeLlama-7b-Ins         01/01/2023    CodeLlama-7b-Instruct-hf
 Instruct-hf
 meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-         LLama3-8b-Ins            01/01/2023    Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct
 8B-Instruct
 meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-         LLama3-70b-Ins           01/01/2023    Meta-Llama-3-70B-
 70B-Instruct                                                            Instruct
 Phind/Phind-CodeLlama-           Phind-34B-V2             01/01/2023    Phind-CodeLlama-34B-v2
 34B-v2
 Smaug-2-72B                      Smaug-2-72B              01/01/2023    Smaug-2-72B
 Qwen-1.5-72B-Chat                Qwen-1.5-72B-Chat        01/01/2023    Qwen-1.5-72B-Chat
 Qwen/CodeQwen1.5-7B              CodeQwen15-7B            08/30/2023    CodeQwen1.5-7B
 Qwen/CodeQwen1.5-7B-             CodeQwen15-7B-           08/30/2023    CodeQwen1.5-7B-Chat
 Chat                             Chat
 gpt-3.5-turbo-0301               GPT-3.5-Turbo-0301       10/01/2021    gpt-3.5-turbo-0301
 gpt-3.5-turbo-0125               GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125       10/01/2021    gpt-3.5-turbo-0125
 gpt-4-0613                       GPT-4-0613               10/01/2021    gpt-4-0613
 gpt-4-1106-preview               GPT-4-Turbo-1106         04/30/2023    gpt-4-1106-preview
 gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09           GPT-4-Turbo-2024-        04/30/2023    gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09
                                  04-09
 gpt-4o-2024-05-13                GPT-4O-2024-05-13        10/30/2023    gpt-4o-2024-05-13
 claude-2                         Claude-2                 12/31/2022    claude-2
 claude-instant-1                 Claude-Instant-1         12/31/2022    claude-instant-1
 claude-3-opus-20240229           Claude-3-Opus            04/30/2023    claude-3-opus-20240229
 claude-3-sonnet-20240229         Claude-3-Sonnet          04/30/2023    claude-3-sonnet-20240229
 claude-3-haiku-20240307          Claude-3-Haiku           04/30/2023    claude-3-haiku-20240307
 codestral-latest                 Codestral-Latest         01/31/2024    codestral-latest
 gemini-pro                       Gemini-Pro               04/30/2023    gemini-pro
 gemini-1.5-pro-latest            Gemini-Pro-1.5-May       04/30/2023    gemini-1.5-pro-latest
 gemini-1.5-flash-latest          Gemini-Flash-1.5-        04/30/2023    gemini-1.5-flash-latest
                                  May
 ise-uiuc/Magicoder-S-DS-         MagiCoderS-DS-           08/30/2023    Magicoder-S-DS-6.7B
 6.7B                             6.7B
 ise-uiuc/Magicoder-S-CL-7B       MagiCoderS-CL-7B         01/01/2023    Magicoder-S-CL-7B
 bigcode/starcoder2-3b            StarCoder2-3b            01/01/2023    starcoder2-3b
 bigcode/starcoder2-7b            StarCoder2-7b            01/01/2023    starcoder2-7b
 bigcode/starcoder2-15b           StarCoder2-15b           01/01/2023    starcoder2-15b


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 codellama/CodeLlama-70b-        CodeLlama-70b-          01/01/2023        CodeLlama-70b-hf
 hf                              Base
 codellama/CodeLlama-34b-        CodeLlama-34b-          01/01/2023        CodeLlama-34b-hf
 hf                              Base
 codellama/CodeLlama-13b-        CodeLlama-13b-          01/01/2023        CodeLlama-13b-hf
 hf                              Base
 codellama/CodeLlama-7b-hf       CodeLlama-7b-Base       01/01/2023        CodeLlama-7b-hf
 deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-     DSCoder-33b-Base        08/30/2023        deepseek-coder-33b-base
 33b-base
 deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-     DSCoder-6.7b-Base       08/30/2023        deepseek-coder-6.7b-base
 6.7b-base
 deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-     DSCoder-1.3b-Base       08/30/2023        deepseek-coder-1.3b-base
 1.3b-base
 google/codegemma-7b             CodeGemma-7b-           01/01/2023        codegemma-7b
                                 Base
 google/codegemma-2b             CodeGemma-2b-           01/01/2023        codegemma-2b
                                 Base
 google/gemma-7b                 Gemma-7b-Base           01/01/2023        gemma-7b
 google/gemma-2b                 Gemma-2b-Base           01/01/2023        gemma-2b
 meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-        LLama3-70b-Base         01/01/2023        Meta-Llama-3-70B
 70B
 meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-        LLama3-8b-Base          01/01/2023        Meta-Llama-3-8B
 8B
 mistral-large-latest            Mistral-Large           01/01/2023        mistral-large-latest
 open-mixtral-8x22b              Mixtral-8x22B-Ins       01/01/2023        open-mixtral-8x22b
 open-mixtral-8x7b               Mixtral-8x7B-Ins        01/01/2023        open-mixtral-8x7b
 m-a-p/OpenCodeInterpreter-      OC-DS-33B               08/30/2023        OpenCodeInterpreter-DS-
 DS-33B                                                                    33B
 m-a-p/OpenCodeInterpreter-      OC-DS-6.7B              08/30/2023        OpenCodeInterpreter-DS-
 DS-6.7B                                                                   6.7B
 m-a-p/OpenCodeInterpreter-      OC-DS-1.3B              08/30/2023        OpenCodeInterpreter-DS-
 DS-1.3B                                                                   1.3B
 command-r                       Command-R               01/01/2023        command-r
 command-r+                      Command-R+              01/01/2023        command-r+

                                 Table 3: Language Models Overview

We use variety of GPUs based on availability for running local models (A6000, L4, A100).

D.2   C ODE G ENERATION

Below we provide the prompt format (with appropriate variants adding special tokens accommodating
each instruct-tuned model) used for this scenario.

D.3   S ELF R EPAIR

Below we provide the prompt format (with appropriate variants adding special tokens accommodating
each instruct-tuned model) used for this scenario.

D.4   C ODE E XECUTION

Below we provide the prompts for code execution with and without CoT. The prompts are modified
versions of those from (Gu et al., 2024) to fit the format of the samples in our benchmark.

D.5   T EST O UTPUT P REDICTION

Below we provide the prompt format (with appropriate variants adding special tokens accommodating
each instruct-tuned model) used for this scenario.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 You are an expert Python programmer. You will be given a question (
     ,→ problem specification) and will generate a correct Python
     ,→ program that matches the specification and passes all tests. You
     ,→ will NOT return anything except for the program

 ### Question:\n{question.question_content}


 { if question.starter_code }
  ### Format: {PromptConstants.FORMATTING_MESSAGE}

 ‘‘‘python
 {question.starter_code}
 ‘‘‘
 { else }
 ### Format: {PromptConstants.FORMATTING_WITHOUT_STARTER_MESSAGE}

 ‘‘‘python
 # YOUR CODE HERE
 ‘‘‘
 { endif }


 ### Answer: (use the provided format with backticks)

 Code Generation Prompt


 {if check_result.result_status is "Wrong Answer"}
 The above code is incorrect and does not pass the testcase.
 Input: {wrong_testcase_input}
 Output: {wrong_testcase_output}
 Expected: {wrong_testcase_expected}


 {elif check_result.result_status is "Time Limit Exceeded"}
 The above code is incorrect and exceeds the time limit.
 Input: {wrong_testcase_input}


 {elif check_result.result_status is "Runtime Error"}
 The above code is incorrect and has a runtime error.
 Input: {wrong_testcase_input}
 Error Message: {wrong_testcase_error_message}

 {endif}

 Self Repair Error Feedback Pseudocode


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 You are a helpful programming assistant and an expert Python programmer
     ,→ . You are helping a user write a program to solve a problem. The
     ,→ user has written some code, but it has some errors and is not
     ,→ passing the tests. You will help the user by first giving a
     ,→ concise (at most 2-3 sentences) textual explanation of what is
     ,→ wrong with the code. After you have pointed out what is wrong
     ,→ with the code, you will then generate a fixed version of the
     ,→ program. You must put the entired fixed program within code
     ,→ delimiters only for once.

 ### Question:\n{question.question_content}

 ### Answer: ‘‘‘python
 {code.code_to_be_corrected}
 ‘‘‘

 ### Format: {PromptConstants.FORMATTING_CHECK_ERROR_MESSAGE}

 ### Answer: (use the provided format with backticks)

 Self-Repair Prompt


 You are given a Python function and an assertion containing an input to
     ,→ the function. Complete the assertion with a literal (no
     ,→ unsimplified expressions, no function calls) containing the
     ,→ output when executing the provided code on the given input, even
     ,→ if the function is incorrect or incomplete. Do NOT output any
     ,→ extra information. Provide the full assertion with the correct
     ,→ output in [ANSWER] and [/ANSWER] tags, following the examples.

 [PYTHON]
 def repeatNumber(number : int) -> int:
     return number
 assert repeatNumber(number = 17) == ??
 [/PYTHON]
 [ANSWER]
 assert repeatNumber(number = 17) == 17
 [/ANSWER]

 [PYTHON]
 def addCharacterA(string : str) -> str:
     return string + "a"
 assert addCharacterA(string = "x9j") == ??
 [/PYTHON]
 [ANSWER]
 assert addCharacterA(string = "x9j") == "x9ja"
 [/ANSWER]

 [PYTHON]
 {code}
 assert {input} == ??
 [/PYTHON]
 [ANSWER]

 Code Execution Prompt


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 You are given a Python function and an assertion containing an input to
     ,→ the function. Complete the assertion with a literal (no
     ,→ unsimplified expressions, no function calls) containing the
     ,→ output when executing the provided code on the given input, even
     ,→ if the function is incorrect or incomplete. Do NOT output any
     ,→ extra information. Execute the program step by step before
     ,→ arriving at an answer, and provide the full assertion with the
     ,→ correct output in [ANSWER] and [/ANSWER] tags, following the
     ,→ examples.

 [PYTHON]
 def performOperation(s):
     s = s + s
     return "b" + s + "a"
 assert performOperation(s = "hi") == ??
 [/PYTHON]
 [THOUGHT]
 Let’s execute the code step by step:

 1. The function performOperation is defined, which takes a single
     ,→ argument s.
 2. The function is called with the argument "hi", so within the
     ,→ function, s is initially "hi".
 3. Inside the function, s is concatenated with itself, so s becomes "
     ,→ hihi".
 4. The function then returns a new string that starts with "b",
     ,→ followed by the value of s (which is now "hihi"), and ends with
     ,→ "a".
 5. The return value of the function is therefore "bhihia".
 [/THOUGHT]
 [ANSWER]
 assert performOperation(s = "hi") == "bhihia"
 [/ANSWER]

 [PYTHON]
 {code}
 assert {input} == ??
 [/PYTHON]
 [THOUGHT]

 Code Execution Prompt with CoT


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 ### Instruction: You are a helpful programming assistant and an expert
     ,→ Python programmer. You are helping a user to write a test case
     ,→ to help to check the correctness of the function. The user has
     ,→ written a input for the testcase. You will calculate the output
     ,→ of the testcase and write the whole assertion statement in the
     ,→ markdown code block with the correct output.

 Problem:
 {problem_statement}

 Function:
 ‘‘‘
 {function_signature}
 ‘‘‘
 Please complete the following test case:

 ‘‘‘
 assert {function_name}({testcase_input}) == # TODO
 ‘‘‘
 ### Response:

 Test Output Prediction Prompt


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     R ESULTS
E.1   C ONTAMINATION

Figure 11 demonstrates contamination in D EEP S EEK in self repair and test output prediction scenarios.


Figure 11: Contamination in DS-B models across self-repair and code execution (without COT)
scenarios over time. Note that code execution currently runs between May and November


         Figure 12: Performance on problems released over different months for AT C ODER


E.2   A LL R ESULTS

Below we provide the tables comprising of results across different L IVE C ODE B ENCH scenarios.
Comparing Closed Models. We evaluate a range of closed (API access) models ranging from
different model families like GPT S, C LAUDES, G EMINI, and M ISTRAL. We find the GPT-4-T URBO and


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Live evaluation over time for various models on code generation scenario in L IVE -
C ODE B ENCH. We consider many recently released models and do not find significant performance
variations across months except for DS-B models.


          Figure 14: Correlations across different scenarios studied in L IVE C ODE B ENCH


C LAUDE -3-O PUS rank at the top across all scenarios followed by M ISTRAL -L and C LAUDE -3-S ONNET
models. Finally, G EMINI -P RO and GPT-3.5- TURBO lie on the lower end of the models. The relative
differences between the models vary across the scenarios. For example, GPT-4-T URBO demonstrates
remarkable improvement from self-repair (24.5% to 36.9% on the LCB-Medium problems) while
G EMINI -P RO only improves from 8.5% to 9.4%. Similarly, as identified above, C LAUDE -3-O PUS and
M ISTRAL -L perform considerably better on test output prediction and code execution scenarios.

E.3   C++ R ESULTS

We evaluate model performances with C++ in Table 8. As we see, model performances roughly align
across the two languages.


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Comparison of open access and (closed) API access models on L IVE C ODE B ENCH-Easy
code generation scenario. We find that closed-access models consistently outperform the open models
with only strong instruction-tuned variants of > 30B models (specifically L3-I NS -70B, M IXTRAL and
DS-I NS -33B models) crossing the performance gap.


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Model Name                      Easy   Medium    Hard   Total
                Claude-2                       61.80      4.90   0.20   22.30
                Claude-3-Haiku                 63.00      4.30   1.10   22.80
                Claude-3-Opus                  78.80     16.30   3.20   32.80
                Claude-3-Sonnet                67.60      6.20   1.10   25.00
                Claude-Instant-1               60.70      4.30   1.10   22.10
                CodeGemma-2b-Base              18.30      0.40   0.00    6.30
                CodeGemma-7b-Base              35.70      2.60   0.10   12.80
                CodeLlama-13b-Base             24.60      0.90   0.00    8.50
                CodeLlama-13b-Ins              36.60      2.40   0.00   13.00
                CodeLlama-34b-Base             32.20      1.80   0.10   11.40
                CodeLlama-34b-Ins              33.70      2.40   1.10   12.40
                CodeLlama-70b-Base             15.80      1.20   0.00    5.70
                CodeLlama-70b-Ins               7.80      0.60   0.00    2.80
                CodeLlama-7b-Base              19.00      0.40   0.00    6.50
                CodeLlama-7b-Ins               28.60      2.50   0.00   10.40
                CodeQwen15-7B                  40.40      4.80   0.00   15.10
                CodeQwen15-7B-Chat             39.20     13.10   0.50   17.60
                Codestral-Latest               69.00     18.70   0.90   29.50
                Command-R                      39.00      3.60   0.00   14.20
                Command-R+                     56.60      6.80   0.00   21.10
                DSCoder-1.3b-Base              17.30      0.70   0.00    6.00
                DSCoder-1.3b-Ins               22.90      1.50   0.00    8.10
                DSCoder-33b-Base               39.40      2.30   0.00   13.90
                DSCoder-33b-Ins                55.60      9.00   0.70   21.80
                DSCoder-6.7b-Base              34.30      1.40   0.10   11.90
                DSCoder-6.7b-Ins               46.40      5.80   0.70   17.60
                GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125             56.80     10.80   0.10   22.60
                GPT-3.5-Turbo-0301             53.40      8.80   0.20   20.80
                GPT-4-0613                     78.40     21.20   2.30   33.90
                GPT-4-Turbo-1106               84.40     24.00   0.50   36.30
                GPT-4-Turbo-2024-04-09         85.30     33.00   5.10   41.10
                GPT-4O-2024-05-13              88.30     33.20   4.20   41.90
                Gemini-Flash-1.5-May           68.10     12.60   2.70   27.80
                Gemini-Pro-1.5-April (n=1)     56.50     14.30   3.60   24.80
                Gemini-Pro-1.5-May             76.00     19.40   3.50   33.00
                Gemma-2b-Base                   6.10      0.00   0.00    2.00
                Gemma-7b-Base                  27.00      0.90   0.00    9.30
                LLama3-70b-Base                52.20      3.20   0.60   18.60
                LLama3-70b-Ins                 60.70     15.80   1.40   26.00
                LLama3-8b-Base                 32.90      1.50   0.00   11.50
                LLama3-8b-Ins                  38.60      3.50   0.50   14.20
                MagiCoderS-CL-7B               32.80      2.40   0.00   11.70
                MagiCoderS-DS-6.7B             49.20      7.50   0.00   18.90
                Mistral-Large                  60.20     10.90   0.90   24.00
                Mixtral-8x22B-Ins              59.80     12.70   0.00   24.20
                Mixtral-8x7B-Ins               31.60      2.60   0.00   11.40
                OC-DS-1.3B                     11.30      0.10   0.00    3.80
                OC-DS-33B                      53.90      5.10   0.00   19.70
                OC-DS-6.7B                     46.30      4.50   0.00   16.90
                Phind-34B-V2                   53.40      4.70   0.10   19.40
                StarCoder2-15b                 37.30      2.20   0.00   13.20
                StarCoder2-3b                  28.20      0.70   0.00    9.60
                StarCoder2-7b                  29.90      1.20   0.00   10.40

                           Table 4: Code Generation Performances


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Model Name                      Easy   Medium     Hard   Total
                Claude-2                       66.20     10.30    0.40   25.60
                Claude-3-Haiku                 66.50      8.70    2.50   25.90
                Claude-3-Opus                  83.10     23.70    6.70   37.80
                Claude-3-Sonnet                72.60     11.80    2.20   28.90
                Claude-Instant-1               64.40      7.10    2.20   24.60
                CodeLlama-13b-Ins              43.10      3.00    0.00   15.30
                CodeLlama-34b-Ins              31.50      3.50    1.80   12.30
                CodeLlama-7b-Ins               31.90      3.10    1.50   12.10
                Codestral-Latest               72.50     25.90    3.30   33.90
                DSCoder-1.3b-Ins               29.50      2.10    0.00   10.60
                DSCoder-33b-Ins                60.70      8.10    1.50   23.40
                DSCoder-6.7b-Ins               49.90      5.70    1.10   18.90
                GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125             59.30     11.90    0.50   23.90
                GPT-3.5-Turbo-0301             58.40     11.60    0.70   23.60
                GPT-4-0613                     79.30     25.00    2.40   35.60
                GPT-4-Turbo-1106               86.90     36.90    4.00   42.60
                GPT-4-Turbo-2024-04-09         88.70     39.70    8.40   45.60
                GPT-4O-2024-05-13              92.60     46.40    8.20   49.10
                Gemini-Flash-1.5-May           73.40     16.40    4.40   31.40
                Gemini-Pro                     53.80      9.40    0.20   21.10
                Gemini-Pro-1.5-April (n=1)     71.80     19.40    5.50   32.20
                Gemini-Pro-1.5-May             84.80     30.10    7.30   40.70
                LLama3-70b-Ins                 69.60     19.00    1.80   30.10
                LLama3-8b-Ins                  47.10      6.10    0.00   17.70
                MagiCoderS-CL-7B               36.50      3.10    0.00   13.20
                MagiCoderS-DS-6.7B             50.60      8.60    0.00   19.70
                Mistral-Large                  71.20     15.60    3.60   30.10
                OC-DS-1.3B                     20.00      0.40    0.00    6.80
                OC-DS-33B                      58.90      7.20    1.30   22.50
                OC-DS-6.7B                     50.90      6.30    0.20   19.10
                Phind-34B-V2                   62.00      6.50    0.90   23.10

                              Table 5: Self Repair Performances


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Model Name                    Pass@1
                            Claude-2                        32.70
                            Claude-3-Haiku                  32.90
                            Claude-3-Opus                   58.70
                            Claude-3-Sonnet                 34.10
                            Claude-Instant-1                25.40
                            CodeLlama-13b-Ins               24.40
                            CodeLlama-34b-Ins               23.00
                            CodeLlama-70b-Ins               16.10
                            CodeLlama-7b-Ins                15.30
                            Codestral-Latest                41.80
                            DSCoder-1.3b-Ins                12.50
                            DSCoder-33b-Ins                 28.30
                            DSCoder-6.7b-Ins                26.50
                            GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125              35.40
                            GPT-3.5-Turbo-0301              32.50
                            GPT-4-0613                      52.90
                            GPT-4-Turbo-1106                55.70
                            GPT-4-Turbo-2024-04-09          66.10
                            GPT-4O-2024-05-13               68.90
                            Gemini-Flash-1.5-May            38.10
                            Gemini-Pro                      29.50
                            Gemini-Pro-1.5-April (n=1)      49.60
                            Gemini-Pro-1.5-May              44.80
                            LLama3-70b-Ins                  41.40
                            LLama3-8b-Ins                   24.40
                            MagiCoderS-CL-7B                21.30
                            MagiCoderS-DS-6.7B              27.10
                            Mistral-Large                   46.50
                            Mixtral-8x22B-Ins               44.70
                            Mixtral-8x7B-Ins                31.80
                            OC-DS-1.3B                       7.80
                            OC-DS-33B                       11.30
                            OC-DS-6.7B                      18.30
                            Phind-34B-V2                    27.20

                         Table 6: Test Output Prediction Performances


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Model Name                       Pass@1     Pass@1 (COT)
                   Claude-2                           31.50            43.80
                   Claude-3-Haiku                      0.70            28.30
                   Claude-3-Opus                      36.50            80.10
                   Claude-3-Sonnet                    29.30            39.40
                   Claude-Instant-1                   20.00            34.80
                   Cllama-13b-Ins                     23.50            14.10
                   Cllama-34b-Ins                     28.90            24.50
                   Cllama-7b-Ins                      20.60            14.20
                   CodeLlama-70b-Ins                  31.20            -1.00
                   Codestral-Latest                   37.90            41.80
                   DSCoder-1.3b-Base                  19.00            13.40
                   DSCoder-1.3b-Ins                   18.10            17.00
                   DSCoder-33b-Base                   29.90            29.10
                   DSCoder-33b-Ins                    26.60            31.70
                   DSCoder-6.7b-Base                  23.50            25.10
                   DSCoder-6.7b-Ins                   23.10            23.80
                   GPT-3.5-Turbo-0301                 33.90            34.80
                   GPT-4-0613                         44.30            64.80
                   GPT-4-Turbo-1106                   40.50            83.60
                   GPT-4-Turbo-2024-04-09             45.90            83.80
                   GPT-4O-2024-05-13                  39.10            91.00
                   Gemini-Flash-1.5-May               21.40            57.10
                   Gemini-Pro                         27.70            37.40
                   Gemini-Pro-1.5 (April) (n=1)       30.30            64.40
                   Gemini-Pro-1.5-May                 42.10            72.10
                   LLama3-70b-Ins                     29.60            55.50
                   LLama3-8b-Ins                      18.40            29.40
                   MagiCoderS-CL-7B                   21.20            -1.00
                   MagiCoderS-DS-6.7B                 27.20            -1.00
                   Mistral-Large                      36.60            54.40
                   Phind-34B-V2                       26.90            -1.00
                   StarCoder                          20.30            -1.00
                   WCoder-34B-V1                      28.40            -1.00

                            Table 7: Code Execution Performances


                                      Model            PASS @1
                                      GPT-4o            49.8
                                 Claude-3.5-Sonnet      45.9

 Table 8: Results for models with C++ evaluations on the entire 713 L IVE C ODE B ENCH problems


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES
F.1   C ODE E XECUTION

We show 5 examples from the code execution task that GPT-4 (gpt-4-1106-preview) still
struggles to execute, even with CoT.


 def countWays(nums: List[int]) -> int:
     nums.sort()
     n = len(nums)
     ans = 0
     for i in range(n + 1):
         if i and nums[i-1] >= i: continue
         if i < n and nums[i] <= i: continue
         ans += 1
     return ans
 assert countWays(nums = [6, 0, 3, 3, 6, 7, 2, 7]) == 3
 # GPT-4 + CoT Outputs: 1, 2, 4, 5

 Mistake 1



 def minimumCoins(prices: List[int]) -> int:

       @cache
       def dfs(i, free_until):
           if i >= len(prices):
               return 0

             res = prices[i] + dfs(i + 1, min(len(prices) - 1, i + i + 1))

             if free_until >= i:
                 res = min(res, dfs(i + 1, free_until))

             return res

     dfs.cache_clear()
     return dfs(0, -1)
 assert minimumCoins(prices = [3, 1, 2]) == 4
 # GPT-4 + CoT Outputs: 1, 3, 5, 6

 Mistake 2



 def sortVowels(s: str) -> str:
      q = deque(sorted((ch for ch in s if vowel(ch))))
      res = []
      for ch in s:
          if vowel(ch):
              res.append(q.popleft())
          else:
              res.append(ch)
      return ’’.join(res)
 assert sortVowels(s = ’lEetcOde’) == ’lEOtcede’
 # GPT-4 + CoT Outputs: "leetecode", "lEetecOde", "leetcede", "leetcEde
     ,→ ", "leetcOde"

 Mistake 3



                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 def relocateMarbles(nums: List[int], moveFrom: List[int], moveTo: List[
     ,→ int]) -> List[int]:

      nums = sorted(list(set(nums)))
      dd = {}
      for item in nums:
          dd[item] = 1
      for a,b in zip(moveFrom, moveTo):
          del dd[a]
          dd[b] = 1
      ll = dd.keys()
      return sorted(ll)
 assert relocateMarbles(nums = [1, 6, 7, 8], moveFrom = [1, 7, 2],
     ,→ moveTo = [2, 9, 5]) == [5, 6, 8, 9]
 # GPT-4 + CoT Outputs: [2, 6, 8, 9], [2, 5, 6, 8, 9], KeyError

 Mistake 4


 def minimumSum(nums: List[int]) -> int:
     left, right, ans = [inf], [inf], inf
     for num in nums:
         left.append(min(left[-1], num))
     for num in nums[::-1]:
         right.append(min(right[-1], num))
     right.reverse()
     for i, num in enumerate(nums):
         if left[i] < num and right[i + 1] < num:
             ans = min(ans, num + left[i] + right[i + 1])
     return ans if ans < inf else -1
 assert minimumSum(nums = [6, 5, 4, 3, 4, 5]) == -1
 # GPT-4 + CoT Outputs: 10, 11, 12

 Mistake 5


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    L IMITATIONS
Benchmark Size. L IVE C ODE B ENCH code generation scenario currently hosts over 500 instances from
problems released since May 2023. To account for contamination in D EEP S EEK, we only perform
evaluations on problems released after the model cutoff date. This leads to only 349 problems used
in our final evaluations which might add noise due to problem set samples. We currently estimate
1 − 2% performance variations in LCB code generation due to this issue (measured by bootstrapping
349 sized problem sets from the full dataset). Other scenarios, i.e. self-repair, code execution, and test
output prediction comprise 238, 188, and 254 problems would have similar performance variations.
We thus recommend exercising proper judgement when comparing models with small performance
differences. Note that H UMAN E VAL has 164 problems and would also struggle with similar issues.
This issue is also exacerbated for newer models, with more recent cutoff dates, as they might only
have access to a smaller evaluation set. We propose two solutions addressing this issue as we evolve
L IVE C ODE B ENCH. First, we will use other competition platforms for problem collection, allowing
larger number of recent problems to be added to the benchmark. In addition, we also hope supplement
this with an unreleased private test set constructed specifically for model evaluation. These problems
will use a similar flavor to current problems and will be used when models are submitted for evaluation
to the L IVE C ODE B ENCH platform. This would reduce the reliance on public accessible problems and
provide a more robust evaluation of the models while providing community public access to similar
problems, similar to strategies employed by popular platforms like K AGGLE.
Focus on P YTHON. L IVE C ODE B ENCH currently only focuses on P YTHON which might not provide
enough signal about model capabilities in other languages. However, since we collected problem
statements and serialized tests, adding new programming languages would be straightforward once
appropriate evaluation engines are used.
Robustness to Prompts. Recent works have identified huge performance variances that can be
caused due to insufficient prompt. Here, we either do not tune prompts across models or make
minor adjustments based on the system prompts and delimiter tokens. This can lead to performance
variance in our results. Our findings and model comparison orders generalize across L IVE C ODE B ENCH
scenarios and mostly match the performance trends observed on H UMAN E VAL making this a less
prominient issue.
This issue can be particularly observed open models on the code execution scenario with COT
prompting. Interestingly, often the open models perform even worse in comparsion to the direct
code execution baseline. Note that we used same prompts for the closed models all of which show
noticable improvement from COT. While the used prompts might be sub-optimal, this highlights how
open-models perform worse against the closed models at performing chain-of-thought.
Problem Domain. Programming is a vast domain and occurs in various forms such as programming
puzzles, competition programming, and real-world software development. Different domains might
have individual requirements, constraints, challenges, and difficulty levels. L IVE C ODE B ENCH currently
focuses on competition problems sourced from three platforms. This might not be representative of
the “most general” notion of LLM programming capabilities. Particularly, real-world usage of LLM S
is drawn upon open-ended and unconstrained problems rasied by users. We therefore recommend
using L IVE C ODE B ENCH as a starting point for evaluating LLM S and further using domain-specific
evaluations to measure and compare LLM S in specific settings as required.


                                                   41
