Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ROBUST BARYCENTER E STIMATION USING
S EMI -U NBALANCED N EURAL O PTIMAL T RANSPORT
 Milena Gazdieva∗                                                      Jaemoo Choi∗
 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology                          Georgia Institute of Technology
 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute                            Atlanta, GA, USA
 Moscow, Russia                                                        jchoi843@gatech.edu
 milena.gazdieva@skoltech.ru

 Alexander Kolesov                                                     Jaewoong Choi
 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology                          Sungkyunkwan University
 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute                            Seoul, Korea
 Moscow, Russia                                                        jaewoongchoi@skku.edu
 a.kolesov@skoltech.ru

 Petr Mokrov                                             Alexander Korotin
 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology            Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
 Moscow, Russia                                          Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
 p.mokrov@skoltech.ru                                    Moscow, Russia
                                                         a.korotin@skoltech.ru
                                              A BSTRACT
            Aggregating data from multiple sources can be formalized as an Optimal Transport
            (OT) barycenter problem, which seeks to compute the average of probability
            distributions with respect to OT discrepancies. However, in real-world scenarios,
            the presence of outliers and noise in the data measures can significantly hinder the
            performance of traditional statistical methods for estimating OT barycenters. To
            address this issue, we propose a novel scalable approach for estimating the robust
            continuous barycenter, leveraging the dual formulation of the (semi-)unbalanced
            OT problem. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first attempt to
            develop an algorithm for robust barycenters under the continuous distribution setup.
            Our method is framed as a min-max optimization problem and is adaptable to
            general cost functions. We rigorously establish the theoretical underpinnings of the
            proposed method and demonstrate its robustness to outliers and class imbalance
            through a number of illustrative experiments. Our source code is publicly available
            at https://github.com/milenagazdieva/U-NOTBarycenters.


Figure 1: The semi-unbalanced barycenter of distributions of colors (P1 ) and digits (P2 ) computed by
our U-NOTB solver in the latent space of a StyleGAN model pretrained on colored MNIST images
of digits ’2’, ’3’. Our solver allows for successful elimination of outliers in the input distributions.

   ∗
       Equal contribution


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1    I NTRODUCTION
The world is full of data, and accurate analysis of this data allows for solving a number of problems in
the world related to science, medicine, engineering, etc. A common challenge in data analysis arises
from two factors: (i) a huge quantity of data, and (ii) the data originating from multiple sources, such
as different scientific experiments, hospitals, or engineering trials. One promising way to address
these difficulties is to perform data aggregation. This means reducing the particular source-specific
characteristics and leaving only source-agnostic information for solving a practical case on hand.
Recently, a fruitful branch of research (Li et al., 2020; Fan et al., 2021; Korotin et al., 2022a; Kolesov
et al., 2024a;b) has emerged that focuses on addressing the challenge of data aggregation through
the framework of the Optimal Transport (OT) barycenter problem. Given a number of reference
distributions representing data from different sources, the problem is to discover a geometrically
meaningful average of these distributions by minimizing the average OT costs from the reference
distributions to the desired one.
Originally introduced for a rather specific setup (quadratic Euclidean OT cost functions) (Agueh
& Carlier, 2011), the subfield of OT barycenter has evolved tremendously over the last decade. At
present, it is the subject of deep learning and can be adapted to high-dimensional data setups, e.g.,
images. However, current barycenter research tends to ignore a typical and important property of
data appearing in real-world applications: the presence of undesirable noise and outliers (Le et al.,
2021). This motivates the development of a robust OT barycenter framework which (i) inherits all the
advances of current barycenter researches, e.g., permits deep learning and could be adapted to high
dims; (ii) wisely deals with aforementioned inconveniences of real-world data. To satisfy both aims,
we propose to opt for recent continuous unbalanced OT techniques (Gazdieva et al., 2023; Choi et al.,
2024b;a) which are naturally aligned with data imperfection.
Our contributions are as follows:
1. We propose a novel semi-unbalanced OT (SUOT) barycenter algorithm that is robust to outliers
    and class imbalance in the reference distributions (§4).
2. We develop a solid theoretical foundation of our proposed approach including the quality bounds
    for the recovered transport plans (§4.1).
3. We conduct a number of experiments on toy and image data setups to demonstrate the performance
    of our method and showcase its robustness to outliers and imbalance of classes (§5).
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first attempt to construct robust OT barycenters
under continuous computational setup (§2.3). Existing works addressing similar problems consider
exclusively discrete settings (Le et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024).
Notations. Throughout the paper, we denote K = {1, ..., K} for K ∈ N and use s[1:K] to denote
                                                       ′
the tuplet of objects (s1 , ..., sK ). We define X ⊂ RD , Xk ⊂ RDk , Y ⊂ RD as the compact subsets of
Euclidian spaces. We use C(Y) to denote the set of continuous functions on Y. The sets of absolutely
continuous Borel probability (or non-negative) measures on X are denoted as P(X ) (or M+ (X )).
For two measures µ1 , µ2 ∈ M+ (X ), we write µ1 ≪ µ2 to denote that the measure µ1 is absolutely
continuous w.r.t. the measure µ2 . The joint probability distributions on X×Y with the marginals P and
Q are denoted as Π(P, Q) and usually called the transport plans. All joint non-negative measures on
X ×Y are referred to as M+ (X ×Y). For a given measure γ(x, y) ∈ P(X ×Y) (or M+ (X ×Y)), we
use γx (x), γy (y) to denote its marginals. All probability measures γ(x, y) ∈ P(X × Y) s.t. γy = Q
for a given probability measure Q are denoted as Π(Q). We use γ(y|x) to denote the conditional
probability measure. For a measurable map T , T# denotes the corresponding push-forward operator.
                                                                 def
The Fenchel conjugate of a function ψ(u) is denoted by ψ(t) = supu∈R {ut − ψ(u)}.
2    BACKGROUND
In this section, we give an overview of the theoretical concepts related to our paper. In M2.1, we state
the SUOT problems and its semi-dual formulation. In M2.2, we formulate the OT/UOT barycenter
problem. Then, in M2.3, we describe our computational setup. For details on OT, we refer to
(Santambrogio, 2015; Villani et al., 2009; Peyré et al., 2019), unbalanced OT - (Chizat, 2017; Liero
et al., 2018; Séjourné et al., 2022), OT barycenters - (Agueh & Carlier, 2011; Chizat, 2023).
To begin with, we introduce the concept of ψ-divergences needed for our further derivations.
ψ-divergences for non-negative measures. Let µ1 , µ2 ∈ M+(X ′ ) be two non-negative measures.
Then, for a function ψ : R+ → R+ ∪ {∞}, the ψ-divergence between µ1 , µ2 is given by:


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                   Z

                             def  µ1 (x)
               Dψ (µ1 ∥µ2 ) =   ψ         dµ2 (x) if µ1 ≪ µ2 and + ∞ otherwise.
                              X   µ2 (x)
Here, the generator function ψ(u) is assumed to be convex, non-negative, lower semi-continuous,
                                                                     u→∞
to attain zero uniquely when u = 1 and to satisfy the property ψ(u)
                                                                  u   → ∞. Then, the conjugate
ψ(u) is also known to be non-negative, and its domain is R, see (Séjourné et al., 2019). Under these
assumptions, Dψ is a valid measure of dissimilarity between two non-negative measures. Well-known
examples of ψ-divergences include Kullback-Leibler divergence DKL (Chizat, 2017; Séjourné et al.,
2022) and χ2 -divergence Dχ2 . For the extended discussion on admissible divergences, we refer to
(Gazdieva et al., 2025, Appendix C).
2.1 O PTIMAL T RANSPORT
Classic OT problem. Consider two probability measures P ∈ P(X ), Q ∈ P(Y) and the cost function
c(x, y) ∈ C(X × Y). Then, the OT problem (Kantorovich,
                                           Z            1942) between P and Q is given by
                                       def
                        OTc (P, Q) =           inf              c(x, y)π(x, y)dxdy.                        (1)
                                             π∈Π(P,Q)    X ×Y
Under the mild assumptions on the distributions P, Q and cost function c, the minimizer π ∗ of (1)
always exists but is not guaranteed to be unique, see (Villani et al., 2009). In the special case of the
                                    2
quadratic cost c(x, y) = ∥x−y∥   2    , problem (1) reduces to the well-known (squared) Wasserstein-2
distance (W22 (P, Q)). Problem (1) admitsZa semi-dual reformulation:
                                                                  Z
                                                  f c (x)dP(x) +

                    OTc (P, Q) = sup                                  f (y)dQ(y)                            (2)
                                      f ∈C(Y)   X                  Y
                def
where f c (x) = inf µ∈P(Y) Y c(x, y) − f (y) dµ(y) is the c-transform. Note that the standard
                                R

c-transform in the OT duality is usually defined as f c (x) = inf y∈Y {c(x, y) − f (y)}. Here, for the
future needs, we substitute the classic c-transform by the weak c-transform (Backhoff-Veraguas
et al., 2019, Theorem 1.3), (Gozlan et al., 2017). This transition is valid since the infimum in weak
transform is anyway attained at any µ ∈ P(Y) supported on the arg inf y∈Y {c(x, y) − f (y)} set.
Unbalanced & semi-unbalanced OT problems. The standard formulation of the OT problem entails
various issues (Balaji et al., 2020; Séjourné et al., 2022), such as sensitivity to outliers, inability to deal
with class imbalance in the source and target measures and inapplicability to general non-negative
measures. Still, we consider the mass transportation between probability measures and focus on
the first two issues. Fortunately, they can be overcome by relaxing the hard marginal constraints of
the OT problem which yields the Unbalanced OT (Chizat, 2017; Liero et al., 2018, UOT) problem.
Formally, the UOT problem betweenZthe probability measures P ∈ P(X ), Q ∈ P(Y) is
    UOTc,ψ,ϕ (P, Q) =           inf             c(x, y)γ(x, y)dxdy + Dψ (γx ∥P) + Dϕ (γy ∥Q)                (3)
                          γ∈M+ (X ×Y)         X ×Y
where c(x, y) ∈ C(X × Y) is a continuous cost function and Dψ , Dϕ are ψ-divergences over X and Y,
respectively. We can tune the degree of penalizing the marginal distributions mismatch by introducing
the unbalancedness parameter τ > 0 and considering Dψ = τ Dψ′ , Dϕ = τ Dϕ′ . Informally, when
τ → +∞, the corresponding UOT problem tends to classic OT (1). More precisely, the classic OT
problem (1) is a special case of the UOT problem (3) where the ψ-divergences Dψ , Dϕ are defined
such that Dψ′ (P′ ∥Q′ ) = 0 if P′ = Q′ , and +∞ otherwise. Equivalently, it means that the generator
functions ψ, ϕ are the convex indicators of {1} and their conjugates are defined as ψ(t) = ϕ(t) = t.
In this paper, we focus on the semi-unbalanced OT (SUOT) problem, i.e., the case when only the first
marginal constraint in the OT problem (1) Z is softened:
               SUOTc,ψ (P, Q) = inf              c(x, y)γ(x, y)dxdy + Dψ (γx ∥P) .                 (4)
                                       γ∈Π(Q)    X ×Y
Note that the minimizer γ ∗ of (4) always exists thanks to the compactness of the space X × Y
(yielding the compactness of Π(Q)), continuity of the cost function c(x, y) and lower semi-continuity
of the function ψ (yielding the lower-semi-continuity of the optimized functional w.r.t. γ).
The semi-dual SUOT problem is given by  (Z                                      )
                                                                  Z
                                                    c
               SUOTc,ψ (P, Q) = sup − ψ(−f (x))dP(x)+ f (y)dQ(y) .                                (5)
                                       f ∈C(Y)       X                      Y
Note that under mild assumptions on the cost function c(x, y), optimal potential f ∗ of (5) always
exists, see (Liero et al., 2018, Theorem 4.14). When ψ(t) = t, problem (5) reduces to classic dual
problem (2) for balanced OT problem (1).

                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2 (S EMI -)U NBALANCED O PTIMAL T RANSPORT BARYCENTER
Consider probability measures Pk ∈ P(Xk ) and continuous cost functions ck (x, y) : Xk × Y 7→ R,
                                     PK
k ∈ K. Given weights λk ≥ 0 s.t. k=1 λk = 1, the classic OT barycenter problem consists in
finding a minimizer of the sum of OT problems with fixed first marginals P[1:K] :
                                       XK
                                   inf     λk OTck (Pk , Q).                                 (6)
                                    Q∈P(Y)
                                             k=1
To ensure the robustness of the barycenter estimation, it is natural to consider the relaxation of the
marginals P[1:K] , i.e., substitute the OT problems in (6) with the SUOT problems. Let ψ[1:K] be the
set of ψ-divergences. Then, the SUOT barycenter problem is
                                                     K
                       def                def
                                                    X
                   L∗ = inf Bu (Q) = inf                 λk SUOTck ,ψk (Pk , Q).                    (7)
                          Q∈P(Y)              Q∈P(Y)
                                                       k=1
Clearly, the SUOT barycenter problem (7) subsumes the conventional OT one (6). We also note that
in principle one may substitute OT with UOT problem (3) unbalanced from the both sides (Friesecke
et al., 2021; Chung & Phung, 2021; Bonafini et al., 2023). However, this is not practically meaningful.
Indeed, the ultimate goal is to get rid of the potential outliers and noises in the input data, not in the
barycenter. So there is no need for unbalancedness in the barycenter.
Thanks to (Liero et al., 2018, Corollary 2.9), the functionals Q 7→ SUOTck ,ψk (Pk , Q) (k ∈ K) are
convex and lower semi-continuous. Thus, the functional Q 7→ Bu (Q) is convex and lower semi-
continuous itself. We note that P(Y) is weakly compact. Thus, thanks to the Weierstrass theorem
(Santambrogio, 2015, Box 1.1), Bu (Q) admits at least one minimizer meaning that the barycenter Q∗
exists. Still, we can not claim that it is unique since the functional Q 7→ Bu (Q) is not proved to be
strictly convex.
2.3 C OMPUTATIONAL SETUP
In a real-world scenario, the distributions Pk are not available explicitly and can be assessed only via
empirical samples. Assume that we are given Nk empirical samples xk[1:Nk ] ∼ Pk , k ∈ K. Our goal
is to find approximations γ  bk of the SUOT plans γk∗ between the measures Pk and unknown SUOT
               ∗
barycenter Q for the given cost functions and ψ-divergences ck , ψk , k ∈ K. After that, we can
use the learned plans to perform the conditional sampling, i.e., derive new points y ∼ γ   bk (·|xk ) from
the (approximate) barycenter taking samples xk ∼ (b    γk )x as inputs. Actually, sampling from the left
marginals of the learned plans is not an easy task since the marginal can not be easily assessed using
the learned plans or potentials. Fortunately, we can deal with this issue using the rejection sampling
procedure (Forsythe, 1972), see our M4.2 for the additional details.
It is important to note that the learned plans should admit the new input samples, i.e., those which are
not necessarily present in the training datasets. This setup is typically called continuous (Li et al.,
2020; Kolesov et al., 2024a; Korotin et al., 2022a) and significantly differs from the discrete one
(Peyré et al., 2019; Cuturi & Doucet, 2014). The latter is aimed at solving the barycenter problem
between the empirical measures which makes its application to new data samples challenging.
3 R ELATED W ORKS
Due to the space constraints, below we give an overview of the most relevant OT barycenter solvers
and leave the discussion of the related continuous OT solvers to Appendix B.
Continuous OT barycenter solvers. We start with a brief overview of continuous OT barycenter
solvers and then proceed to the current state of robust (unbalanced) barycenter research. The
continuous OT barycenter methods could be categorized as follows: (Fan et al., 2021; Korotin et al.,
2021c) stick to ICNN (Amos et al., 2017) parameterization and work only with quadratic Euclidean
costs (ℓ22 ); (Korotin et al., 2022a) also deals with ℓ22 but utilizes fixed point algorithm (Álvarez-Esteban
et al., 2016); (Noble et al., 2023) builds upon Schrödinger bridge; (Li et al., 2020; Chi et al., 2023)
take the advantage of congruence condition; (Kolesov et al., 2024a;b) empower the congruence
condition with Neural OT (Korotin et al., 2023b) and Energy-guided Neural OT (Mokrov et al., 2024)
correspondingly. The latter works are the current SOTA in the continuous OT barycenter domain.
The area of robust barycenter computation is much less explored and, to the best of our knowledge,
limited exclusively to discrete (§2.3) solvers (Chizat et al., 2018; Le et al., 2021; Beier et al., 2023;
Séjourné et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Manupriya et al., 2024; Yang & Ding, 2024) based on
different principles (MMD regularization/Sinkhorn algorithm/Sliced OT etc.). In contrast, we take
a significant step forward and propose the first continuous robust barycenter approach with proper
theoretical support and practical validation (§4, 5).

                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4    P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In M4.1, we derive and investigate our novel optimization objective for learning SUOT barycenters.
In M4.2, we propose the algorithm to solve this problem. The proofs for all theoretical results are
given in Appendix A.
4.1 D ERIVING THE O PTIMIZATION O BJECTIVE
To develop a procedure for estimating the barycenter, one may simply substitute the dual form of
SUOT problem (5) in the barycenter problem (7) and get a min-max problem. Actually, without
additional modifications, it will lead to the min-max-min problem since the c-transforms fkck also
need to be optimized. In our Theorem 1 below, we present the way for solving the optimization
problem (7) in max-min manner and without the optimization over distributions Q ∈ P(Y).
Theorem 1 (Semi-dual form of SUOT barycenter problem). The dual form of SUOT barycenter
problem (7) is given by                K        Z
                                      X
               ∗
                                                  −ψ k (−fkck (xk ))dPk (xk ) + m .

            L =          sup               λk                                                  (8)
                    m∈R,f[1:K] ∈C K (Y) k=1        Xk
                     PK
                       k=1 λk fk ≡m

Hereafter, we say that the potentials f[1:K] are m-congruent or satisfy the m-congruence condition if
PK
   k=1 λk fk ≡ m (for some m ∈ R). Substituting the definition of the c-transform in (8), we get our
final optimization objective.
Corollary 1 (Maximin reformulation "Z for the Z semi-dual problem (8)). It holds:             #
                            XK
  ∗

L = sup             inf         λk      −ψ k −      ck (xk , y)−fk (y) dγk (y|xk ) dPk (xk )+m . (9)
         m∈R, γ(·|xk )∈P(Y)              Xk        Y
                            k=1
    f[1:K] ∈C K (Y)         |                                         {z                           }
    PK
      k=1  λk fk ≡m                                    L(f
                                                                                     def
                                                       e [1:K] ,{γk (·|xk )}[1:K] ,m)=

where the sup is taken over m ∈ R and m-congruent potentials f[1:K] ∈ C K (Y), inf − over
conditional plans γk (·|xk ).
Interestingly, in the special case when at least one of the SUOTck ,ψk terms in the right-hand-
side of (7) reduces into OTck , the m-congruence condition in (9) turns into congruence condition
PK
   k=1 λk fk ≡ 0, which typically appears in balanced settings (Kolesov et al., 2024a;b).
Corollary 2 (Congruence Condition of the Special SUOT barycenter problem). Suppose that ψ1 (t) =
t, i.e., SUOTc1 ,ψ1 = OTc1 in (7). Then,            (9) turns into the following dual formulation:
                                       " Zdual form Z                                            #
                               XK
  ∗

L =        sup         inf          λk      −ψ k −       ck (xk , y)−fk (y) dγk (y|xk ) dPk (xk ) . (10)
     f[1:K] ∈C K (Y) γ(·|xk )∈P(Y) k=1        Xk            Y
     P K
       k=1 λk fk ≡0

Theorem 2 below demonstrates the two important properties of the true plans γ ∗ solving the SUOT
barycenter problem (7). First, the left marginals of these plans (γk∗ )x can be characterized via the
optimal potentials fk∗ which allows us to find a procedure for sampling from the marginal density
during the inference, see M4.2. Second, the Theorem guarantees that the family of optimal plans is
indeed one of the solutions to (9).
Theorem 2 (SUOT barycenter conditional plans are contained in optimal saddle points). Assume
that there exist m and {fk∗ (y) ∈ C(Y)}K k=1 which deliver maximum to the problem (9). Assume that
ck (x, y) are continuous cost functions and ψ k are continuously differentiable functions. Let {γk∗ }K
                                                                                                     k=1
be a family of optimal SUOT plans between Pk and some barycenter Q∗ . Then for every plan γk∗
(a) the marginal of the plan can be represented as:
                             d(γk∗ )x (x) = ∇ψk (−(fk∗ )ck (x))dPk (x);                                (11)
(b) the corresponding conditional plan γk∗ (·|xk ) satisfies
                   γk∗ (·|xk ) ∈ arg minγk (·|xk ) L(f
                                                   e ∗ , {γk (·|xk ))}[1:K] , m).
                                                       [1:K]                                           (12)
Theorem (2) shows that for some optimal saddle points {(fk∗ , γk∗ )}K                           ∗ K
                                                                    k=1 of (9), it holds that {γk }k=1 is
                                                       ∗                                            ∗
the family of true SUOT plans between P[1:K] and Q . Meanwhile, for any family of optimal f[1:K]         ,
                                                                         ∗ K
the arg minγk (·|xk ) sets might contain not only optimal SUOT plans {γk }k=1 but other functions as
well which is a known fake solutions issue of neural OT solvers (Korotin et al., 2023a).


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       b {fbk }K
Still, in Theorem 3 below, we show that if the triple (m,             γk } K
                                                               k=1 , {b    k=1 ) solves the problem (9)
relatively well and some additional assumptions are satisfied, then the recovered conditional plans
                                                              ∗
 γ (·|xk )k }K
{b                                                                     K
             k=1 are close to those of the true SUOT plans {γk (·|xk )}k=1 . Thanks to this result, we
deduce that when Algorithm 1 (M4.2) optimizing (9) converged nearly to the optimum, its solutions
are close to the true conditional plans.
Theorem 3 (Quality bounds for recovered plans). Consider recovered m-congruent
                                                                        b              potentials fb[1:K]
                                                                        K
s.t. fk ∈ C(Y), k ∈ K and recovered conditional plans {b
      b                                                     γk (·|xk )}     , xk ∼ Pk s.t. γ
                                                                                        k=1  bk (·|xk ) ∈
P(Y), k ∈ K. Assume that the conditions of Theorem 2 are satisfied, Y is convex set, and maps
                                                                              def
y 7→ ck (xk , y) − fbk (y) are β-strongly convex on Y, k ∈ K. Also, let 0 < η = ∇ψ(−b) where b is
the upper bound b = max max                max {ck (xk , y) − fk (y)}. Introduce the duality gaps:
                             k∈K fk ∈{fbk ,fk∗ } xk ∈Xk ,y∈Y
                                   def
                          b[1:K] ) = L(
            δ1 (fb[1:K] , γ                e fb[1:K] , γ        b −
                                                       b[1:K] , m)          inf         L(
                                                                                        e fb[1:K] , γ[1:K] , m);
                                                                                                             b
                                                                      γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)
                            def
              δ2 (fb[1:K] ) = L∗ −        inf       L(
                                                     e fb[1:K] , γ[1:K] , m).
                                                                          b
                                   γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)
                  PK
       2
                                      bk (·|x), γk∗ (·|x) dPk (x).

         δ1 + δ2 ≥ k=1 λk Xk W22 γ
                                R
Then, ηβ
Theorem 3 establishes quality bounds for the recovered plans {b  γk (·|xk )}K
                                                                            k=1 investigating the duality
gaps, i.e., the errors for solving inner and outer optimization problems in (9). Note that the strong
convexity conditions, in general, are not guaranteed in practice, but are commonly used in the related
papers (Fan et al., 2023; Rout et al., 2022), see (Kolesov et al., 2024a, M4) for additional details.
4.2 PARAMETRIZATION AND P RACTICAL O PTIMIZATION P ROCEDURE
Parametrization. To implement the optimization over distributions γ(·|xk ) ∈ P(Y) (k ∈ K) in (9),
we consider parametrizing them with stochastic or deterministic functions, using the strategy defined
in (Kolesov et al., 2024a, M4.1) and (Korotin et al., 2023a, M4.1).
To realize the optimization over conditional plans γk (·|xk ) in (9), we define an auxiliary space
S ⊂ RDs , atomless distribution S ∈ P(S) and measurable maps Tk : Xk × S → Y. For every plan
γk , we consider the representation using the map Tk s.t. γk (·|x) = Tk (x, ·)# S. Using the stochastic
parametrization of the conditional
                           "Z       plans, we can reformulate the optimization objective ! (9) as: #
                     XK               Z
L∗ = sup       inf       λk −ψk            fk (Tk (xk , s)) − ck (xk , Tk (xk , s)) dS(s) dPk (xk )+m . (13)
       m∈R, T[1:K]                 Xk        S
                   k=1
  f[1:K] ∈C K (Y)  |                                                   {z                                          }
  PK
         λ
    k=1 k kf  =m                                            L(f[1:K] ,T[1:K] ,m)=
                                                                                  def


We denote the expression under sup inf in (13) as L(f[1:K] , T[1:K] , m). In some of the setups, the
stochasticity of the conditional plans γ(·|x) is not needed. Then we can consider a measurable map
Tk : Xk → Y which specifies the deterministic conditional plans as γk (·|x) = δTk (x) (·).
For solving (13), we parametrize the maps Tk and potentials fk (k ∈ K) as neural networks
                                                                    def              def
Tk,ω : RDk × RDs 7→ RD and fk,θ : RDk 7→ R with weights ω = ω[1:K] ∈ Ω, θ = θ[1:K] ∈ Θ. Here
Ω = Ω1 × Ω2 × ... × ΩK and Θ = Θ1 × Θ2 × ... × ΘK are the parameter spaces for the maps and
potentials respectively. Note that RDs denotes the stochastic dimension which should be omitted in
the case of deterministic maps. In order
                                       P to ensure     the m-congruence condition for the potentials, we
                                                    λn          m
parametrize them as fk,θ = gk,θ − n̸=k λk (K−1)         gn,θ + Kλ k
                                                                    where gk,θ denote the auxiliary neural
nets. Here we take inspiration from similar strategies in (Li et al., 2020; Kolesov et al., 2024b;a).
Training. Recall that we work in the continuous setup of the barycenter problem, i.e., the distri-
butions P[1:K] are accessible only through the empirical samples of data. Thus, we opt to estimate
the objective (13) from samples using the Monte-Carlo method. Specifically, the objective is op-
timized using stochastic gradient descent-ascent algorithm over random batches of samples from
the distributions Pk and auxiliary distribution S1 . For simplicity, we replace the minimization of
the objective  L(fθ,[1:K] , Tω,[1:K] ) w.r.t. Tω,[1:K]  with the direct minimization of the c-transform
R R
  Xk S
          ck (xk , Tk (xk , s)) − fk (Tk (xk , s)) dS(s)dPk (xk ) which has the same set of minimizers.
We detail our optimization procedure in Algorithm 1.
Inference. Our approach for SUOT barycenter estimation relaxes the marginal constraints related to
   1
       Sampling from the stochastic distribution is omitted when we deal with the deterministic maps Tω,[1:K] .


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: SUOT Barycenter with Semi-Unbalanced Neural Optimal Transport
Input: Distributions P1:K , S accessible by samples; transport costs ck : Xk × Y 7→ R; maps
Tk,ω and m-congruent potentials fk,θ , k ∈ K; number NT of inner iterations; batch sizes.
Output: Trained (stochastic) maps T[1:K],ω∗ approximating SUOT plans between Pk and
 barycenter Q∗ .
repeat
    Sample batches Xk"∼ Pk , k ∈ K; For each xk ∈ Xk sample an auxiliary             # S[xk ] ∼ S;
                                                                                 ! batch
             P            1
                               P           P    f (Tk (xk ,s))−c(xk ,Tk (xk ,s))
    L
    cf ← −
               k∈K λk |Xk |         ψ                       |S[xk ]|              +m ;
                              xk ∈Xk     sk ∈S[xk ]
                           ∂L
    Update θ by using ∂θf to maximize L
                            c
                                      cf ;
    for nT = 1, 2, . . . , NT do
        Sample batches Xk ∼ Pk ; For each xk ∈ Xk :
           sample an auxiliary batch S[xk ] ∼ S;
                            P c(xk ,Tk (xk ,s))−f (Tk (xk ,s))
        LT ← 1
        d           P
           k   |Xk |                         |S[xk ]|
                    xk ∈Xk sk ∈S[xk ]
                             LT
        Update ω by using ∂∂ω    to minimize L
                                             cT ;
                              c


until not converged;


the input distributions Pk . It means that during the inference, the input points xk should be sampled
not from the distributions Pk but from the left marginals of the learned plans (b      γk )x . However,
sampling from these marginals is not available explicitly and requires the usage of the established
techniques for sampling from the reweighted distributions, e.g., the rejection sampling technique. We
apply this technique in the following manner.
Thanks to our Theorem 2 (a), we are able to approximate the fraction of the densities of measures
                d(γ ∗ )x (x)
(γk∗ )x and Pk : dPkk (x)    ≈ ∇ψ(−(fbk )c (x)) where fbk denotes the potential learned during training.
Thus, we can (1) generate new samples Xk ∼ Pk and samples of the same shape from the uniform
                                                    def
distribution uk ∼ U ; (2) calculate the constant c = max ∇ψ(−(fbk )c (x)) ; (3) accept the samples
Xk′ which satisfy the inequality uk ≤ ∇ψ(−(fbk )c (Xk′ )) and reject the others.
5    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate our model through various experiments. In M5.1, we compare the numerical
accuracy of our method against baseline methods. In M5.2, we investigate two key properties of our
U-NOTB method: robustness to class imbalance and robustness to outliers. Specifically, we show
that these properties can be controlled by adjusting the unbalanced parameter τ . In M5.3, we evaluate
our model for the general costs, leveraging shape and color-invariant cost on the image dataset,
other than the quadratic cost. We provide the details about settings and baselines in Appendix C. In
Appendices D.1, D.2, we test our solver in the balanced/semi-unbalanced OT barycenter problem
for Gaussian distributions with computable ground-truth solutions. Additionally, in Appendix D.3,
we illustrate another interesting application of U-NOTB in higher dimensions showing its ability to
manipulate images through interpolating its distributions on the image manifolds. The code for our
model is written using PyTorch framework and is publicly available at
                https://github.com/milenagazdieva/U-NOTBarycenters.
5.1 BARYCENTER E VALUATION ON S YNTHETIC DATASETS
Baselines. We aim to evaluate whether our model accurately estimates the optimal barycenter Q∗
and the corresponding transport maps T ∗ [1:K] . Because our work is the first attempt to address the
continuous SUOT barycenters, there are no existing baselines for direct comparison. Therefore, we
carefully designed two baseline models for comparison with our approach. These baseline models
are motivated by the equivalence between the OT barycenter of two distributions and the interpolation
between them (Villani et al., 2009). Each baseline model is derived from two approaches for learning
the unbalanced transport map Tuot between P1 and P2 : (i) the semi-dual UOT model (UOTM) (Choi
et al., 2024a) and (ii) the OT Map model (OTM) (Rout et al., 2022) combined with the mini-batch
UOT sampling (Eyring et al., 2024). Because the SUOT problem is equivalent to the OT problem


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Setup           (b) Discrete UOT             (c) UOTM        (d) Mini-Batch UOT (e) U-NOTB (ours)
Figure 2: Transport map T1 (x1 ), x1 ∼ P1 and UOT barycenter distribution Q = T1# P1 obtained by
Discrete UOT, UOTM, Mini-batch UOT, and our method in Spiral → Gaussian Mixture.
                            Data              Metric    UOTM      Mini-Batch UOT   U-NOTB (ours)
                                               L2        0.65          0.31            0.25
                  Sprial → Gaussian Mixture
                                               W2        0.29          0.15            0.12
                                               L2        0.89          0.64            0.52
                       Moon → Spiral
                                               W2        0.59          0.93            0.81

                         Table 1: Comparison on Benchmarks on Toy datasets.
between the rescaled distributions, we conduct the displacement interpolation using this Tuot to
approximate the barycenter. Specifically, we consider the following SUOT barycenter problem:
                        inf {λ1 OTc1 (P1 , Q) + λ2 SUOTc2 (P2 , Q)},                         (14)
                          Q∈P(Y)
                                                                        2                      def
where c1 , c2 are the quadratic cost functions ck (x, y)= ∥x−y∥
                                                             2   , λ1=λ2= 21 . Let T1 =λ1 Id+λ2 Tuot .
Then, T1# P1 and T1 approximate the barycenter distribution Q∗ and the transport map from P1 to
Q∗ , respectively. Note that we should set the OTc1 distance for the first distribution P1 to ensure that
the estimated barycenter Q = T1# P1 has a unit mass in two baselines. Since the OT problem is a
specific case of the SUOT one, our method can be naturally applied to this case. We test U-NOTB on
the synthetic dataset of Spiral-to-Gaussian Mixture (S→GM) (Fig. 2a).
Experimental Results. Fig. 2 presents a qualitative visualization of the results from our model and
two baseline methods. Since there is no closed-form solution for the continuous SUOT barycenter
problems, we consider the SUOT barycenter between two discrete empirical distributions, obtained
from the POT (Flamary et al., 2021) library, as the ground-truth solution Q∗ and T1∗ (Fig. 2b). In
Fig. 2c-2e, we visualize the spiral distribution P1 , the estimated transport map T1 and barycenter
Q = T1# P1 . Note that, because we set OTc1 for P1 in Eq. (14), the rejection sampling is not applied
in this case. Fig. 2 shows that our model and other baseline methods present decent results.
Table 1 provides a quantitative evaluation of our model for a more detailed assessment. The approxi-
mate barycenter Qω∗ and the transport map T1,ω∗ from each method are evaluated from two perspec-
tives. First, the distribution error between Qω∗ and Q∗ is evaluated by measuring the Wasserstein-2
distance W22 (Qω∗ , Q∗ ) (W2 metric). Second, the optimality errorR of the transport map is assessed by
measuring L2 -norm between the transport maps (L2 metric), i.e., X1 ∥T1,ω∗ (x1 )−T1∗ (x1 )∥22 dP1 (x1 ).
As shown in Table 1, our model achieves the most accurate barycenter estimation in three out of four
scores, evaluated using two metrics (W2 and L2 ) across two synthetic datasets.
5.2 ROBUST BARYCENTER E STIMATION UNDER O UTLIER AND C LASS I MBALANCE
In this section, we examine two key properties of our U-NOTB model: (i) robustness to class
imbalancedness, (ii) robustness to outliers. The value of OT functional OTc (·, ·) is known to be
sensitive to outliers and class imbalance problems. Hence, the OT barycenter is also largely affected
by these factors. To address this sensitivity, the UOT problem extends the traditional OT by relaxing
the constraint on marginal densities. This relaxation introduces two notable characteristics. First, even
in the presence of class imbalances, the reweighting process allows the model to appropriately align
with the relevant modes in a reasonable manner (Eyring et al., 2024). Second, the model exhibits
robustness to outliers, maintaining reliable transport despite their presence (Balaji et al., 2020; Choi
et al., 2024a). The goal of this section is twofold: (1) to investigate whether these two properties are
also observed in our U-NOTB model by comparing it with its OT counterpart (Kolesov et al., 2024a)
and (2) to demonstrate that this robustness can be controlled through the unbalancedness parameter τ .
Robustness to Class Imbalance. The class imbalance issue refers to the case where each class has a
different proportion across Pk . This class imbalance problem can lead to undesirable behaviour in
the standard OT barycenter. For example, in Fig. 3, we consider the upper-modes and bottom-modes
for each distribution as class 1 and 2, respectively. In P1 , 75% of the data is concentrated in class 1


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (a) NOTB                  (b) τ = 200                (c) τ = 20              (d) τ = 1
Figure 3: Conditional plans γk (y|x) and barycenter Q obtained by NOTB and our method in Gaussian
Mixture barycenter experiment. We evaluate on various unbalancedness parameter τ ∈ {1, 20, 200}.


      (a) Marginal distributions         (b) NOTB with outlier             (c) NOTB without outlier


            (d) τ = 200                          (e) τ = 20                       (f) τ = 1
Figure 4: Learned barycenter Q obtained from x ∼ P1 by NOTB and our method on Gaussian Mixture
with 5% outliers. The evaluation is conducted for various unbalancedness parameter τ ∈ {1, 20, 200}.
For comparison, we additionally trained NOTB without outliers, as shown in subfigure (c).

(upper-left white dots) while only 25% is concentrated in class 1 for P1 (upper-right yellow dots).
Therefore, the balanced OT barycenter (Kolesov et al., 2024a, NOTB) generates a mode between two
majority modes of Pk , which can be an undesirable phenomenon for the barycenter (Fig. 3a).
As shown in Fig. 3, we evaluated our model for diverse unbalancedness parameter τ ∈ {1, 20, 100}
(Eq. 3). Additionally, for comparison, we conducted experiments under a balanced setting using the
OT counterpart. It is important to note that as τ increases, the UOT problem converges to the OT
problem, allowing for less flexibility in marginal distributions (Choi et al., 2024b). When τ = 1,
our unbalanced barycenter demonstrates robust results by generating barycenter modes between
the pair of the closest modes of the P1 and P2 . Our model rejects contour samples from majority
modes, reweighting them to better align the corresponding modes. Moreover, our unbalanced
barycenter offers controllability of this robustness through τ . As τ increases, the flexibility on
marginal distributions decreases in the UOT problem. Thus, when τ = 200, our model accepts
nearly all samples, making the UOT barycenter closely resemble the OT barycenter. We believe this
adaptability of the UOT barycenter offers practical benefits in real-world scenarios.
Robustness to Outliers. To evaluate the robustness to outliers, we conducted experiments on a
synthetic dataset that included a small proportion of outliers. As depicted in Fig. 4, the dataset
comprises three marginal distributions: P1 (beige dots), P2 (gray dots), and P3 (orange dots). Outliers,
constituting 5% of the marginal P1 and P2 , were added to the outermost point of each marginal. We
evaluated our model for various unbalancedness parameters τ and compared it with the balanced OT
counterpart. Similar to the robustness to class imbalance experiments, we expect that smaller values
of τ will provide more robustness to outliers by allowing higher flexibility in marginal distributions.
For the comparative analysis, we also tested the NOTB approach for OT barycenter estimation under
the data without outliers. This experiment aims to demonstrate the desired behaviour of barycenter
when there are no outliers in the dataset. In Fig. 4, we see that for τ = 1, our U-NOTB closely aligns
with the OT barycenter in this outlier-free scenario. This result shows that our model offers robustness


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 (a) In-distribution Samples from P1 .                    (b) Outlier Samples from P1 .
                        Acceptance Rate: 63%                                 Acceptance Rate: 19%


                 (c) In-distribution Samples from P2 .                    (d) Outlier Samples from P2 .
                       Acceptance Rate: 71.25%                               Acceptance Rate: 5.5%
Figure 5: Examples of x1 ∼ P1 (grayscale digits) and x2 ∼ P2 (color images) and its corresponding
             barycenter y ∼ Q samples (colored-digits) in shape-color experiment.
to outliers by rejecting outlier samples at smaller τ . As τ increases, our model accepts a higher
proportion of outliers. Hence, the outliers on the left and right begin to influence the barycenter,
making the modes of barycenter lie between the majority modes of distributions Pk . In summary,
reducing τ enhances outlier robustness, while increasing τ yields a more precise barycenter by
incorporating all data points. We believe that the flexibility to adjust τ offers promising potential for
broader applications, where different levels of tolerance to outliers may be required.
5.3 S HAPE - COLOR EXPERIMENT
In this section, we illustrate one interesting example demonstrating how the UOT barycenter problem
can be applied using a general cost. We designed the problem at general costs when there are some
undesirable outliers in the marginal distributions, see Fig. 1 for visualization of the setup.
• Shape distribution P1 . The first marginal distribution consists of grayscaled images of digits ‘2’
  (49% of training dataset), ‘3’ (50%) and ‘7’(1% - outliers) of MNIST data.
• Color distribution P2 . The second marginal distribution consists of three color points: red
  (probability mass p0 = 0.495), green (p1 = 0.495), white (p2 = 0.01 - outliers).
• Manifold. We pretrained the StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019) generator G : Z → R3×32×32 on the
  colored MNIST dataset of digits ‘2’ and ‘3’. Let Eθk be the network which encodes each marginal
  Pk to the latent Z. Throughout the experiment, we transport xk ∼ Pk to the barycenter point yk by
  yk = G◦Eθk (xk ), thus confining the transformed images to the colored MNIST of digits ‘2’ and ‘3’.
• General Transport costs. For the first marginal sample x1 ∼ P1 and its corresponding barycenter
  point y1 , we use the following shape-preserving cost: c1 (x1 , y1 ) = 21 ∥x1 − Hg (y1 )∥2 , where Hg is
  a decolorization operator. Moreover, for the second marginal sample x2 ∼ P2 and the corresponding
  barycenter point y2 , we use the following color-preserving cost: c2 (x2 , y2 ) = 12 ∥x2 − Hc (y2 )∥2 ,
  where Hc is a color projection operator defined in (Kolesov et al., 2024a).
Our results for unbalancedness τ = 10 are presented in Figure 5. We demonstrate the examples of
learned mapping (xk , Tk (xk , s)) from in-distribution points xk , see Fig. 5a, 5c, and from outliers,
see Fig. 5b, 5d. Expectedly, the learned in-distribution mappings preserve the shape (P1 → Q∗ ) and
color (P2 → Q∗ ). In turn, the outlier mappings have no reasonable interpretation.
Along with the qualitative performance, we report the acceptance rates of input points xk , see the
explanation of our inference procedure in §4.2. Importantly, the acceptance of outliers is much
smaller compared to in-distribution samples. In particular, if x1 is a grayscaled digit ‘7’, it will be
accepted (and processed through the mapping T1 ) only with probability 0.19, while for grayscaled
digits ‘2’ and ‘3’ the same figure reads as 0.63. Thus, the experiment showcases the applicability of
our robust barycenter methodology for non-trivial cases with non-Euclidean OT costs.
6    D ISCUSSION
Our work continues the recent and fruitful branch of OT barycenter research. We present the first
attempt to build robust OT barycenters under continuous setup based on unbalanced OT formulation.
From now on, the barycenter researchers have a new deep learning tool at their disposal that gives
them the ability to deal with imperfect data (with outliers/noise/class imbalance) at a large scale. We
believe that our proposed method will further expand the toolbox of deep learning practitioners. We
discuss the limitations of our method and future research directions in Appendix E.
Reproducibility. For transparency and reproducibility, we make our source code publicly available at
https://github.com/milenagazdieva/U-NOTBarycenters. The code contains a README
file with further instructions to reproduce our experiments.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Code of Ethics. This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learn-
ing. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be
specifically highlighted here.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. The work of Skoltech was supported by the Analytical center under
the RF Government (subsidy agreement 000000D730321P5Q0002, Grant No. 70-2021-00145
02.11.2021). Jaemoo Choi acknowledges the support by National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) [RS-2024-00410661].

R EFERENCES
Martial Agueh and Guillaume Carlier. Barycenters in the wasserstein space. SIAM Journal on
 Mathematical Analysis, 43(2):904–924, 2011.

Pedro C Álvarez-Esteban, E Del Barrio, JA Cuesta-Albertos, and C Matrán. A fixed-point approach
  to barycenters in wasserstein space. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 441(2):
  744–762, 2016.
Brandon Amos. On amortizing convex conjugates for optimal transport. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=TQ5WUwS_4ai.
Brandon Amos, Lei Xu, and J Zico Kolter. Input convex neural networks. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 146–155. PMLR, 2017.
Arip Asadulaev, Alexander Korotin, Vage Egiazarian, and Evgeny Burnaev. Neural optimal transport
  with general cost functionals. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Julio Backhoff-Veraguas, Mathias Beiglböck, and Gudmund Pammer. Existence, duality, and cyclical
  monotonicity for weak transport costs. Calculus of Variations and Partial Differential Equations,
  58(6):203, 2019.
Yogesh Balaji, Rama Chellappa, and Soheil Feizi. Robust optimal transport with applications in
  generative modeling and domain adaptation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:12934–12944, 2020.
Florian Beier, Johannes von Lindheim, Sebastian Neumayer, and Gabriele Steidl. Unbalanced
  multi-marginal optimal transport. Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision, 65(3):394–413,
  2023.
Dimitri Bertsekas and Steven E Shreve. Stochastic optimal control: the discrete-time case, volume 5.
  Athena Scientific, 1996.
Mauro Bonafini, Olga Minevich, and Bernhard Schmitzer. Hellinger–kantorovich barycenter between
 dirac measures. ESAIM: Control, Optimisation and Calculus of Variations, 29:19, 2023.
Maciej Buze. Constrained hellinger-kantorovich barycenters: least-cost soft and conic multi-marginal
 formulations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11268, 2024.
Jinjin Chi, Zhiyao Yang, Ximing Li, Jihong Ouyang, and Renchu Guan. Variational wasserstein
   barycenters with c-cyclical monotonicity regularization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
   on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 7157–7165, 2023.
Lénaïc Chizat. Doubly regularized entropic wasserstein barycenters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11844,
  2023.
Lenaic Chizat, Gabriel Peyré, Bernhard Schmitzer, and François-Xavier Vialard. Scaling algorithms
  for unbalanced optimal transport problems. Mathematics of Computation, 87(314):2563–2609,
  2018.
Lénaïc Chizat. Unbalanced optimal transport: Models, numerical methods, applications. PhD thesis,
  Université Paris sciences et lettres, 2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jaemoo Choi, Jaewoong Choi, and Myungjoo Kang. Generative modeling through the semi-dual
  formulation of unbalanced optimal transport. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024a.
Jaemoo Choi, Jaewoong Choi, and Myungjoo Kang. Analyzing and improving optimal-transport-
  based adversarial networks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024b.
Nhan-Phu Chung and Minh-Nhat Phung. Barycenters in the hellinger–kantorovich space. Applied
 Mathematics & Optimization, 84(2):1791–1820, 2021.
Marco Cuturi and Arnaud Doucet. Fast computation of wasserstein barycenters. In International
 conference on machine learning, pp. 685–693. PMLR, 2014.
Max Daniels, Tyler Maunu, and Paul Hand. Score-based generative neural networks for large-scale
 optimal transport. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:12955–12965, 2021.
Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schrödinger
  bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:17695–17709, 2021.
Luca Eyring, Dominik Klein, Théo Uscidda, Giovanni Palla, Niki Kilbertus, Zeynep Akata, and
  Fabian J Theis. Unbalancedness in neural monge maps improves unpaired domain translation. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Jiaojiao Fan, Amirhossein Taghvaei, and Yongxin Chen. Scalable computations of wasserstein
   barycenter via input convex neural networks. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings
   of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
   Learning Research, pp. 1571–1581. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.
   mlr.press/v139/fan21d.html.
Jiaojiao Fan, Shu Liu, Shaojun Ma, Hao-Min Zhou, and Yongxin Chen. Neural monge map estimation
   and its applications. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
   https://openreview.net/forum?id=2mZSlQscj3. Featured Certification.
Rémi Flamary, Nicolas Courty, Alexandre Gramfort, Mokhtar Z. Alaya, Aurélie Boisbunon, Stanislas
  Chambon, Laetitia Chapel, Adrien Corenflos, Kilian Fatras, Nemo Fournier, Léo Gautheron,
  Nathalie T.H. Gayraud, Hicham Janati, Alain Rakotomamonjy, Ievgen Redko, Antoine Rolet,
  Antony Schutz, Vivien Seguy, Danica J. Sutherland, Romain Tavenard, Alexander Tong, and
  Titouan Vayer. Pot: Python optimal transport. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(78):1–8,
  2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-451.html.
George E Forsythe. Von neumann’s comparison method for random sampling from the normal and
  other distributions. Mathematics of Computation, 26(120):817–826, 1972.
Gero Friesecke, Daniel Matthes, and Bernhard Schmitzer. Barycenters for the hellinger–kantorovich
  distance over rˆd. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 53(1):62–110, 2021.
Milena Gazdieva, Alexander Korotin, Daniil Selikhanovych, and Evgeny Burnaev. Extremal domain
 translation with neural optimal transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2023.
Milena Gazdieva, Arip Asadulaev, Evgeny Burnaev, and Aleksandr Korotin. Light unbalanced
 optimal transport. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:93907–93938, 2025.
Nathael Gozlan, Cyril Roberto, Paul-Marie Samson, and Prasad Tetali. Kantorovich duality for
  general transport costs and applications. Journal of Functional Analysis, 273(11):3327–3405,
  2017.
Nikita Gushchin, Alexander Kolesov, Alexander Korotin, Dmitry Vetrov, and Evgeny Burnaev.
  Entropic neural optimal transport via diffusion processes. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nikita Gushchin, Sergei Kholkin, Evgeny Burnaev, and Alexander Korotin. Light and optimal
  schrödinger bridge matching. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Nikita Gushchin, Daniil Selikhanovych, Sergei Kholkin, Evgeny Burnaev, and Alexander Korotin.
  Adversarial schrödinger bridge matching. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024b.
Leonid V Kantorovich. On the translocation of masses. In Dokl. Akad. Nauk. USSR (NS), volume 37,
  pp. 199–201, 1942.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Samuli Laine, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Training
  generative adversarial networks with limited data. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.
Dominik Klein, Théo Uscidda, Fabian Theis, and Marco Cuturi. Genot: A neural optimal transport
  framework for single cell genomics. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2024.
Alexander Kolesov, Petr Mokrov, Igor Udovichenko, Milena Gazdieva, Gudmund Pammer, Evgeny
  Burnaev, and Alexander Korotin. Estimating barycenters of distributions with neural optimal
  transport. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Alexander Kolesov, Petr Mokrov, Igor Udovichenko, Milena Gazdieva, Gudmund Pammer, Anastasis
  Kratsios, Evgeny Burnaev, and Alexander Korotin. Energy-guided continuous entropic barycenter
  estimation for general costs. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2024b.
Nikita Kornilov, Petr Mokrov, Alexander Gasnikov, and Alexander Korotin. Optimal flow matching:
  Learning straight trajectories in just one step. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Alexander Korotin, Vage Egiazarian, Arip Asadulaev, Alexander Safin, and Evgeny Burnaev.
  Wasserstein-2 generative networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021a.
Alexander Korotin, Lingxiao Li, Aude Genevay, Justin M Solomon, Alexander Filippov, and Evgeny
  Burnaev. Do neural optimal transport solvers work? a continuous wasserstein-2 benchmark.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14593–14605, 2021b.
Alexander Korotin, Lingxiao Li, Justin Solomon, and Evgeny Burnaev. Continuous wasserstein-2
  barycenter estimation without minimax optimization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021c. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3tFAs5E-Pe.
Alexander Korotin, Vage Egiazarian, Lingxiao Li, and Evgeny Burnaev. Wasserstein iterative
  networks for barycenter estimation. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and
  Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022a. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=GiEnzxTnaMN.
Alexander Korotin, Alexander Kolesov, and Evgeny Burnaev. Kantorovich strikes back! wasserstein
  gans are not optimal transport? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:13933–
  13946, 2022b.
Alexander Korotin, Daniil Selikhanovych, and Evgeny Burnaev. Kernel neural optimal transport. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.
Alexander Korotin, Daniil Selikhanovych, and Evgeny Burnaev. Neural optimal transport. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Alexander Korotin, Nikita Gushchin, and Evgeny Burnaev. Light schrödinger bridge. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=WhZoCLRWYJ.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Khang Le, Huy Nguyen, Quang M Nguyen, Tung Pham, Hung Bui, and Nhat Ho. On robust optimal
  transport: Computational complexity and barycenter computation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:21947–21959, 2021.
Lingxiao Li, Aude Genevay, Mikhail Yurochkin, and Justin M Solomon. Continuous regularized
  wasserstein barycenters. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:17755–17765,
  2020.
Matthias Liero, Alexander Mielke, and Giuseppe Savaré. Optimal entropy-transport problems and a
 new hellinger–kantorovich distance between positive measures. Inventiones mathematicae, 211(3):
 969–1117, 2018.
Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and qiang liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer
  data with rectified flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XVjTT1nw5z.
Ashok Makkuva, Amirhossein Taghvaei, Sewoong Oh, and Jason Lee. Optimal transport mapping via
  input convex neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6672–6681.
  PMLR, 2020.
Piyushi Manupriya, SakethaNath Jagarlapudi, and Pratik Jawanpuria. MMD-regularized unbalanced
  optimal transport. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=eN9CjU3h1b.
Petr Mokrov, Alexander Korotin, Alexander Kolesov, Nikita Gushchin, and Evgeny Burnaev. Energy-
  guided entropic neural optimal transport. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=d6tUsZeVs7.
Ngoc-Hai Nguyen, Dung Le, Hoang-Phi Nguyen, Tung Pham, and Nhat Ho. On barycenter
  computation: Semi-unbalanced optimal transport-based method on gaussians. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.08117, 2024.
Sloan Nietert, Ziv Goldfeld, and Rachel Cummings. Outlier-robust optimal transport: Duality,
  structure, and statistical analysis. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 11691–11719. PMLR, 2022.
Maxence Noble, Valentin De Bortoli, Arnaud Doucet, and Alain Durmus. Tree-based diffusion schr\"
 odinger bridge with applications to wasserstein barycenters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16557,
 2023.
Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
  science. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.
Litu Rout, Alexander Korotin, and Evgeny Burnaev. Generative modeling with optimal transport maps.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=5JdLZg346Lw.
Filippo Santambrogio. Optimal transport for applied mathematicians. Birkäuser, NY, 55(58-63):94,
   2015.
Vivien Seguy, Bharath Bhushan Damodaran, Remi Flamary, Nicolas Courty, Antoine Rolet, and
  Mathieu Blondel. Large scale optimal transport and mapping estimation. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  B1zlp1bRW.
Thibault Séjourné, Jean Feydy, François-Xavier Vialard, Alain Trouvé, and Gabriel Peyré. Sinkhorn
  divergences for unbalanced optimal transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12958, 2019.
Thibault Séjourné, Gabriel Peyré, and François-Xavier Vialard. Unbalanced optimal transport, from
  theory to numerics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.08775, 2022.
Thibault Séjourné, Clément Bonet, Kilian Fatras, Kimia Nadjahi, and Nicolas Courty. Unbalanced
  optimal transport meets sliced-wasserstein. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07176, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuyang Shi, Valentin De Bortoli, Andrew Campbell, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schrödinger
  bridge matching. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Frode Terkelsen. Some minimax theorems. Mathematica Scandinavica, 31(2):405–413, 1972.
Alexander Tong, Nikolay Malkin, Kilian Fatras, Lazar Atanackovic, Yanlei Zhang, Guillaume Huguet,
  Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Simulation-free schr\" odinger bridges via score and flow matching.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03672, 2023.
Alexander Tong, Kilian FATRAS, Nikolay Malkin, Guillaume Huguet, Yanlei Zhang, Jarrid Rector-
  Brooks, Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Improving and generalizing flow-based generative models
  with minibatch optimal transport. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-
  8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CD9Snc73AW. Expert Certification.
Omer Tov, Yuval Alaluf, Yotam Nitzan, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Designing an encoder
 for stylegan image manipulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–14, 2021.
Francisco Vargas, Pierre Thodoroff, Austen Lamacraft, and Neil Lawrence. Solving schrödinger
  bridges via maximum likelihood. Entropy, 23(9):1134, 2021.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Xu Wang, Jiawei Huang, Qingyuan Yang, and Jinpeng Zhang. On robust wasserstein barycenter: The
  model and algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2024 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining
 (SDM), pp. 235–243. SIAM, 2024.
Qingyuan Yang and Hu Ding. Approximate algorithms for k-sparse wasserstein barycenter with
  outliers. In Kate Larson (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-24, pp. 5316–5325. International Joint Conferences on Artificial
  Intelligence Organization, 8 2024. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2024/588. URL https://doi.org/
  10.24963/ijcai.2024/588. Main Track.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A         P ROOFS

A.1       P ROOFS OF T HEOREM 1 AND C OROLLARY 1

Proof of Theorem 1. Substituting the dual form (5) into (13), we can formulate the barycenter prob-
lem as finding
                                                    K
                                                    X                 Z                                       Z
              ∗
                                                                            −ψ k (−fkc (x))dPk (xk ) +

          L = min                 sup                        λk                                                       fk (y)dQ(y)          (15)
                    Q∈P(Y) f1 ,...,fK ∈C(Y)                            Xk                                         Y
                                                    k=1
                             |                                                      {z                                             }
                                                                                          def
                                                                              F (Q,f[1:K] )=

where we replace inf with min thanks to the existence of SUOT barycenter, see M2.2.
Note that the compactness of the space Y yields the weak compactness of P(Y). At the same time,
the functional Q 7→ F(Q, f[1:K] ) is continuous and linear in Q. At the same time, it is concave in
f[1:K] . Indeed, the convex conjugate of the generator function ψ is convex and non-decreasing by
definition, the c-transform operation is convex, see (Kolesov et al., 2024b, Proposition A.1 (iii)).
Thus, the superposition of a concave, non-increasing function −ψ k (·) and concave function −fkc (·),
i.e., −ψ k (−fkc (·)) is a concave function as well (for every k ∈ K). Thus, we can apply the minimax
theorem (Terkelsen, 1972, Corollary 1) and swap min and sup in (15):
                                                    K
                                                    X             Z                                           Z
          ∗
                                                                           −ψ k (−fkc (xk ))dPk (xk ) +

      L =              sup            min                λk                                                           fk (y)dQ(y) =
                  f1 ,...,fK ∈C(Y) Q∈P(Y) k=1                         Xk                                       Y
                         K
                        hX            Z                                                                 K
                                                                                                      Z X                    i
              sup                λk            −ψ k (−fkc (xk ))dPk (xk ) + min                               λk fk (y) dQ(y) =
    f1 ,...,fK ∈C(Y)                    Xk                                               Q∈P(Y)       Y k=1
                          k=1
                                                                                                       |      {z            }
                                                                                                                      def
                                                                                                           f (y)=
                                           K
                                          hX             Z                                                            Z               i
                          sup                       λk            −ψ k (−fkc (xk ))dPk (xk ) + min                          f (y)dQ(y) .   (16)
                     f1 ,...,fK ∈C(Y)                     Xk                                           Q∈P(Y)          Y
                                              k=1
                                          |                                              {z                                            }
                                                                                                def
                                                                                    G(f1 ,...fK )=
                                         R
Now we use the following fact: inf Q∈P(Y) Y f (y)dQ(y) = inf y∈Y f (y). Assume that the true value
    def
m = miny∈Y f (y) is known. Then we can restrict sup in (16) to the potentials f[1:K] satisfying
                                    PK
the m-congruence condition: k=1 λk fk ≡ m. Indeed, for each tuple (f1 , ..., fK ), let us consider
                            def
the tuple (fe1 , ..., feK ) = (f1 , ..., fK + m−f
                                               λK ) satisfying the congruence condition. For this tuple,
         PK
inf y∈Y k=1 λk fek = m. Besides, we get:
                                          Z
                                                       c                 c
G(f1 , ..., fK )−G(f1 , ...fK ) = λK
    e       e                                [−ψ K (−feK (xK )) + ψ K (−fK (xK ))]dPK (xK )+ m  −  m=

                                                         XK
                                                                                  m−f c
                                              Z    h                                          i
                                                           c
                                      λK            ψ K (−fK (xK )) − ψ K (−(fK +     ) (xK )) dPK (xK ) ≥ 0. (17)
                                                XK                                 λK
Here the inequality in line (17) follows from the properties of the c-transform function and convex
conjugate of the divergence’ generator function ψ. First, c-transform is a decreasing function of its
argument, see (Kolesov et al., 2024b, Proposition A.1 (i)). Thus,
                                 m−f       m−m               m − f cK  cK
                       fK +          ≤ fK +    = fK =⇒ (fK +      ) ≥ fK  .
                                  λK         λ K              λK

Second, the convex conjugate ψ K is a non-decreasing function which yields

                      cK                        m − f cK         cK                 m − f cK
                    −fK  ≥ −(fK +                    ) =⇒ ψ K (−fK  ) ≥ ψ K (−(fK +      ) ).
                                                 λK                                  λK

                                                                               16
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  From this, the inequality (17) becomes obvious. It means that the transition to congruent tuple is fair
  for the known value m. It is important to note that in practice this value is not given and should be
  optimized. Thus, the final optimization objective can be formalized as
                                                            hXK      Z                                    i
  L∗ =         sup         G(f1 , ..., fK ) =   sup               λk      −ψ k (−fkc (xk ))dPk (xk ) + m (18)
        m∈R,f[1:K] ∈C K (Y)                               m∈R,f[1:K] ∈C K (Y)            k=1     Xk
         PK                                                PK
           k=1 λk fk ≡m                                      k=1 λk fk ≡m

  where (18) coincides with (9).

  Proof of Corollary 1. By substituting the definition of the c-transform in (8), we get
                        K
                              "Z                       Z                                          #
                        X
   ∗

  L =        sup           λk       −ψ k − inf              ck (xk , y)−fk (y) dµ(y) dPk (xk ) + m = (19)
       m∈R,f[1:K] ∈C K (Y) k=1                 Xk              µ(y)∈P(Y)             Y
        PK
          k=1 λk fk ≡m

                          K
                                        "Z                                                                                   #
                          X                                     n      Z                                          o
             sup                   λk               inf          −ψ k −                  ck (xk , y)−fk (y) dµ(y) dPk (xk )+m . (20)
    m∈R,f[1:K] ∈C K (Y) k=1              Xk µ(y)∈P(Y)                                Y
     PK
       k=1 λk fk ≡m



  In transition from (19) to (20), we interchange the operation of taking inf over µ(y) ∈ P(Y) and ψ k .
  This is possible since −ψ k is monotone non-increasing and infimum in (19) is attained.
  Now we note that the map
                                               n                    Z                                   o

                           (xk , µ) 7→              − ψk −                  ck (xk , y) − fk (y) dµ(y)                    (21)
                                                                     Y
 is measurable and bounded from below. Indeed, recall that the spaces Xk , Y and P(Y) are com-
 pact, the potentials
              R       fk (y) and cost functions ck (xk , y) are continuous. Therefore, the function
 (xk , µ) 7→ − Y (ck (xk , y) − fk (y))dµ(y) is bounded from above, i.e. ∃Bk ∈ R:
                                                Z
                   ∀(xk , µ) ∈ Xk × P(Y) : − (ck (xk , y) − fk (y))dµ(y) ≤ Bk .
                                                                        Y
                                                                 ψ(u)
  Since −ψ k is monotone non-increasing and dom(ψ k ) = (−∞, lim      ) = R, then:
                                                            u→∞ u
                                                            | {z }
                                                                                                =+∞
                                                           Z
        ∀(xk , µ) ∈ Xk × P(Y) : −ψ k −                             (ck (xk , y) − fk (y))dµ(y) ≥ −ψ k (Bk ) > −∞.
                                                               Y
  The latter justifies that (21) is indeed bounded from below; its measurability is obvious. Thanks to
  the properties of this map, we can use the rule of interchange between integral and inf (Bertsekas &
  Shreve, 1996, Propositions 7.27 and 7.50) and get
                                                                                                             (20) =
                   K
                               "                           Z                                                      #
                   X                                                 Z                               o
       sup                λk                 inf               −ψ k − ck (xk , y)−fk (y) dγk (y|xk ) dPk (xk )+m . (22)
m∈R,f[1:K] ∈C K (Y) k=1        γk (·|xk ):Xk 7→P(Y)            Xk                Y
 PK
   k=1 λk fk ≡m

  where the inf is taken over families of measurable stochastic maps {γk (·|xk )}[1:K] . Note that (22) is
  equal to (9) after the trivial interchange between the summation and inf operations. This completes
  the proof.

  Proof of Corollary 2. Since SUOTc1 = OTc1 , ψ 1 = Id by the definition of convex conjugate. By
  substituting f˜1 := f1 − λm1 and ψ 1 = Id into (9), we can obtain the congruence condition as follows:
                              K
                                    "Z                                                                 #
                             X                   Z
    ∗

  L =        sup       inf       λk       −ψ k −         ck (xk , y) − fk (y) dγk (y|xk ) dPk (xk ) + m =
         m,f[1:K]   γk (·|xk )                      Xk                      Y
       PK                      k=1
        k=1 λk fk ≡m


                                                                            17
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                    "        Z     Z
                                                                                              m
                 sup                   inf              λ1            c1 (x1 , y) − f˜1 (y) +       dγ1 (y|x1 )dP1 (x1 )+
                m,f[1:K]        γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)                  X1 Y                         λ1
        λ1 f˜1 + K
                P
                  k=2 λ k fk ≡0
                                     K          Z                      Z                                                      #
                                     X
                                           λk           −ψ k −                  ck (xk , y) − fk (y) dγk (y|xk ) dPk (xk ) +
                                                                                                                             m =
                                     k=2         Xk                        Y
                                                         "        Z            Z
                                                                                            c1 (x1 , y) − f˜1 (y) dγ1 (y|x1 ) dP1 (x1 )+

                   sup                     inf               λ1            ψ1 −
           λ1 f˜1 +
                  P   K            γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)                    X1               Y
                      k=2 λk fk ≡0

                                                K            Z                    Z                                                  #
                                                X
                                                        λk            −ψ k −               ck (xk , y) − fk (y) dγk (y|xk ) dPk (xk ) .
                                                k=2              Xk                Y


  A.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

  Below we recall an auxiliary thereotical result which will be used in our proof of Theorem 2.
  Theorem 4 (Connection between solutions of dual OT and UOT problems (Choi et al., 2024a)).
  Assume that ψ is a continuously differentiable function. Then if the optimal potential f ∗ delivering
  maximum to the dual UOT problem exists, f ∗ is a solution of the following objective
                                          Z                  Z
                       OTc (P, e = sup
                            e Q)              f c (x)dP(x)
                                                      e    +     f (y)dQ(y)
                                                                       e
                                                    f        X                             Y

                                     ∗ c
  where dP(x)
         e    = ∇ψ 1 (−(f ) (x))dP(x) and dQ(y)
                                           e    = ∇ψ2 (−f ∗ (y))dQ(y).

  This Theorem highlights the intriguing connection between the solutions of the classic OT problem
  and its unbalanced counterpart. Note that in the case of SUOT problem, ψ2 (y) = y, thus, the measure
  e reduces to Q. Now we are ready to prove our Theorem 2.
  Q

                                                              ∗
  Proof of Theorem 2. Below we show that optimal potentials f[1:K]  delivering maximum to the dual
  SUOT barycenter problem (8) are also optimal for each of the underlying SUOT(Pk , Q) problems.
  Recall that the SUOT barycenter problem (7) admits a minimizer which we denote by Q∗ . Then:
            K                                           K      Z
           X                             (8)           X
                λk SUOTck ,ψk (Pk , Q∗ ) =                         −ψ k (−fkck (xk ))dPk (xk )+m = (23)

                                             sup          λk
            k=1                                     m∈R,f[1:K] ∈C K (Y) k=1                     Xk
                                                     PK
                                                       k=1 λk fk ≡m

                                             K
                                             X           Z                                                  K
                                                                                                          Z X
                               sup                  λk            −ψ k (−fkck (xk ))dPk (xk ) +                     λk fk (y) dQ∗ (y) ≤ (24)
                                     K                       Xk                                           Y k=1
                      m∈R,f[1:K] ∈C (Y) k=1
                       PK
                         k=1 λk fk ≡m
                                                                                                            |        {z   }
                                                                                                                    =m
              K
              X            Z                          Z X K                    XK
    sup               λk            ck
                            −ψ k (−fk (xk ))dPk (xk )+       λk fk (y)dQ∗ (y) =    λk SUOTck ,ψk (Pk , Q∗ ). (25)
f[1:K] ∈C K (Y)k=1         Xk                          Y k=1                   k=1

  Here the transition from line (23) to (24) follows from the fact that the optimization is performed
  over m-congruence potentials. If we then remove this restriction on potentials, the value of sup can
  become bigger which explains the transition between (24)-(25). Importantly, we get that the final
  objective in line (25) is equal to the initial objective in line (23). Thus, the inequality in line (24)
                                                                           ∗
  turns into equality. At the same time, it justifies that the potentials f[1:K] delivering maximum to the
  SUOT barycenter (8) problem coincide with the optimal potentials for each of the SUOT problems.
  Then, thanks to Theorem 4, the SUOT barycenter problem (25) admits a reformulation:
                                      K
                                      X                                          K
                                                                                 X
                               L∗ =          λk SUOT(Pk , Q∗ ) =                             e k , Q∗ )
                                                                                       λk OT(P                                    (26)
                                      k=1                                        k=1


                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where each of the distributions P        ek (k ∈ K) is specified via the optimal potential f ∗ delivering
                                                                                                    k
maximum to the problem OT(Pk , Q∗ ) in its dual form (2): dP
                                      e                                   ek (xk ) = ∇ψ(−(f ∗ )ck (xk ))dPk (xk ).
                                                                                              k
Thus, the optimal SUOT plans now correspond to the optimal OT plans γk∗ (x, y) belonging to
Π(Pek , Q∗ ), i.e., having marginals (γ ∗ )x = P      ek , (γ ∗ )y = Q∗ .
                                            k                k

Now we fix k ∈ K. We aim to show that γk (·|xk ) ∈ arg inf γk (·|xk )) Y (ck (xk , y) − fk∗ (y))dγ(·|xk )
                                                    ∗
                                                                                  R

where inf is taken over measurable maps γk (·|xk ). Then by repeating the derivations of Corollary
1 we easily get that γk∗ (·|xk ) ∈ arg inf γk (·|xk )) L(fk∗ , γk (·|xk ))). To prove the former, we again
use the fact that γk∗ is a solution of the balanced OT problem between the rescaled marginal
ek and Q∗ . Note that ∇ψ k is a continuous function since ψ k is assumed to be a continu-
P
ously differentiable function. This yields the fact that P            ek is an absolutely continuous distribu-
tion w.r.t. Pk . Thus, we can use (Villani et al., 2009, Remark 5.13)               which states that for each
y ∈ Supp(γk∗ (·|xk )) it holds that yR ∈ arg inf y′ ∈Y ck (xk , y ′ )−f k (y ′ ) . The latter statement is equiva-
lent to γk∗ (·|xk ) ∈ arg inf γk (·|xk ) Y (ck (xk , y)−fk∗ (y))dγ(·|xk ) which completes the proof. Note that
since the infimum is attained at least for one map γk∗ (·|xk ), the arg inf γk (·|xk ) in the latter equation is
actually arg minγk (·|xk ) .


A.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

                                                                        b fb[1:K] which are
The theorem provides duality gap analysis. We are given approximations: m;
m-congruent;
b            γ
             b[1:K] . Recall that the gaps are defined as follows:


          δ1 (fb[1:K] , γ
                        b[1:K] )       =       L(
                                               e fb[1:K] , γ        b −
                                                           b[1:K] , m)               inf          L(
                                                                                                  e fb[1:K] , γ[1:K] , m);
                                                                                                                       b      (27)
                                                                                γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)

                   δ2 (fb[1:K] )       =       L∗ −            inf          L(
                                                                            e fb[1:K] , γ[1:K] , m).
                                                                                                 b                            (28)
                                                       γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)


Proof of Theorem 3. Our proof considerably extends the proof of (Kolesov et al., 2024a, Theorem
4.2) for the case of the classical cost function.
Part 1. Several notations.
To begin with, we introduce several notations (Q∗ is a SUOT barycenter):

                                           Z         Z
                               def
              Vk (fk , γk )        =           −ψ k −                ck (xk , y)−fk (y) dγk (y|xk ) dPk (xk );                (29)
                                            Xk                 Y
                                                               Z
                               def
              V
              ek (fk , γk )        =       Vk (fk , γk ) +             fk (y)dQ∗ (y);                                         (30)
                                                                   Y
                               def
                   Jk (fk )        =             inf           Vk (fk , γk );                                                 (31)
                                           γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)
                                                         Z
                               def
                   Jek (fk )       =       Jk (fk ) +          fk (y)dQ∗ (y);                                                 (32)
                                                           Y


Note that the following holds:
                   XK                                                                       K
                                                                                            X
L∗ =      sup          λk Jk (fk ) + m =                           sup            inf                λk Vk (fk , γk ) + m .
           m∈R,                                               m∈R,      γ(·|xk )∈P(Y)
                      k=1                                                                     k=1
      f      ∈C K (Y)                                    f[1:K] ∈C K (Y)
      P[1:K]
        K                                                PK
        k=1 λk fk ≡m                                       k=1 λk fk ≡m

                                                   PK
                                                                           fk (y)dQ∗ (y) = m and therefore:
                                                                       R
Also, if f[1:K] are m-congruent, then                   k=1 λk         Y

                   K
                   X                              K
                                                  X
                        λk V(f
                           e f , γk ) =                 λk Vk (fk , γk ) + m = L(f
                                                                               e [1:K] , γ[1:K] , m);
                  k=1                             k=1


                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            K
            X                       K
                                    X
                  λk Jek (fk ) =           λk Jk (fk ) + m =                         inf      L(f
                                                                                              e [1:K] , γ[1:K] , m).              (33)
                                                                           γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)
            k=1                     k=1


Now we start the proof.
Part 2. Analysis of gap δ1 .
At first, we express gap δ1 in terms of newly introduced Vk (29), Jk (31) as follows:

                   δ1       =            L(
                                         e fb[1:K] , γ        b −
                                                     b[1:K] , m)                        inf   L(
                                                                                              e fb[1:K] , γ[1:K] , m)
                                                                                                                   b
                                                                               γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)
                                         K
                                         X
                            =                  λk Vk (fbk , γ
                                                            bk ) − Jk (fbk )
                                         k=1
                                         K
                                         X
                            =                  λk δ1,k (fbk , γ
                                                              bk ),
                                         k=1
                                                          def
                        where                        bk ) = Vk (fbk , γ
                                         δ1,k (fbk , γ                bk ) − Jk (fbk );                                           (34)

We analyze gaps δ1,k for each particular k ∈ [1, K] separately. For convenience, we introduce the
                      def
function gbk (xk , y) = ck (xk , y) − fbk (y), xk ∈ Xk , y ∈ Y. Note that gbk is β-strongly convex in the
second argument by the Theorem assumption. Define the maps Tkf : Xk → Y as follows:
                                                                                                   b


                                                            def
                                                Tkf (xk ) = arg inf gbk (xk , y).
                                                    b

                                                                      y∈Y



Note that Tkf is correctly defined (since gbk is strongly convex) and Borel (cf. the proof of (Kolesov
            b

et al., 2024a, Theorem 4.2). It induces the family of conditional distributions:

                                               xk 7→ γkf (·|xk ) ∈ P(Y);
                                                            b

                                                                    def
                                                 γkf (·|xk ) = δT fb(x ) (·).
                                                    b
                                                                                                                                  (35)
                                                                               k    k



For any family γk (·|xk ) ∈ P(Y) we have:

                                    Z          Z
            Vk (fbk , γk ) =             −ψ k − gbk (xk , y)dγk (y|xk ) dPk (xk )                                                 (36)
                                    Xk                  Y
                                    Z
                                ≥        −ψ k − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) dPk (xk )
                                                            b
                                                                                                                                  (37)
                                    Xk
                                    Z          Z
                                         −ψ k − gbk (xk , y)dγkf (y|xk ) dPk (xk ) = Vk (fbk , γkf ),
                                                               b                                 b
                                =
                                    Xk                  Y


where in transition from (36) to (37) we utilize the properties of ψ k and Tkf :
                                                                                                              b

                       Z
                          gbk (xk , y)dγk (y|xk ) ≥ gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) ⇒
                                                                b


                            Y
                            Z
                                                                                                          ψ k is non-decreasing
                        −        gbk (xk , y)dγk (y|xk ) ≤                          gk (xk , Tkf (xk ))
                                                                                   −b                             ⇒
                                                                                               b


                            Y
                        Z
                ψk −                                                      ≤        ψ k − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) ⇒
                                                                                                     b
                                gbk (xk , y)dγk (y|xk )
                        Y


                                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                   Z
             −ψ k − gbk (xk , y)dγk (y|xk )   ≥                     −ψ k − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) .
                                                                                       b


                             Y


From the above, we conclude that γkf minimizes the functional γk 7→ Vk (fbk , γk ). In particular, it
                                   b

delivers the value of Jk (fbk ):

                                               Jk (fbk ) = Vk (fbk , γkf ).
                                                                       b
                                                                                                       (38)

From the perspective of (38), gap δ1,k could be analyzed as follows:

                                      bk ) − Vk (fbk , γkf )
                            Vk (fbk , γ
                                                         b
      δ1,k (fbk , γ
                  bk ) =
                           Z                                     Z
                               ψ k − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) − ψ k − gbk (xk , y)db
                                                    b
                         =                                                     γk (y|xk ) dPk (xk ) (39)
                             Xk                                               Y
                                 Z  Z
                         ≥η                            γk (y|xk ) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk ))
                                                                                b
                                          gbk (xk , y)db                                   dPk (xk )   (40)
                              Xk      Y
                            Z Z n                                   o
                                 gbk (xk , y) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) db
                                                            b
                         =η                                           γk (y|xk )dPk (xk )              (41)
                              Xk Y
                                   Z Z
                             ηβ
                         ≥                ∥y − Tkf (xk )∥22 db
                                                   b
                                                             γk (y|xk )dPk (xk ).                      (42)
                              2
                                  Xk Y


Transition from (39) to (40). Note that:
                                 Z
       −bgk (xk , Tkf (xk )) ≥ −                  γk (y|xk ) ≥ − max gbk (xk , y) ≥ −b.
                    b
                                     gbk (xk , y)db
                                   Y                            xk ∈Xk ;y∈Y
                                 |             {z         }
                                                    def
                                                    = gbkγ

The first-order properties of convex differentiable function ψ k read as:
                      ∇ψ k − gbkγ

                                       ≥ ∇ψ k (−b) = η;
           ψ k − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) ≥ ψ k − gbkγ + ∇ψ k (−b     gkγ ) gbkγ − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )
                             b                                                             b

Based on them, we derive:

                ψ k − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) − ψ k − gbkγ ≥ η gbkγ − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk ) ,
                                  b                                            b

which validates the transition from from (39) to (40).

Transition from (41) to (42). Note that Tkf (xk ) is the minimizer of y 7→ gbk (xk , y). Therefore, due to
                                                       b

β - strong convexity of gbk on the second argument it holds:
                       β fb
                         ∥T (xk ) − y∥22 ≤ gbk (xk , y) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )),
                                                                      b
                       2 k
which validates the transition.
Part 3. Analysis of gap δ2 .
Note that we work under the conditions of Theorem 2. In particular, we assume that there exist
m∗ and m∗ -congruent potentials {fk∗ ∈ C(Y)}K k=1 which deliver maximum to (9). Also, we denote
{γk∗ }K
      k=1 as the family of optimal SUOT plans between Pk and Q∗ .
Under these assumptions, we note that:
                          K         h                                      i
               cf. (8)    X
        L∗      =                 λk − ψ k − (fk∗ )ck (xk ) dPk (xk ) + m∗                             (43)
                          k=1


                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        K
                        X         h                     Z                                                       i
                                                               ck (xk , y) − fk∗ (y) dγk∗ (y|xk ) dPk (xk ) + m∗ ,

              =               λk − ψ k −                                                                                        (44)
                        k=1                                Y
                        K
                        X
              =                  ek (fk∗ , γk∗ )
                              λk V                                                                                              (45)
                        k=1

where the transition from (43) to (44) follows from the proof of Theorem 2. In particular,
                       Z
                           ck (xk , y) − fk∗ (y) dγk∗ (y|xk ) = (fk∗ )ck (xk ).

                              Y

Thanks to (45) and (33), one can decompose gap δ2 as follows:
                             δ2            =           L∗ −           inf            L(
                                                                                     e fb[1:K] , γ[1:K] , m)
                                                                                                          b
                                                               γk (·|xk )∈P(Y)
                                                       K
                                                       X
                                                                ek (fk∗ , γk∗ ) − Jek (fbk )

                                           =                 λk V
                                                       k=1
                                                       K
                                        cf. (38)       X
                                                                                  ek (fbk , γ fb)
                                                                ek (fk∗ , γk∗ ) − V

                                           =                 λk V                            k
                                                       k=1
                                                       K
                                                       X
                                           =                 λk δ2,k (fbk ),
                                                       k=1
                                                          def e    ∗    ∗     e b fb
                                        where δ2,k (fbk ) = V  k (fk , γk ) − Vk (fk , γk ).


In what follows, we analyze gap δ2,k for each particular k ∈ [1 : K]:
                  Z
                                        fb                 ∗ ck
     δ2,k (fk ) =
           b           ψ k − gbk (xk , Tk (xk )) − ψ k −(fk ) (xk ) dPk (xk )                                                   (46)
                   Xk
                         Z
                               ∗
                      +       fk (y) − fbk (y) dQ∗ (y)
                          Y
                    Z
                        (fk ) (xk ) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) ∇ψ k − (fk∗ )ck (xk ) dPk (xk )
                          ∗ ck

               ≥
                                                  b
                                                                                                                                (47)
                                                            |           {z              }
                    Xk                                                                        =d(γk∗ )x (xk ) , cf. (11)
                                  Z
                                           ∗
                      +                   fk (y) − fbk (y) dQ∗ (y)
                                  Y
                    Z Z                                                                                    Z
                                      ck (xk , y) − fk∗ (y)          dγk∗ (y|xk )d(γk∗ )x (xk ) +              fk∗ (y)dQ∗ (y)

               =
                                                                     |               {z                }
                    Xk Y                                                       =dγk∗ (xk ,y)               Y
                                  Z                                                     Z
                          −             gbk (xk , Tkf (xk ))d(γk∗ )x (xk ) −                  fbk (y)dQ∗ (y)
                                                       b

                                                                                          Y
                               Xk
                    Z Z                                                                     Z Z
                                                           fk∗   dγ ∗ (x , y) +
                                                                      fk∗ (y)dγ       k∗

               =                      c.k. .(x         .. −
                                             . . k. .,.y)     (y)  k

                                                                        k
                                                                                         (x
                                                                                           k , y)
                    Xk Y                                        X
                                                                    Y
                         Z Z                                     Zk Z
                       −     gbk (xk , Tkf (xk ))dγk∗ (xk , y) −                        ∗
                                         b
                                                                       f.bk. .(y)
                                                                               . . . dγk (xk , y)
                                             ::::::::::::
                               Xk Y                                                         Xk Y
                    Z Z
                                                                          fb
                                                                                     dγk∗ (xk , y)

               =                      gb.k. .(x         . . − gb::::::::::::
                                              . . k. .,.y)       k (xk , Tk (xk ))
                    Xk Y
                   Z  Z
                              gbk (xk , y)dγk∗ (y|xk ) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk ))                     ∇ψ k −(fk∗ )ck (xk ) dPk (xk ) (48)
                                                                     b
               =
                   Xk    Y


                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                           Z  Z
                  ≥ η                  gbk (xk , y)dγk∗ (y|xk ) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk ))
                                                                              b
                                                                                              dPk (xk )                 (49)
                          Xk      Y
                           Z Z n                                   o
                                gbk (xk , y) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) dγk∗ (y|xk )dPk (xk )
                                                           b
                  = η
                          Xk Y
                               Z Z
                          ηβ
                  ≥                    ∥y − Tkf (xk )∥22 dγk∗ (y|xk )dPk (xk )
                                                b
                                                                                                                        (50)
                           2
                               Xk Y


Transition from (46) to (47) follows from the first-order property of convex differentiable function
ψk :

      gk (xk , Tkf (xk )) ≥ ψ k −(fk∗ )ck (xk ) + ∇ψ k −(fk∗ )ck (xk ) (fk∗ )ck (xk ) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk ))

ψ k −b
                 b                                                                                  b


Transition from (48) to (49). Since Tkf minimizes y 7→ gbk (xk , y) then:
                                                b

                        Z
                           gbk (xk , y)dγk∗ (y|xk ) − gbk (xk , Tkf (xk )) ≥ 0.
                                                                  b
                                                                                                                        (51)
                                 Y

Also note that:
                   Z
−(fk∗ )ck (xk ) = − ck (xk , y) − fk∗ (y) dγk∗ (y|xk ) ≥ − max                            ck (xk , y) − fk∗ (y) ≥ −b,

                                                                        xk ∈Xk ,y∈Y
                      Y

and, therefore,
                                      ∇ψ k (−(fk∗ )ck (xk )) ≥ ∇ψ k (−b) = η.                                           (52)
The combination of (51) and (52) validates the transition.
Part 4. Bringing it all together.
Summarizing inequalities for δ1,k (42) and δ2,k (50) yields:

     δ1,k (fbk , γ
                 bk ) + δ2,k (fbk )
                Z                                                 Z
          ηβ
     ≥                 ∥y − Tkf (xk )∥22 db γk (y|xk )dPk (xk ) + ∥y − Tkf (xk )∥22 dγk∗ (y|xk )dPk (xk )
                                b                                        b
           2
                 Xk ×Y                                          Xk ×Y
               Z
          ηβ
                   W22 γbk (·|xk ), γk∗ (·|xk ) dPk (xk ),

     ≥
           2
              Xk

where the last inequality is obtained analogously to the similar one in the proof of (Kolesov et al.,
2024a, Theorem 4.2).
Aggregating the inequalities for δ1,k + δ2,k with weights λk finishes the proof of the Theorem:
                      K                                    K        Z
                      X                            ηβ X
                                                                             bk (·|x), γk∗ (·|x) dPk (x).
                                                                         W22 γ

        δ1 + δ2 =              λk (δ1,k + δ2,k ) ≥      λk
                                                    2               Xk
                      k=1                                 k=1


B    E XTENDED D ISCUSSION OF R ELATED W ORKS
Below we give an overview of the continuous OT solvers with a specific focus on unbalanced setup.
Neural OT/UOT solvers. Neural network-based continuous OT is a popular and fruitful area of
recent generative modelling research. Some keynote solvers include: (Makkuva et al., 2020; Korotin
et al., 2021a; Amos, 2023) (ICNN-based, quadratic cost); (Seguy et al., 2018; Daniels et al., 2021;
Mokrov et al., 2024) (Entropic OT); (Vargas et al., 2021; De Bortoli et al., 2021; Gushchin et al.,


                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023; Tong et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024; Gushchin et al., 2024b; Korotin et al., 2024; Gushchin et al.,
2024a), (Schrödinger bridge); (Liu et al., 2023; Tong et al., 2024; Kornilov et al., 2024; Klein et al.,
2024) (Flow matching). Of special importance for our developed method are max-min (adversarial)
OT solvers based on (semi-) dual OT formulation (Rout et al., 2022; Korotin et al., 2023b;a; Fan et al.,
2023; Asadulaev et al., 2024; Korotin et al., 2022b; 2021b). Recently, the adversarial methodology
has been extended to unbalanced setup (Choi et al., 2024a; Gazdieva et al., 2023; Choi et al., 2024b),
opening up a new intriguing research direction in the field of robust continuous OT.

C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this section, we provide additional details about experiments in our paper.

C.1   D ESCRIPTION OF T OY E XPERIMENTS

Moon, Spiral, and 8-Gaussian Datasets. The datasets used in Section 5.1 were implemented by
following (Choi et al., 2024b).
Datasets for Class Imbalance Experiments. For the distribution P1 and P2 , we employ the Gaussian
mixture of 14 N ((−5, 4), 0.42 ) + 34 N ((−5, −4), 0.42 ) and 34 N ((5, 4), 0.42 ) + 14 N ((5, −4), 0.42 ),
respectively.
Datasets for Outlier Experiments. We consider three marginal distributions, denoted as P1 , P2 , and
P3 . For P1 and P2 , we generate datasets consisting of 95% in-distribution data and 5% outliers. In
contrast, P3 consists solely of in-distribution data. The in-distribution data for each marginal follows
                                                                             P4
a Gaussian mixture model with four modes and uniform weights, i.e., k=1 14 N (mk , σ 2 I). The
means and variances for P1 , P2 , and P3 are defined as follows:

       • P1 : m1 = (−5, −1), m2 = (5, 1), m3 = (1, −5), m4 = (−1, 5), with σ = 0.1,
       • P2 : m1 = (−5, 1), m2 = (5, −1), m3 = (1, 5), m4 = (−1, −5), with σ = 0.1,
       • P3 : m1 = (−5, 0), m2 = (5, 0), m3 = (0, 5), m4 = (0, −5), with σ = 0.1,

respectively. For the outlier distributions of P1 and P2 , we again use a Gaussian mixture model with
             P4
four modes, k=1 14 N (mk , σ 2 I), with the means and variances defined as:

       • P1 outliers: m1 = (10, 2), m2 = (10, 1), m3 = (10, 0), m4 = (10, −1), with σ = 0.02,
       • P2 outliers: m1 = (−10, 1), m2 = (−10, 0), m3 = (10, −1), m4 = (10, −2), with
         σ = 0.02,

respectively.
Implementation Details. For the experiments in Section 5.1 and the class imbalanced experiments,
we use the number of iterations of 10K. For the outlier experiments in Section 5.2, we employ
the number of iterations of 20K. We use the batch size of 1024. We update m with the Adam
Optimizer with learning rate of 10−3 and (β1 , β2 ) = (0, 0.9). For other hyperparameters, we follow
the experimental settings of (Kolesov et al., 2024a).
Evaluation metric. As discussed in Section 5.1, we utilize the W2 and L2 metrics, defined as
W22 (T1# P1 , Q∗ ) and ∥T1 − T1∗ ∥2L2 (P1 ) , respectively. Here, Q∗ and T1∗ represent the true barycenter
and transport maps. To approximate (T1∗ , Q∗ ), we solve the discrete Unbalanced Barycenter problem.
Specifically, we sample 2000 points and solve the Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT) problem
from P1 to P2 using the Python Optimal Transport (POT) library (Flamary et al., 2021). The obtained
                      ∗
discrete UOT map Tuot    is then used to define T1∗ = λ1 Id + λ2 Tuot ∗
                                                                        , and Q∗ = T1∗ # P1 . Using these
discrete samples and transport maps, we compute the approximation of the metrics.
Training/Inference Time. The training and inference times of our model, along with comparisons to
baseline methods, are presented in Table 2 and Table 3. In the case of toy experiments, the training
time of U-NOTB is comparable to that of NOTB (Kolesov et al., 2024a). The inference time of
U-NOTB is typically 2-10 times slower than NOTB. This gap is due to the additional computational
complexity introduced by rejection sampling, which requires calculating the c-transform of the


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


potential function fbk , i.e., fbkc (x) ≈ c(x, Tbk (x)) − fb(Tbk (x)). Thus, this process involves a forward
pass through the learned potential function. Moreover, it requires to compute the cost functional,
which is an additional burden for StyleGAN experiments. However, we would like to highlight
that thanks to our proposed sampling method, our solver gains robustness to outliers and class
imbalancedness.

    Experiment        2D Toy (§5.1)     Class Imbalance (§5.2)     Outlier (§5.2)   Shape-Color (§5.3)
    UOTM              4-5 mins          -                          -                -
    Minibatch UOT     2h                -                          -                -
    NOTB              6-7 mins          6-7 mins                   42-45 mins       -
    U-NOTB            6-7 mins          6-7 mins                   42-45 mins       3h 20 mins
    GPU               RTX 2080Ti        RTX 2080Ti                 RTX 2080Ti       RTX 3090Ti

                            Table 2: Training time for various experiments.


    Experiment        2D Toy (§5.1)     Class Imbalance (§5.2)     Outlier (§5.2)   Shape-Color (§5.3)
    UOTM              0.001 sec         -                          -                -
    Minibatch UOT     0.001 sec         -                          -                -
    NOTB              0.001 sec         0.001 sec                  0.001 sec        0.02 sec
    U-NOTB            0.001 sec         0.003 sec                  0.003 sec        0.18 sec
    GPU               RTX 2080Ti        RTX 2080Ti                 RTX 2080Ti       RTX 3090Ti

Table 3: Inference time for various experiments. We report the inference time of 1000 samples for
synthetic experiments (§5.1, §5.2). For StyleGAN experiment (§5.3), we evaluated with 220 samples.


C.2    S TYLE GAN E XPERIMENTS

Unless otherwise stated, we follow the implementation of (Kolesov et al., 2024a). Note that we use
Adam Optimizers with (β1 , β2 ) = (0, 0.9).
The exact hyperparameters for all experiments are described in Table 4.

    Experiment        2D Toy (§5.1)    Class Imbalance (§5.2)     Outlier (§5.2)    Shape-Color (§5.3)
    D                 2                2                          2                 512
    K                 2                2                          3                 2
    τ                 5                1,20,200                   1,20,200          10
    batch size        1024             256                        256               64
    Epochs            10K              10K                        20K               3K
    NT                3                3                          5                 10
    λ1                1/2              1/2                        1/3               1/2
    λ2                1/2              1/2                        1/3               1/3
    λ3                -                -                          1/3               -
    Divergence ψ1     balanced         KL                         KL                Softplus
    Divergence ψ2     KL               KL                         KL                Softplus
    Divergence ψ3     -                -                          KL                -
    fk,θ              MLP              MLP                        MLP               ResNet
    Tk,ω              MLP              MLP                        MLP               ResNet
    lrfk,θ            1e-3             1e-3                       1e-3              1e-4
    lrTk,ω            1e-3             1e-3                       1e-3              1e-7
    lrm               1e-3             1e-3                       1e-3              1e-2

             Table 4: Hyper-parameter settings of Algorithm 1 for various experiments.


D     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide additional experimental results. In Appendices D.1 and D.2, we demon-
strate the performance of our solver and baselines in OT/SUOT barycenter problem for Gaussian
distributions with computable ground-truth solutions. In Appendix D.3, we conduct high-dimensional


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


experiment demonstrating the practical advantages of our solver, i.e., its ability to manipulate images
through interpolating image distributions on the image manifolds.


D.1    BALANCED OT BARYCENTERS FOR G AUSSIAN D ISTRIBUTIONS

In the balanced OT barycenter problem for Gaussian distributions, the ground-truth barycenter is
known to be Gaussian and can be estimated using the fixed point iteration procedure (Álvarez-Esteban
et al., 2016). In this section, we tested our solver in this balanced setup keeping in mind that for large
unbalancedness parameters τ , it should provide a good approximation of balanced OT barycenter
problem solutions. Ultimately, we show that while our solver is designed to tackle an unbalanced
OT barycenter problem, its performance in the different balanced OT barycenter problem is
comparable to the current SOTA solvers.
We consider K = 3 Gaussian input distributions with weights λ1 = λ2 = 0.25, λ3 = 0.5, and quadratic
                                      2
OT cost functions ck (x, y) = ∥xk −y∥
                                  2     following the experimental setup which was firstly introduced
in (Kolesov et al., 2024b) and also used in (Kolesov et al., 2024a, Appendix B.1). We perform
comparison with three recent approaches for continuous barycenter estimation − (Kolesov et al.,
2024a, NOTB), (Kolesov et al., 2024b, EgBary) and (Korotin et al., 2022a, WIN). For EgBary
approach, which solves the Entropy-resugularized OT (EOT) barycenter problem, we consider small
entropy regularization parameter ε = 0.01. For completeness, we also tested the performance of the
classic approach (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014, FCWB) which approximates the barycenter by a discrete
distribution on a fixed number of free-support points.
For our U-NOTB solver, we consider KL divergencies and varying unbalancedness parameter
τ ∈ [1, 101 , 102 , 103 , 104 , 105 ] expecting that for large τ , our solver will provide good results in
solving the balanced problem. We assessed the performance of solvers using the weighted unexplained
                                                     ∥T̂ −T ∗ ∥2 2
variance percentage metrics L2 -UVP(T̂ ) = 100 · [ var(Q∗L) (P) ]% where Q∗ is a given ground-truth
OT barycenter. For the continuous baseline solvers (NOTB, EgBary, WIN), we report the results
given in (Kolesov et al., 2024a, Table 3). Specifically, for our solver and EgBary which learn the
optimal plans, we consider their barycentric projections. For the assessment of FCWB, we first
calculate the discrete barycenter using large number of samples from input distributions Pk . Then we
compute the optimal plans between the input and this barycenter distributions (Flamary et al., 2021),
and consider their barycentric projections. Table 5 presents the weighted sum of L2 -UVP values w.r.t.
the barycenter weights λk .

                         Method/Dim         2       4        8         16      64
                         Ours (τ = 1)     3.10    2.39     1.64       1.44    1.39
                        Ours (τ = 101 )   0.03    0.09     0.06       0.08    0.09
                        Ours (τ = 102 )   0.02    0.03     0.03       0.05    0.07
                        Ours (τ = 103 )   0.02    0.03     0.04       0.05    0.08
                        Ours (τ = 104 )   0.02    0.03     0.04       0.05    0.08
                           NOTB           0.01    0.02     0.04       0.04    0.08
                           EgBary         0.02    0.05     0.06       0.09    0.84
                            WIN           0.03    0.08     0.13       0.25    0.75
                           FCWB           2.17    6.51    18.68      35.80   100.47

                    Table 5: L2 -UVP for our method, NOTB, EgBary (ϵ = 0.01),
                                WIN and FCWB, D = 2, 4, 8, 16, 64.


The Table shows that for τ = 102 , our approach gives the results comparable with the current SOTA
solver for continuous balanced barycenter estimation − NOTB. Further increase of τ does not help
to improve the results which can be explained by related numerical instabilities. At the same time,
discrete OT barycenter solver provides the worst results and the L2 -UVP metric increases drastically
with the increase of dimension D. It is an expected behaviour, since the discrete distributions poorly
approximate the continuous ones. This aspect was previously investigated and justified in (Korotin
et al., 2022a, M5.1).


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2    S EMI - UNBALANCED OT BARYCENTERS FOR G AUSSIAN D ISTRIBUTIONS

A recent preprint (Nguyen et al., 2024) provides an iteration procedure for calculating unbalanced
SUOT barycenter for Gaussian distributions using the quadratic cost and KL divergences. We test
our solver in this unbalanced setup for different parameters τ and show that it consistently
outperforms the SOTA balanced solver (Kolesov et al., 2024a, NOTB).

        Method      τ = 10−2     τ = 10−1     τ =1      τ = 10   τ = 102     τ = 103    τ = 104
         Ours         0.31         0.20        0.15      0.17      0.17        0.17       0.17
        NOTB          1.71         1.22        0.47      0.21      0.20        0.19       0.19

Table 6: BW22 -UVP between the learned and ground-truth unbalanced barycenters for our method
  and NOTB. The results are given for varying parameters τ = 10−2 , 10−1 , 1, 10, 102 , 103 , 104 .

We consider the same set of Gaussians distributions, weights and quadratic cost function as in the
experiment with balanced Gaussians, see Appendix D.1. As the baseline solver, we consider SOTA
balanced solver for continuous barycenter estimation (Kolesov et al., 2024a, NOTB). To calculate the
ground-truth barycenter, we run the Hybrid Bures-Wasserstein Gradient Descent algorithm (Nguyen
et al., 2024, M4.3) for computation of SUOT barycenter problem between Gaussians. The algorithm
is designed for the case of KL divergencies and is endowed with the unbalancedness parameter which
we denote as τ .
We consider parameters τ ∈ [10−2 , 10−1 , 1, 10, 102 , 103 , 104 ]. For each parameter, we calculate
the corresponding ground-truth SUOT barycenter and train our U-NOTB solver with KL diver-
gencies. Then we assess the performance of our solver and NOTB by measuring the weighted
Bures-Wasserstein unexplained variance percentage metric for an implicitly given barycenters Q:b
                                                            b Q∗ )
                                                      BW22 (Q,
                                         b def
                               BW22 -UVP(Q) = 100 ·                 %
                                                       1       ∗
                                                       2 var(Q )

where BW22 (Q1 , Q2 ) = W22 (N (µQ1 , ΣQ1 ), N (µQ2 , ΣQ2 )) is the Bures-Wasserstein metric, µQ , ΣQ
denote means and covariances of corresponding distribution Q, see (Korotin et al., 2021c). To get
the samples from learned barycenter Q, b we first sample the input points xk either form the input
distributions Pk (for NOTB) or from the left marginals of the learned plans (for our U-NOTB). Here
sampling from the left marginals of the plans can be done using the rejection sampling procedure, see
M4.2. Then we sample new points from the learned barycenter by passing the points xk through the
learned stochastic or deterministic maps Tk which parametrize the learned plans. Table 6 presents the
weighted sum of BW22 -UVP values w.r.t. the barycenter weights λk .
We see that our unbalanced U-NOTB solver outperforms NOTB for all considered unbalancedness
parameters τ . The difference is especially visible for small parameter τ . It is expected since for small
τ the solutions of the unbalanced barycenter problem significantly differ from the balanced one. For
large τ this difference is getting smaller, thus, balanced NOTB solver manages to approximate the
barycenter quite well but still worse than ours.

D.3    M ANIPULATING I MAGES THROUGH I NTERPOLATING I MAGE D ISTRIBUTIONS ON THE
       I MAGE M ANIFOLD

In this section, we present a novel real-world application of U-NOTB for high-dimensional image
manipulation. Specifically, we address scenarios characterized by class imbalances in the marginal
distributions. Ultimately, our experiment highlights the potential of our approach to manipulate
images by learning barycenters between distinct image distributions, enabling controlled
transitions across semantic attributes. Moreover, our model also demonstrates robustness to
class imbalancedness in this practical task compared to other baselines.
Given multiple image distributions {Pk }K  k=1 ,P
                                                we aim to simultaneously learn all UOT barycenters
                                                  K
Qλ1:K for arbitrary tuple (λk )Kk=1 satisfying    k=1 λk = 1, 0 ≤ λk ≤ 1. Specifically, we learn all
intermediate barycenters simultaneously by parametrizing the transport maps {Tk }K    k=1 as functions of
the condition variable λ1:K , expressed as Tk (λ1:K , ·). Note that a similar conditioning on barycenter
weights is also employed in Algorithm 2 of (Fan et al., 2021).


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With the learned conditional transport plan, we perform image manipulation through transforming
given image x ∼ Pk to the barycenter point y ∼ Qλ1:K . In particular, we consider P1 and P2 as
collections of images of young individuals (age between 5 to 20) and elderly individuals (age of
over 50), respectively, from the FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019) dataset. It is important to note that
the ratios of females to males in P1 and P2 are approximately 1:2 and 3:1, respectively. Thus,
the data inherently exhibits class imbalance across the marginals. Here, we provide the precise
experimental settings:

      • Marginal distributions P1 , P2 . The marginal distributions P1 , P2 consist of FFHQ images
        of young individuals (5 < age < 20) and elderly individuals (age > 50). We randomly
        partition each distribution into 90% for the training set and 10% for the test set.
      • StyleGAN Manifold. Let G : W + → R3×256×256 be the pretrained StyleGAN2-ada
        (Karras et al., 2020) generator that maps W + space to 256-dimensional images. Let
        E : R3×256×256 → W + be the pretrained FFHQ e4e encoder (Tov et al., 2021). Note that
        E maps image x ∈ R3×256×256 to the corresponding vector w ∈ W + , i.e. G(w) ≈ x. Note
        that W + ⊂ R18×512 . To restrict our transformed images to FFHQ images, we parametrize
        our transport map by follows: Tk,ω (x) := G ◦ Sk,ω ◦ E(x) where x ∈ R3×256×256 and
        Sk,ω : R18×512 → R18×512 .
      • General Transport Cost. To guide image manipulation in a meaningful direction, we adopt
        a quadratic cost function in the W + latent space, defined as:
                                     c(x, y) = α∥E(y) − E(x)∥2 .                                   (53)
                              −2
        Here, we set α = 10 .
      • Network Parametrization. Let (λ1 , λ2 ) := (1 − t, t). To generate Qλ1:2 from x ∼ Pk , we
        condition the transport map Tk,ω with t as follows:
                                    Tk,ω (t, x) = G (Sk,ω (t, E(x))) .                             (54)
        We parametrize S1,ω (t, z) = z+tNN1,ω (t, z) and S2,ω (t, z) = z+(1−t)NN2,ω (t, z). Note
        that S1,ω and S2,ω transport the latent vector of young individuals to barycenter point, latent
        vector of elderly individuals to barycenter, respectively. Thus, we selected this heuristic
        parametrization of Sk,ω to ensure that S1,ω (t, x) ≈ x when t ≈ 0 and S2,ω (t, y) ≈ y when
        t ≈ 1. Furthermore, the potential functions f1 , f2 are also conditioned by variable t as
        follows:
                            Vθ (t, E(x))                           Vθ (t, E(x))
              f1,θ (t, x) =              + mθ (t), f2,θ (t, x) = −               + mθ (t),         (55)
                                1−t                                       t
        where Vθ : R × R18×512 → R. Note that (1 − t)f1,θ + tf2,θ = mθ (t). Here, mθ (t) can be
        regarded as the parametrization of the congruence constant at time t. To avoid the numerical
        instability of (55) with respect to the time variable t, we sample t from a uniform distribution
        within the interval [0.05, 0.95].

Results. As discussed, the two marginals P1 , P2 exhibit a class imbalance with respect to gender.
P1 contains more than 60% of female individuals, while P2 consists of less than 30% of female
individuals. Thus, we evaluate the quantitative performance of our transport map by measuring how
well the transport map preserves gender in such a class imbalanced case. Specifically, we measure
the gender preservation accuracy when transforming a young individual x to barycenter T1 (t, x) at
t = 0.9. For our model, we report the gender preservation accuracy for the accepted images. As a
comparison, we include the results from the NOTB method applied to the entire test dataset. For the
baseline model, we precompute the global latent direction vglobal := Ey∼P2 [E(y)] − Ex∼P1 [E(x)],
and measure the accuracy of the gender alignment between x ∼ P1 and x + tvglobal .
               Method              Baseline              NOTB                U-NOTB
            Acceptance Rate            -                    -            67.9% (592 / 872)
               Accuracy        69.8% (609 / 872)    63.4% (553 / 872)    88.0% (521 / 592)

Table 7: Gender preservation accuracy for x ∼ P1 and T1 (t, x) at t = 0.9. U-NOTB can perform
rejection sampling to address class imbalancedness.
As shown in Table 7, our model achieves a significantly high accuracy of 88%, highly outperforming
other methods, which achieve less than 70%. This demonstrates that our model performs robustly


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (a) Accepted samples from P1 .                 (b) Corresponding barycenter samples.

Figure 6: Examples of randomly selected (a) accepted samples of x ∼ P1 and (b) its corresponding
barycenter at t = 0.9. Note that the acceptance rate of U-NOTB is 67.9%. Approximately, 36% of
the accepted samples are female individuals.


Figure 7: Examples of rejected samples of U-NOTB. Approximately 80% of rejected samples are
female images.

under class-imbalanced conditions. Moreover, only 36.1% of the accepted samples were female.
Given that over 60% of the data in P1 consisted of female samples, this result indicates that a
significant proportion of female samples were rejected to address the class imbalance. For qualitative
examples, please refer to Figure 6 and Figure 7.
Evaluation Metric. To classify the gender of images, we use the open python library called OpenCV.
Specifically, we adjusted the code from the following github address:
          https://github.com/smahesh29/Gender-and-Age-Detection

Implementation Details. We set (ψ̄1 , ψ̄2 ) = (Softplus, Softplus) and τ = 0.1. We employ the
learning rate of 10−5 , batch size of 4, and the total number of iterations of 5K. For all the networks
NN1,ω , NN1,ω , Vθ we employ the same embedding approach: the time variable t is embedded


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    D                  512×18
                                    K                  2
                                    τ                  0.1
                                    batch size         4
                                    # Iterations       5000
                                    NT                 1
                                    λ1                 1/2
                                    λ2                 1/2
                                    Divergence ψ1      Softplus
                                    Divergence ψ2      Softplus
                                    fk,θ               Transformer
                                    Tk,ω               Transformer
                                    lrfk,θ             1e-5
                                    lrTk,ω             1e-5
                                    lrm                1e-5
                                    Training Time      4-5 h
                                    GPU                RTX 3090Ti

            Table 8: Hyper-parameter settings and training time for FFHQ experiment.


into 512-dimension vector temb ∈ R1×512 through sinusoidal embedding, and concatenated with
z ∈ R18×512 . For NN1,ω , NN2,ω , these embeddings are processed through two transformer layers,
each with four attention heads. Then, we pass through the linear layer with both input and output
channels of 512, resulting the output of size R18×512 . For the potential Vθ , we use pass through four
transformer layers, each with four attention heads. Then, we aggregate features by taking mean of
the tokens, which is then passed through the final linear layer. Additionally, for the network mθ (t),
we embed t by sinusoidal embedding, and then pass it through 2-layered MLP. The outline of the
hyperparameter settings and the training time are described in Table 8.

E    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
In practice, we found that the practical optimization procedure (Algorithm 1) may work unstably.
In particular, the training may diverge under improper hyper-parameters selection or the resulting
quality might depend on the random seed. We hypothesise that this behaviour is due to the reliance
on adversarial training and leave its thorough investigation to future research. From the theoretical
side, the recovered semi-unbalanced OT barycenter is not guaranteed to be unique (§2.2). Resolving
these limitations paves a way for future work. Another appealing direction for future research is
to adopt alternative robust OT/barycenter variants, e.g., (Nietert et al., 2022; Buze, 2024), for the
continuous barycenter setup.


                                                  30
