Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W HAT SHOULD A NEURON AIM FOR ?
D ESIGNING LOCAL OBJECTIVE FUNCTIONS BASED ON
INFORMATION THEORY

 Andreas C. Schneider1,2,∗, Valentin Neuhaus1,2,∗, David A. Ehrlich3,2,∗, Abdullah Makkeh3,2 ,
 Alexander S. Ecker4,2 , Viola Priesemann2,1,†, Michael Wibral3,2,†
 1
   Faculty of Physics, Institute for the Dynamics of Complex Systems, University of Göttingen
 2
   Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen
 3
   Göttingen Campus Institute for Dynamics of Biological Networks, University of Göttingen
 4
   Institute of Computer Science and Campus Institute Data Science, University of Göttingen
 {andreas.schneider, valentin.neuhaus, viola.priesemann}@ds.mpg.de
 {davidalexander.ehrlich, michael.wibral}@uni-goettingen.de



                                                   A BSTRACT
           In modern deep neural networks, the learning dynamics of individual neurons are
           often obscure, as the networks are trained via global optimization. Conversely,
           biological systems build on self-organized, local learning, achieving robustness and
           efficiency with limited global information. Here, we show how self-organization
           between individual artificial neurons can be achieved by designing abstract bio-
           inspired local learning goals. These goals are parameterized using a recent ex-
           tension of information theory, Partial Information Decomposition (PID), which
           decomposes the information that a set of information sources holds about an out-
           come into unique, redundant and synergistic contributions. Our framework enables
           neurons to locally shape the integration of information from various input classes,
           i.e., feedforward, feedback, and lateral, by selecting which of the three inputs
           should contribute uniquely, redundantly or synergistically to the output. This se-
           lection is expressed as a weighted sum of PID terms, which, for a given problem,
           can be directly derived from intuitive reasoning or via numerical optimization,
           offering a window into understanding task-relevant local information processing.
           Achieving neuron-level interpretability while enabling strong performance using
           local learning, our work advances a principled information-theoretic foundation
           for local learning strategies.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Most artificial neural networks (ANNs) optimize a single global objective function through algorithms
like backpropagation, orchestrating parameters across all computational elements of the network
as a unified computational structure. While this global objective approach has proven effective
across a large variety of tasks, the role of the individual neuron often remains elusive, hindering the
understanding of how local computation contributes to global task performance.
In contrast, biological neural networks exhibit a markedly different approach to learning, relying
strongly on self-organization between neurons. Further, biological neurons must individually learn
according to information that is locally available, because of being limited by physical constraints
regarding locality and communication bandwidth. Interestingly, these limitations come with the
advantage that computation of a neuron can also be interpreted locally, at least in principle. Combining
this local interpretability with the observation that biological neural networks achieve high levels of
efficiency and robustness even in the absence of a centrally coordinated objective raises the question:
Could ANNs benefit from similar local learning mechanisms to enhance the local interpretability of
their computations, while maintaining performance?
     * Equally contributing first authors;† Equally contributing last authors


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Neuroscience models have indeed shown that local learning rules (Hebb, 1949; Dan and Poo, 2004;
Song et al., 2000) can solve a variety of tasks, such as sequence learning, unsupervised clustering,
and classification tasks (Hebb, 1949; Földiak, 1990; Cramer et al., 2020). Often formulated on the
basis of temporal coincidence (spike-timing), these very mechanistic rules do not offer direct insights
into the actual information processing at each neuron. To facilitate such functional insight, more
recently information theory has been used to formulate more abstract, but interpretable frameworks
for local learning rules (e.g., Kay 2000; Wibral et al. 2017).
Information theory (Shannon, 1948) allows one to abstractly prescribe how much of the information
from different inputs should be conveyed to the output of a neuron (Kay, 2000). Moreover, it provides
a general and flexible mathematical framework, which captures the information processing at an
abstract and interpretable level free of details of the exact implementation. As such, information theory
has been employed to define general optimization goals, including global objectives like cross-entropy
loss (Goodfellow et al., 2016) and more localized ones such as local greedy infomax (Löwe et al.,
2019), and early attempts at passing only information that is coherent between multiple inputs (Kay
and Phillips, 2011).
Nevertheless, classical information theory falls short of describing how multiple sources work together
to produce an output. In fact, it completely lacks the capacity to describe how the information from
different sources is integrated in redundant, synergistic or unique ways in the output. These different
ways, or information atoms, however, contribute very differently to a neuron’s function: Redundant
information quantifies only coherent information from multiple sources, for example to have a neuron
forward only information that is in agreement between sensory input and internal context information;
while unique information reflects what can be obtained from a single source but not from others,
for example to make neurons not encode the same information that their peers already encode.
Lastly, synergy describes the synthesis of new information from taking multiple sources into account
simultaneously, for instance when comparing two signals and computing a difference or error signal.
This complexity of operations on input information from multiple classes of sources can be quantified
by using the recent framework of “Partial Information Decomposition (PID)” (Williams and Beer,
2010; Gutknecht et al., 2021; Makkeh et al., 2021). Given multiple inputs to an output, it can dissect
the mutual information into different information atoms, which enumerate the different ways in which
the sources can interact to produce the target, as explained above. Through this decomposition, one
can paint a comprehensive, yet interpretable picture of how the different input variables contribute to
the local computation of an individual neuron.
PID has already been utilized to analyze the information representation and flows in DNNs (Ehrlich
et al., 2023; Tax et al., 2017). We show how this approach can be inverted by using PID to directly
formulate goal functions on the individual neuron level. These “infomorphic neurons” then have
the ability to optimize for encoding specific parts of the information they receive from their inputs,
allowing for an application to tasks from supervised, unsupervised and memory learning, as demon-
strated explicitly in Makkeh et al. (2025). However, neurons with only two different inputs struggle
to achieve good performance on classification tasks. It seems that in general, three distinct signals
are necessary for local neuron learning: A receptive signal providing the input, a relevance signal
helping to filter this input and a distribution signal enabling self-organization between neurons. In
classical neural networks, these different classes of information are provided implicitly via the global
gradient signals of backpropagation.
In this work, we show how ANNs based on infomorphic neurons with three input classes can be used
to solve supervised classification tasks with a performance comparable to backpropagation, despite
relying only on locally available information. We demonstrate how the parameters for the objective
functions can either be determined from intuitive reasoning or be optimized by hyperparameter
optimization techniques. The latter approach then sheds light onto the local information processing
needed to solve a complex task. Through this approach, we demonstrate that local learning rules
rooted in information theory can provide an understanding of local ANN learning while maintaining
their performance.
The main contributions of this work are as follows: Firstly, we use information theory, and in particular
PID, to formulate interpretable, per-neuron goal functions with three input classes, significantly
advancing the capabilities of the approach originally presented in Makkeh et al. (2025). Secondly,
we systematically optimize the goal function parameters for these “infomorphic” neurons, provide



                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A apical                      context/                  B                  XC contextual
                                                                                input
                                                                                                     C                 I(Y:C)
    dendrites                 feedback

                                                                    wC                                I(Y:F,C)                      syn
                                                                                                                                        unq,C
                                axon                                       C          (binary)
                              (output)                        wF                       output        I(Y:F)                              H(Y)
feed-                                                   XF          F                    Y
forward                                                                                                                      Hres
                                                        feedforward                                      unq,F
          basal dendrites                                  input
                                                                                                              red

D               H(Y)      =    I(Y:F:C)        +        I(Y:F|C) + I(Y:C|F) + Hres                   E
 Classical
 Inform.                             -
 Decomp.
                H(Y) =        unq,F +      unq,C    +        red    +        syn      +    Hres
 Partial
 Inform.
 Decomp.
 (PID)
                output    unique F       unique C       redundant       synergistic       residual               active signal
                entropy                                  between        of F and C        entropy                no gradient exchange
                                                         F and C

Figure 1: Infomorphic neurons are abstract, information-theoretic neurons inspired by the
structure of pyramidal neurons (Wibral et al., 2017). They are trained by adjusting their
synaptic weights according to a PID-based goal function. A,B. Inspired by the distinction be-
tween apical and basal dendrites in cortical pyramidal neurons, infomorphic neurons are defined
as computational units with separate feedforward (F ) and contextual (C) input classes. C. Partial
information decomposition (PID) allows one to dissect the total entropy of the neuron into explain-
able components. D. PID enables one to distinguish how much information comes uniquely from
either the feedforward F (Πunq,F ) or contextual C input (Πunq,C ) and how much they contribute
redundantly (Πred ), or synergistically (Πsyn ). Classic information theory (top) cannot disentangle
these information atoms: The classic entities cover several of the atoms, so that effectively one can
only measure redundant minus synergistic information. E. Formulating goal functions Gneuron in
terms of PID-atoms Πneuron enables one to formulate how strongly redundant, unique, or synergistic
information should contribute to a neuron’s output. Figure adapted from Makkeh et al. (2025).


an intuitive interpretation, and thereby obtain insights into the local computational goals of typical
classification tasks. Thirdly, for classification tasks we show that PID-based learning can achieve
performance comparable to backpropagation despite being limited to local information only, while
being interpretable on a per-neuron basis.
Next, we give a succinct account of infomorphic neurons with two input classes following Makkeh
et al. (2025) before generalizing the framework to the more capable version with three input classes
in Section 3.


2   B IVARIATE I NFOMORPHIC N EURONS

Neurons can be viewed as information processors that receive a number of input signals and process
them to produce their own output signal. From an information-theoretic perspective, the output Y
of a neuron can be considered a random variable, and the total output information can be quantified
using the Shannon entropy H(Y ). From an information channel perspective, this output information
consists of two parts: The mutual information I(Y : X) coming from the inputs X and the residual
entropy H(Y |X) arising from stochastic processes within the neuron.
Mutual information can be used to quantify the amount of information that is carried by different
input classes about the neuron’s output by considering the aggregated feedforward (F ), contextual
(C) and lateral inputs (L) as sources X individually. Nevertheless, classical information theory
cannot quantify how much of the information is provided redundantly, uniquely or synergistically
by different inputs, making it impossible to describe how exactly the information from two source


                                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


variables contribute to creating the output. Using PID, the total mutual information I(Y : F, C)
between the output of the neuron Y and two aggregated inputs, e.g., F and C, can be dissected into
four PID atoms (see Fig. 1.C): The unique information of the feedforward connection about the
output Y , Πunq,F , is the information which can only be obtained from the feedforward and not the
context input, with the unique information Πunq,C of the context being defined analogously. The
redundant information Πred reflects the information which can equivalently obtained from either
feedforward or contextual inputs about Y , while finally the synergistic information Πsyn can only
be obtained from both inputs considered jointly. All classical mutual information terms between
the target and subsets of source variables can be constructed from these PID atoms through the
consistency equations (Williams and Beer, 2010)
                         I(Y : F, C) = Πred + Πunq,F + Πunq,C + Πsyn ,
                           I(Y : F ) = Πred + Πunq,F and                                           (1)
                           I(Y : C) = Πred + Πunq,C .
However, these atoms are underdetermined as there are four unknown atoms with only three consis-
tency equations providing constraints. For this reason, an additional quantity needs to be defined,
which is usually a measure for redundancy (Williams and Beer, 2010). Such a definition for redun-
dancy, based on the concept of shared exclusions in probability space, is given by the shared-exclusion
PID, I∩sx (Makkeh et al., 2021) (see Appendix A.2). Importantly, the resulting PID is differentiable
with respect to the underlying probability mass function, which allows for a specification and
subsequent optimization of learning goals based on PID.
Depending on the task the network is set to solve, different PID atoms become relevant to the
information processing. In this work, we focus on the application to supervised learning tasks, in
which the ground-truth label is provided as the context C during training. Here, the intuitive goal
for the neuron is to foster redundancy between the feedforward and context inputs in its output, to
capture only the feedforward signal that agrees with the label. Likewise, if the goal is unsupervised
encoding of the input, lateral connections between neurons can be used as the context signal and the
goal might become maximizing the unique information of the feedforward input about the output, i.e.,
to capture only the information which is not already encoded in other neurons (Makkeh et al., 2025).
PID can not only be used to describe the local information processing, but also to optimize it through
the maximization of a PID based objective function. Generally, such an objective function can be
expressed as a linear combination of PID atoms as
        G = γred Πred + γunq,F Πunq,F + γunq,C Πunq,C + γsyn Πsyn + γres Hres = γ T Π,             (2)
where the residual entropy Hres = H(Y |F, C), is included in the vector Π for brevity of notation.
As the I∩sx measure is differentiable, the goal function can be optimized by adjusting the weights of
the incoming connections of the inputs F and C using gradient ascent—with the analytic formulation
of the gradients given in Makkeh et al. (2025), or using a suitable autograd algorithm.
While such infomorphic neurons can be used for supervised learning tasks when each neuron is
provided a part of the label to focus on (Makkeh et al., 2025), two input classes are insufficient for
fully self-organizing the necessary local information processing. This is because if each neuron is
tasked with encoding information that is redundant between the whole label and the feedforward
signal with no regard to the other neurons, they will inevitably start encoding much of the same
information, leading to poor performance. To avoid this, the neurons need to be made aware of what
the other neurons encode, similar to the unsupervised example. This can be achieved by incorporating
a third input class for lateral connections between neurons of the same layer, as presented next.

3   T RIVARIATE I NFOMORPHIC N EURONS
Including a third source variable results in a so-called trivariate PID which is more complex than the
bivariate case, with atoms in general now describing redundancies between synergies. For example,
the atom Π{F }{C} denotes information that can be obtained redundantly from the feedforward and
context signal but is unavailable from the lateral inputs, making it ‘uniquely redundant’ to F and
C. Likewise, the atom Π{F }{C,L} denotes information that can be obtained from F alone but also
synergistically from the pair C, L (but not from C or L alone). Overall, upon the introduction
of a third source, the four PID atoms of the bivariate setup turn into a total of 18 trivariate PID


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                        context/     B                                 C
                         feedback
                                                      context


                                       feedforward
                                                            C
feed-                    output
                                                     F              Y
forward
                                                            L
               lateral
                                                          lateral
                                                                                                          Hres
                                                 red =1
D                                 C
 encode information that
 is redundant between        F                  Y
                                                                            {F}{C}=1
 feedforward and context                                                                              C

                                                                        'AND'                     F              Y
                                        unq,F=1                                                       L
 encode information that
 is unique with respect to   F                   Y                      encode information redundant between
 laterally connected neurons      L                                     feedforward and context, and unique with
                                                                        respect to laterally connected neurons

Figure 2: Adding lateral connections as a third input class enables neurons to self-organize to
encode relevant and unique information. A,B. Infomorphic neuron with three inputs - namely
feed-forward (F ), contextual (C) and lateral (L) inputs. C. With three input classes, the number of
PID-atoms increases to 18, represented by different colors, plus the residual entropy Hres in the outer
circle. Classical information-theoretic quantities such as the entropy H(Y ) and mutual information I
with individual sources are depicted by ovals, indicating how they can be built from PID atoms. D.
Three input classes allow for the optimization of more complex goals based on 19 different terms
(compared to only five in Fig. 1.C). This trivariate PID allows to combine two bivariate objective
functions: In a supervised learning task, the intuitive goal is to maximize information in the neuron’s
output that is redundant between the feedforward input F and label C, while simultaneously ensuring
the neuron’s output stays unique with respect to lateral neurons L. While bivariate goal functions
only allow for optimizing one of these objectives at a time, both objectives can be combined to the
goal of maximizing the single atom Π{F }{C} in the trivariate case.


atoms (Gutknecht et al., 2021) as shown in Fig. 2.C. These PID atoms Πα can in general be addressed
by their antichains α, i.e., sets of sets of input variables, with the inner sets describing synergies and
the outer set redundancies between them (Gutknecht et al., 2021).
Including the residual entropy Hres = H(Y |F, C, L), the decomposition vector Π and goal parameter
vector γ thus have 19 elements each. The general goal function of a neuron is again given by
G = γ T Π and can be set and optimized in the same way as in the bivariate case:

          G = γ{F }{C}{L} Π{F }{C}{L} + ... + γ{F CL} Π{F,C,L} + γres Hres = γ T Π.                              (3)

Utilizing the expressiveness and interpretability of trivariate PID, heuristic goal functions can be
derived for different classes of tasks from intuitive reasoning. For the supervised learning task to be
solved here, the introduction of the lateral connections as a third input allows to synthesize an intuitive
goal function from the two bivariate goals introduced before (see Fig. 2.D). As outlined in the bivariate
case above, canonical goals might either be to foster redundancy between the feedforward and context
signals with no regards for what lateral neurons do, or, alternatively, to optimize for uniqueness of
the output with respect to the lateral inputs, which does not differentiate between task relevance
of information. With trivariate infomorphic neurons, however, these goals can simultaneously be
achieved by optimizing for the atom Π{F }{C} , which represents the redundancy of the feedforward
and context signal which is at the same time unique with respect to the lateral inputs. In simple terms,
this enables the neuron to find coherent information between label and input data, that is not yet
encoded by other neurons.


                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4    E XPERIMENTS

We now explain how the general concept of trivariate infomorphic neurons can be practically utilized
to construct networks solving a supervised classification task, i.e., the MNIST supervised handwritten
digit classification task. To this end, we demonstrate how an infomorphic network with one hidden
layer can be set up using either heuristic or optimized goal function parameters.
Neuron structure and activation function To construct infomorphic networks, a number of
practical decisions need to be made for how the output signal is constructed from the inputs in the
forward pass. As a first step, the higher-dimensional signals from the different input classes are
aggregated to the single numbers F , C and L by a weighted sum. Subsequently, these aggregated
inputs are passed into an activation function, which can be chosen arbitrarily, but needs to fit the
requirements of the specific application. For the supervised classification task at hand, the function
A(F, C, L) = F [(1 − α1 − α2 ) + α1 σ(β1 F C) + α2 σ(β2 F L)] has been chosen, where σ refers to
the sigmoid function and α1 = α2 = 0.1 and β1 = β2 = 2 are parameters that shape the influence of
the input compartments on the activation function. This activation function builds on concepts of
Kay (1994) and makes a clear distinction between the driving feedforward input and the modulatory
context and lateral inputs, ensuring that the network performs similarly during training, when the
context inputs is provided, and for evaluation, where it is withheld (i.e., by setting C = 0). To
show the independence of the infomorphic approach from a particular activation function, the results
are additionally compared to a simple linear activation function A(F, C, L) = F + 0.1L + 0.1C.
The output of the activation function is finally mapped to the unit interval by a sigmoid function,
whose output is used as a probability to stochastically output “1” (firing) or “-1” (non-firing). For
the bivariate output layer, the sigmoid is not sampled from but just interpreted as a firing probability,
with the neuron with the highest value being used as the network prediction. The lateral connections
between neurons add recurrence to the network, requiring for the same input to be shown multiple
times to ensure convergence of the activations. In practice, however, we have seen that presenting the
same input twice is sufficient to achieve proper network function (see Appendix A.9). The inference
procedure for infomorphic networks is summarized in pseudocode in Appendix A.1.
Discretization and local gradients To optimize a PID-based goal function during training, the
first step is to estimate the PID atoms. Since the original I∩sx measure only works with discrete
variables, the aggregated inputs from a batch of samples are first discretized to 20 levels each (see
Appendix A.11). Subsequently, the empirical probability mass function is constructed from the batch,
from which the PID atoms are computed by means of a plug-in estimation. Finally, the current
value of the goal function can determined as a linear combination of PID atoms (Algorithm 2 and
Algorithm 3 in Appendix A.1). For the local gradient computation, the gradient of the individual
neuron’s objective function is backpropagated via the output to produce the neuron’s weight updates.
Choosing goal parameters The parameters γ for a PID goal function can be obtained in two distinct
ways—either heuristically from intuitive notions about the nature of the computations necessary to
solve the problem, as explained before, or optimized using a suitable hyperparameter optimization
procedure. In this work, we contrast both approaches. For the hyperparameter optimization, we
compared two established techniques: The Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE, Bergstra et al.,
2011), that splits the sample points into two groups with high and low performance, fits a model
to each group and draws the next sample points according to the ratio of probabilities, and the
Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES, Hansen, 2016), which generates new
evaluation points by sampling from a multivariate Gaussian distribution that was fitted to the best
samples from previous iterations.
Network Setup To solve the MNIST task (LeCun et al., 1998), we devised a network architecture
consisting of an input layer, a hidden layer made up from Nhid trivariate infomorphic neurons and
an output layer consisting of 10 bivariate infomorphic neurons. The trivariate neurons in the hidden
layer each receive the whole image as their feedforward signal, a context signal that guides their
learning, and the output of other neurons of the same layer through lateral connections. The bivariate
neurons in the output layer receive all outputs of the hidden layer and additionally exactly one
element of the one-hot label as context, which is only provided during training, and are trained to
maximize redundancy between their input and the information about the one label they observe. We
explored three slightly different approaches to how the hidden layer can be set up using trivariate
infomorphic neurons, illustrated in Fig. 3.A. In setup 1, we use the fully connected one-hot label as


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A label &setup 1:
          dense lateral
                                                                 setup 2:
                                                          label & sparse lateral
                                                                                                          setup 3:
                                                                                                  feedback & sparse lateral
                                                                                                                            types of inputs:
                                                label                     label                                 label            driving
                                                                                                                                 modulating
                                         Nhid                                                                                  connection matrix:
                                                                                                                                   all-to-all
    input (image)


                                                                                                                                   random sparse
                                                                                                                                   one-to-one
                                                                                                                                     differences
                                            Nout=10                                                                                  between setups
       lateral*                                                                                                                lateral*: no self-
                                                                                                                               connection
B                                        bivariate      trivariate           C 10             0
     test error for Nhid=100


                               0.20


                                                                             test error
                               0.15
                                                                                      10-1
                               0.10

                               0.05
                                                                                                  1              10             100            1000
                                                       d
                                      om tim d


                                            ag n
                                                       n
                                                     tic
                                                      ic



                                            ti ic

                                      p he d
                                                     ed


                                 ba p ize
                                  nd op e


                                          op tio

                                                    io
                                                     e


                                                                                                      number of neurons in hidden layer Nhid
                                 co l op rist



                                 se t op rist


                                se 1 o uris

                                                  z
                                se p 1 miz
                               co ext miz


                                                 at
                               ra 3 imi


                                        pr ec
                                                u


                                      ex eu
                                    te he


                                     ck roj
                                              i


                                                                                                         random projection
                                      p pt
                                            t
                                           h
                   al


                                                                                                         label & dense lateral (setup 1)
         r
                                      ra
      te


                                     nt



                                     tu


                                   tu
                                   tu
                                   nt
 la
                        la


                                                                                                         label & sparse lateral (setup 2)
                                      type of setup and goal                                             feedback & sparse lateral (setup 3)
                                                                                                         backpropagation
                                                                                                         direct classification without hidden layer

Figure 3: Infomorphic networks with three input classes approach the performance of a similar
network trained with backpropagation and outperform networks with two input classes on
the MNIST handwritten digit classification task. A. In the hidden layer of the network, the
infomorphic neurons receive feedforward and lateral connections as well as either the ground-truth
label or feedback from the output layer, outlined in three setups. B. Networks with trivariate
infomorphic neurons outperform models with bivariate neurons with both, heuristic and optimized
goals for a hidden layer size of 100 neurons. Only the setup with a feedback signal instead of the
label performs worse for this layer size but outperforms the bivariate models for larger hidden layers
as shown in Fig. 8. C. Infomorphic networks achieve similar performance as the same network
trained with backpropagation. For larger layers, using a sparse connectivity significantly improves
performance (setup 2). The lines indicate mean values, with the intervals depicting the maximum and
minimum of 10 runs. The goal function parameters have been optimized for networks with a hidden
layers size of 100 neurons, indicated by the dashed line in C.


C and the output of all neurons of the same layer as all-to-all connected lateral input L. In setup 2, a
sparse connectivity of a maximum of 100 connections is used instead of all-to-all for L. In setup 3,
additionally to sparse L, the label is replaced by a fully connected feedback from the output layer as
context C, indicating a path towards how multiple hidden layers may be stacked in the future. For
comparison, we trained a benchmark network with the same connectivity as setup 1 using standard
backpropagation and cross-entropy loss. Additionally, we trained the output layer of a fixed random
hidden layer setup using step-function activation.

5                        R ESULTS

Performance The performance of all major setups for Nhid = 100 is shown in Fig. 3.B. The three
trivariate infomorphic setups use the same set of optimized goal parameters (see below) for all hidden
layer sizes and significantly outperform the random baseline as well as the networks with a bivariate
setup for the hidden layer. As shown in Appendix Fig. 3.C, Setup 1 matches the performance of
backpropagation for up to 100 neurons, and reaches its maximum test accuracy for 500 neurons before


                                                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                         goal parameters                  B         importance of goal parameters
              heuristic          optimization for MNIST,
                                   100 neurons (best)
                                                                                                          {FC}{FL}

                                                                                                          {F}{C}

                                                                                                          {F}{C}{L}

                                                                                                          {F}{L}


           median test          median test                        difference in validation accuracy
         accuracy 92.8%       accuracy 94.9%                   by setting individual goal parameters to 0
                     goal parameter value
                          -1       0        1                         -1.12%    0.00%           1.12%
C 100                training
                                   simplified goal         D optimized for CIFAR10,                 parameter
                     validation                                  for 100 neurons                   importance
                     test
ﬁnal error


                                                                                       {F}{C}
              1
         10                          median test
                                   accuracy 94.4%

                                                                                   {F}{C}{L}


                                                                                                    difference in
                   {FC}{CL s
                     {F} inal
                              L}
                      L}{ }
                       {F L}
                     {C CL}
                              L}
                            {L}

                         {FC}
                                }

                        }{ }
                     {L} CL}
                                }
                      {C L}
                                }
                      {F F}
                   {F} }{C}
                       { L}
                   {FCF}{L}
                              L}
                               e
                  }{F {CL


                            {C


                         {FC

                           }{L
                   {FL Hr
                         {C

                           C

                        }{F


                          {F


                           }{

                        }{F
                            {


                                                               goal parameter value             validation accuracy
                         g


                      {C
                     ori

              {FC


                                                               -1       0          1        -5.4%       0.0%         5.4%
                  → successive ablation of parameters →

Figure 4: Given a set of optimized goal parameters, an ablation study allows for the identifica-
tion and interpretation of the most critical neural subgoals for a given task. A. The heuristically
defined goal function (see Fig. 2.D) shows 92.8% test accuracy on MNIST for Nhid = 100; opti-
mizing the goal function using hyperparameter optimization increases the test accuracy to 94.9%.
The optimized goal parameters include the intuitive γ{F }{C} , but also additional PID atoms to be
maximized or minimized at the same time. B. For identifying the most important goal parameters,
we performed an ablation study (individually setting γ parameters to 0) and measured the change
in validation accuracy compared to a network trained with the full goal. C. A successive ablation
of parameters in order from lowest to highest individual effect identifies four parameters as being
crucial for network performance (see Table 3 for their definition). The lines indicate mean values,
with the intervals depicting the maximum and minimum of 10 runs. D. To test whether more complex
image classification tasks require different goal parameters, we perform a separate hyperparameter
optimization for setup 1, 100 neurons in CIFAR-10 and reach a median test accuracy of 42.5%
(compared to 42.2% using backprop and 41.1% using the goal function optimized for MNIST).


its performance starts decreasing with larger layer sizes. This decrease in accuracy can be attributed
to a lack of convergence of the neurons (Appendix Fig. 5), likely arising through the interaction of too
many neurons. To alleviate the convergence problem, we performed additional experiments (setup 2)
with the number of lateral connections reduced to maximally 100, which leads to better convergence
and contributes to the continuous increase of performance for larger hidden layers, reaching a median
test accuracy of 97.5% for 2000 neurons, slightly below the 98.0% reached via backpropagation.
Finally, experiments with setup 3 provide evidence that the direct label input to the hidden layer can
be replaced with feedback from the next layer, while still enabling solid performance especially for
large layers. Additionally, we tested the alternate linear activation function as outlined in 4. Here,
experiments using the optimized goal function parameters resulted in accuracies between 94.9 % and
95.1 % for 100 neurons, which is on par with the original activation function.
Goal parameters The optimized goal function used for training the three main setups at all sizes
were obtained by maximizing the validation set accuracy using setup 1 with Nhid = 100. We
performed a total of six hyperparameter optimizations of 1000 trials, three using TPE and three using
CMA-ES samplers, respectively (see Appendix Fig. 6). The best results were achieved using the
parameters shown in Fig. 4. The optimized objective functions outperform the intuitive goal function


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by including additional PID atoms besides the intuitively derived Π{F }{C} . To compare to a more
complex image classification task, a single CMA-ES optimization run has been performed for the
CIFAR-10 task (Krizhevsky, 2012), with the optimal parameters presented in Fig. 4.D.
Parameter importance An analysis of the optimized hyperparameter values (Fig. 4.B) shows that
only relatively few parameters are of high importance for performance. By setting goal parameters to
zero individually (Figure 4.B) we find that there are four goal parameters that are critically non-zero
for high performance on MNIST. This finding is confirmed by cumulatively setting goal function
parameters to zero in the order of the individual drop in performance, which is illustrated in Fig. 4.C.
Interestingly, we find that CIFAR-10 two of the four critical goal parameters for MNIST seem
especially important. As a complementary measure of parameter importance, the results of mean
decrease in impurity (Breiman, 2001) can be found in Appendix A.6. The results of a more detailed
analysis of parameter importance are presented in Appendix Fig. 9.
Interpretation For the MNIST task, neurons aim for (i) encoding information that is redundant
between feedforward and context inputs and thus task relevant, but not already encoded in other
neurons (strongly positive γ{F }{C} ), (ii) avoid encoding information that is not in the context,
thus not task-relevant, and already encoded by other neurons (strongly negative γ{F }{L} ) and (iii)
allow redundancies of task relevant information between neurons (slightly positive γ{F }{C}{L} ).
Additionally, neurons avoid synergies that require F and either C or L for their recovery (γ{F C}{F L} )
(see Appendix Table 3 for an overview of the parameter values and interpretations). For the CIFAR-
10 task (see Fig. 4.D), the two most important parameters γ{F }{C}{L} and γ{F }{C} point to a
prioritization of redundancy over uniqueness between neurons.


6    R ELATED W ORKS

We are not aware of any other attempts to use PID directly as a constructive tool for designing
ANNs with local learning objectives, aside from the bivariate implementation of infomorphic net-
works (Makkeh et al., 2025). The most directly related work using other local information-theoretic
learning objectives is likely the work on coherent infomax by Kay, Phillips and colleagues (Kay and
Phillips, 1997). Their idea of defining a neural goal function that ensures only information coherent
between the inputs being passed on in the output of a neuron inspired our idea of using PID-based
redundancy as a neural goal function. However, as analyzed in Wibral et al. (2017), the lack of a
PID at the time of invention of coherent infomax reduced the expressiveness of their goal function,
and also prevented an easily interpretable formulation for more than two input classes. Our results
suggest that three input classes are crucial to unlock the potential of information theoretic learning,
in the sense that a neuron needs to know at least the data to transform (F ), the relevance of various
aspects of these data (C), and also what is not yet encoded well by other neurons (via L).
Aside from PID proper, there are two prominent principles based on information theory that has been
employed to train deep neural networks: information maximization (InfoMax, Linsker, 1988) and
information bottleneck (IB, Tishby et al., 2000). The main idea of InfoMax is to learn representations
that encode as much information as possible about the task, while IB additionally penalizes informa-
tion that is irrelevant to the task (Yu et al., 2020). Various frameworks have employed InfoMax and
IB where unlike in our framework, information theory is employed at the level of group of neurons
(layer). Examples include Deep InfoMax where mutual information of high-level representations and
the input is maximized (Hjelm et al., 2019), InfoNCE that maximizes the mutual information of future
observations and the current latent representation (Oord et al., 2018), and Variational autoencoders
that employ an IB layer (Alemi et al., 2017).
Additionally, local learning rules based on concepts other than information theory have been developed
and show potential for scaling to larger, more capable networks (Lillicrap et al., 2020; Richards et al.,
2019; Jeon and Kim, 2023; Bredenberg et al., 2024). This includes learning rules based on concepts
from contrastive learning (Illing et al., 2021; Ahamed et al., 2023), predictive coding (Mikulasch
et al., 2023; Sacramento et al., 2018; Millidge et al., 2022), and many others (Launay et al., 2020;
Hinton, 2022; Høier et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2015; Nøkland and Eidnes, 2019; Lässig et al., 2023).
Most of these approaches are confined to specific learning paradigms and implementations, while
our framework describes local learning goals in an abstract manner, making it applicable to various
learning paradigms, datasets and implementations, while still being interpretable.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In terms of abstract per-neuron objectives, recently complementary work has been published, building
on concepts from control theory (Moore et al., 2024) and reinforcement learning (Ott, 2020). These
efforts are in line with our work, and we believe similar creative, yet principled approaches could
provide a basis for deepening the understanding of local information processing.
Beyond the formulation of information theoretic learning rules, there is literature using PID to
analyze deep neural network function, such as Tax et al. (2017); Ehrlich et al. (2023); Tokui and Sato
(2021); Liang et al. (2023; 2024); Mohamadi et al. (2023). These studies necessarily differ from the
perspective on neural function taken here, as they analyze the function of neurons in feedforward
networks trained with backprop, where—different to the infomorphic approach—the learning signals
are not directly available as inputs to the neural activation function.



7    D ISCUSSION

In this work we demonstrate how neurons can self-organize to solve classification tasks using local
PID-based goal functions. Unlike mechanistic local learning rules or purely global objectives, our
framework expresses learning in human interpretable terms. These local objectives are expressed by
selecting which output information should be uniquely, redundantly or synergistically determined by
the various classes of local inputs to a neuron. We show how to derive a supervised learning objective
based on intuitive heuristic reasoning, and upon some optimization of this simple rule demonstrate
performance on MNIST that is comparable to the same ANN trained with backpropagation.
By showing which PID atoms need to be optimized to solve a certain goal and assessing the
importance of each goal function parameter, infomorphic networks provide a novel insight into
the local information processing required at a local level to solve a global goal. Note that this
interpretability differs from other notions of interpretability: While other attempts at interpretability
focus on how specific tasks are solved, infomorphic neurons show on an abstract level what kind
of local information processing is necessary to solve a certain class of problems, e.g., classification.
These insights may in the future be used to discern which neurons fail to contribute to the overall task,
with the localizability of the I∩sx redundancy measure revealing for which labels problems occur.
Limitations and Outlook We show that the infomorphic local optimization approach reaches a
performance comparable to backpropagation in a setup with one fully connected hidden layer. In
subsequent work, we will investigate the local information processing and connectivity required for
deeper networks. Preliminary experiments show that deeper networks train out of the box using the
same goal function parameters and reach the same or slightly higher accuracy compared to the single
hidden layer models (see subsection A.10). More work is needed to determine how this accuracy can
be improved, for instance by choosing different goal function parameters for the different layers.
The infomorphic neurons presented in this work use a discrete version of PID, which limits the
amount of information that individual neurons can convey. While this is similar to the binary output
states of “spike” and “no spike” in biological neurons, PID can also be applied to continuous variables
and thus could also enable learning in continuous neurons (Ehrlich et al., 2024).
For the study of biological neural networks, infomorphic networks could potentially serve as a
powerful constructive modeling approach. While information-theoretic gradients are almost certainly
too complex to be directly implemented in biological substrate, biological neurons may still strive for
similar objectives through simpler approximations and mechanistic local learning rules. Having a
principled and general way to formulate, identify and test local information processing objectives
could provide a new perspective on local learning in general. Additionally, subsequent work could
aim to establish a formal bridge between local goals and known local learning rules, reconciling
well-established Hebbian-like rules with novel principled approaches.
In conclusion, the formulation of local objective functions in the language of PID directly enables
an interpretation of the information processing of neurons. Our work represents an important step
towards a principled theory of local learning founded in information theory.
Code Availability The framework and the code to reproduce the results of this work are available
under https://github.com/Priesemann-Group/Infomorphic_Networks.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Marcel Graetz, Jonas Dehning, Mark Blümel, Fabian Mikulasch and Lucas
Rudelt for their input and fruitful discussions about this topic. We would also like to thank Johannes
Zierenberg, Sebastian Mohr, Darius Burr and the rest of the Priesemann and the Wibral Group for their
valuable comments and feedback on this work. A.S., V.N., A.E. and V.P. were funded via the MBExC
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s
Excellence Strategy-EXC 2067/1-390729940. A.S., V.N., A.E., V.P., and M.W., were supported and
funded by the DFG – GRK2906 – project number 502807174. V.N. was partly supported by the Else
Kröner Fresenius Foundation via the Else Kröner Fresenius Center for Optogenetic Therapies. D.E.
and M.W. were supported by a funding from the Ministry for Science and Education of Lower Saxony
and the Volkswagen Foundation through the “Niedersächsisches Vorab” under the program “Big
Data in den Lebenswissenschaften” – project “Deep learning techniques for association studies of
transcriptome and systems dynamics in tissue morphogenesis”. A.M. and M.W. are employed at the
Campus Institute for Dynamics of Biological Networks (CIDBN) funded by the Volkswagenstiftung.
A.E., V.P. and M.W. received funding from the DFG via the SFB 1528 “Cognition of Interaction”
- project-ID 454648639. A.E. was supported from the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No.
101041669). M.W. was supported by the flagship science initiative of the European Commission’s
Future and Emerging Technologies program under the Human Brain project, HBP-SP3.1-SGA1-
T3.6.1.

R EFERENCES
Donald Hebb. The organization of behavior., 1949.
Yang Dan and Mu-ming Poo. Spike timing-dependent plasticity of neural circuits. Neuron, 44(1):
  23–30, 2004.
Sen Song, Kenneth D Miller, and Larry F Abbott. Competitive hebbian learning through spike-timing-
  dependent synaptic plasticity. Nature neuroscience, 3(9):919–926, 2000.
Peter Földiak. Forming sparse representations by local anti-hebbian learning. Biological cybernetics,
  64(2):165–170, 1990.
Benjamin Cramer, David Stöckel, Markus Kreft, Michael Wibral, Johannes Schemmel, Karlheinz
  Meier, and Viola Priesemann. Control of criticality and computation in spiking neuromorphic
  networks with plasticity. Nature communications, 11(1):2853, 2020.
Jim Kay. Neural networks for unsupervised learning based on information theory, pages 25–63.
  Oxford University Press, Inc., United States, 2000.
Michael Wibral, Viola Priesemann, Jim W Kay, Joseph T Lizier, and William A Phillips. Partial
 information decomposition as a unified approach to the specification of neural goal functions.
 Brain and cognition, 112:25–38, 2017.
Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system technical
  journal, 27(3):379–423, 1948.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
Sindy Löwe, Peter O’Connor, and Bastiaan Veeling. Putting an end to end-to-end: Gradient-isolated
  learning of representations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Jim W Kay and WA Phillips. Coherent infomax as a computational goal for neural systems. Bulletin
  of mathematical biology, 73(2):344–372, 2011.
Paul L Williams and Randall D Beer. Nonnegative decomposition of multivariate information. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1004.2515, 2010.
Aaron J Gutknecht, Michael Wibral, and Abdullah Makkeh. Bits and pieces: Understanding
  information decomposition from part-whole relationships and formal logic. Proceedings of the
  Royal Society A, 477(2251):20210110, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Abdullah Makkeh, Aaron J Gutknecht, and Michael Wibral. Introducing a differentiable measure of
  pointwise shared information. Physical Review E, 103(3):032149, 2021.
David Alexander Ehrlich, Andreas Christian Schneider, Viola Priesemann, Michael Wibral, and
  Abdullah Makkeh. A measure of the complexity of neural representations based on partial
  information decomposition. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8TU3pfzFr.
Tycho Tax, Pedro AM Mediano, and Murray Shanahan. The partial information decomposition of
  generative neural network models. Entropy, 19(9):474, 2017.
Abdullah Makkeh, Marcel Graetz, Andreas C. Schneider, David A. Ehrlich, Viola Priesemann,
  and Michael Wibral. A general framework for interpretable neural learning based on local
  information-theoretic goal functions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(10):
  e2408125122, 2025. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2408125122. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/
  abs/10.1073/pnas.2408125122.
Jim Kay. Information-theoretic neural networks for unsupervised learning: mathematical and
  statistical considerations. Technical Report 1573387449478062080, Scottish Agricultural Statistics
  Service, 1994.
James Bergstra, Rémi Bardenet, Yoshua Bengio, and Balázs Kégl. Algorithms for hyper-
  parameter optimization. In J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and K.Q. Wein-
  berger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 24. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2011. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2011/file/86e8f7ab32cfd12577bc2619bc635690-Paper.pdf.
Nikolaus Hansen. The cma evolution strategy: A tutorial. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00772, 2016.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. University of Toronto, 05
  2012.
Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45:5–32, 2001.
Jim Kay and William A Phillips. Activation functions, computational goals, and learning rules for
  local processors with contextual guidance. Neural Computation, 9(4):895–910, 1997.
Ralph Linsker. An application of the principle of maximum information preservation to linear systems.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 1, 1988.
Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William Bialek. The information bottleneck method. arXiv
  preprint physics/0004057, 2000.
Shujian Yu, Kristoffer Wickstrøm, Robert Jenssen, and Jose C Principe. Understanding convolutional
  neural networks with information theory: An initial exploration. IEEE transactions on neural
  networks and learning systems, 32(1):435–442, 2020.
R Devon Hjelm, Alex Fedorov, Samuel Lavoie-Marchildon, Karan Grewal, Phil Bachman, Adam
  Trischler, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep representations by mutual information estimation
  and maximization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Bklr3j0cKX.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Alexander A. Alemi, Ian Fischer, Joshua V. Dillon, and Kevin Murphy. Deep variational information
  bottleneck. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=HyxQzBceg.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Adam Santoro, Luke Marris, Colin J Akerman, and Geoffrey Hinton. Backprop-
  agation and the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 21(6):335–346, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Blake A Richards, Timothy P Lillicrap, Philippe Beaudoin, Yoshua Bengio, Rafal Bogacz, Amelia
  Christensen, Claudia Clopath, Rui Ponte Costa, Archy de Berker, Surya Ganguli, et al. A deep
  learning framework for neuroscience. Nature neuroscience, 22(11):1761–1770, 2019.

Ikhwan Jeon and Taegon Kim. Distinctive properties of biological neural networks and recent
  advances in bottom-up approaches toward a better biologically plausible neural network. Frontiers
  in Computational Neuroscience, 17, 2023.

Colin Bredenberg, Ezekiel Williams, Cristina Savin, Blake Richards, and Guillaume Lajoie. Formal-
  izing locality for normative synaptic plasticity models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.

Bernd Illing, Jean Ventura, Guillaume Bellec, and Wulfram Gerstner. Local plasticity rules can learn
  deep representations using self-supervised contrastive predictions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:30365–30379, 2021.

Md Atik Ahamed, Jin Chen, and Abdullah-Al-Zubaer Imran. Forward-forward contrastive learning.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02927, 2023.

Fabian A Mikulasch, Lucas Rudelt, Michael Wibral, and Viola Priesemann. Where is the error?
  hierarchical predictive coding through dendritic error computation. Trends in Neurosciences, 46
  (1):45–59, 2023.

João Sacramento, Rui Ponte Costa, Yoshua Bengio, and Walter Senn. Dendritic cortical microcircuits
  approximate the backpropagation algorithm. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.

Beren Millidge, Alexander Tschantz, and Christopher L Buckley. Predictive coding approximates
  backprop along arbitrary computation graphs. Neural Computation, 34(6):1329–1368, 2022.

Julien Launay, Iacopo Poli, François Boniface, and Florent Krzakala. Direct feedback alignment
  scales to modern deep learning tasks and architectures. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:9346–9360, 2020.

Geoffrey Hinton. The forward-forward algorithm: Some preliminary investigations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.13345, 2022.

Rasmus Høier, D Staudt, and Christopher Zach. Dual propagation: Accelerating contrastive hebbian
  learning with dyadic neurons. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 13141–
  13156. PMLR, 2023.

Dong-Hyun Lee, Saizheng Zhang, Asja Fischer, and Yoshua Bengio. Difference target propagation.
  In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML
 PKDD 2015, Porto, Portugal, September 7-11, 2015, Proceedings, Part I 15, pages 498–515.
  Springer, 2015.

Arild Nøkland and Lars Hiller Eidnes. Training neural networks with local error signals. In
  International conference on machine learning, pages 4839–4850. PMLR, 2019.

Francesco Lässig, Pau Vilimelis Aceituno, Martino Sorbaro, and Benjamin F Grewe. Bio-inspired,
  task-free continual learning through activity regularization. Biological Cybernetics, 117(4):345–
  361, 2023.

Jason J Moore, Alexander Genkin, Magnus Tournoy, Joshua L Pughe-Sanford, Rob R de Ruyter van
  Steveninck, and Dmitri B Chklovskii. The neuron as a direct data-driven controller. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(27):e2311893121, 2024.

Jordan Ott. Giving up control: Neurons as reinforcement learning agents, 2020. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2003.11642.

Seiya Tokui and Issei Sato. Disentanglement analysis with partial information decomposition. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2108.13753, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paul Pu Liang, Zihao Deng, Martin Ma, James Zou, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov. Factorized contrastive learning: Going beyond multi-view redundancy. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.05268, 2023.
Paul Pu Liang, Chun Kai Ling, Yun Cheng, Alexander Obolenskiy, Yudong Liu, Rohan Pandey, Alex
  Wilf, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Russ Salakhutdinov. Multimodal learning without labeled mul-
  timodal data: Guarantees and applications. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BrjLHbqiYs.
Salman Mohamadi, Gianfranco Doretto, and Donald A Adjeroh. More synergy, less redundancy:
  Exploiting joint mutual information for self-supervised learning. In 2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pages 1390–1394. IEEE, 2023.
David Ehrlich, Kyle Schick-Poland, Abdullah Makkeh, Felix Lanfermann, Patricia Wollstadt, and
  Michael Wibral. Partial information decomposition for continuous variables based on shared
  exclusions: Analytical formulation and estimation. Physical Review E, 110, 07 2024. doi:
 10.1103/PhysRevE.110.014115.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
  A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pages 2623–2631,
  2019.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature, 521(7553):436–444,
  2015.


                                               14
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     A     A PPENDIX
     A.1   P SEUDOCODE FOR T RAINING A LGORITHM (S ETUP 1)

     In this section, we provide pseudocode detailing the procedure to train infomorphic networks with
     dense lateral connections and label context (i.e., Setup 1 in Figure 3). The code is started from the
     main function TrainModel, which invokes TrainNeuronTrivariate and TrainNeuronBivariate to update
     hidden layer and output layer weights, respectively. These functions in turn make use of the auxiliary
     functions ComputeIsxRedundancies, which computes generalized redundancies according to the
     analytical definition by Makkeh et al. (2021), and ComputePIDAtoms, which performs a Moebius
     inversion to compute the PID atoms from the generalized redundancies (Williams and Beer, 2010).
     Note that since the linear operation performed by ComputePIDAtoms is fixed, it can be efficiently
     implemented as a multiplication with a precomputed matrix.
     Note that, as originally proposed by Kay (1994) and utilized by Makkeh et al. (2025), gradients for
     the incoming weights are only computed with respect to the conditional probability p(y|f, c, l) (or
     p(y|f, c)) of the output Y , since the empirical probability mass functions p(f, c, l) in Algorithm 2
     and p(f, c) in Algorithm 3 are not differentiable. While we currently have no strong a priori argument
     why the empirical probability mass functions can be assumed constant, the learning of PID over
     training and the good task performance when using these gradients in experiments provides an ex
     post justification for this procedure.

     Function 1: TrainModel
   Input: data, num_epochs
   Output: trained model
 1 INITIALIZE model;
 2 foreach epoch in range(num_epochs) do
 3     foreach (batch_samples, batch_labels) in data do
 4         INITIALIZE hidden_state, output_state to zero;
 5         hidden_state ← forward_hidden_layer(f=batch_samples, c=batch_labels,
            l=hidden_state);
 6         hidden_state ← forward_hidden_layer(f=batch_samples, c=batch_labels,
            l=hidden_state);
 7         output_state ← forward_output_layer(f=hidden_state, c=batch_labels) ;
 8         foreach neuron in hidden_layer do
 9             TrainNeuronTrivariate(y=hidden_state[neuron], f=batch_samples, c=batch_labels,
                l=last_outputs[other neurons]);
10         foreach neuron in output_layer do
11             TrainNeuronBivariate(y=output_state[neuron], f=hidden_state, c=batch_labels);

12   return trained model


                                                      15
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Function 2: TrainNeuronTrivariate
   Input: y, f, c, l
1  BIN continuous values f, c, l to 20 equally sized bins;
 2 COUNT occurrences of tuples (f, c, l) in batch;

 3 COMPUTE empirical probability masses p(f, c, l);
 4 EVALUATE conditional probabilities p(y|f, c, l) from the neurons;
 5 CONSTRUCT full joint probability mass function p(y, f, c, l) = p(f, c, l)p(y|f, c, l);
 6 isx_redundancies ← ComputeIsxRedundancies(p(y, f, c, l));
 7 pid_atoms ← ComputePIDAtoms(isx_redundancies);

 8 goal ← scalar_product(goal_params, pid_atoms);
 9 PERFORM autograd to maximize goal;
10 UPDATE neuron weights;


    Function 3: TrainNeuronBivariate
  Input: y, f, c
1 BIN continuous values f, c to 20 equally sized bins;
2 COUNT occurrences of tuples (f, c) in batch;
3 COMPUTE empirical probability masses p(f, c);

4 EVALUATE conditional probabilities p(y|f, c) from the neurons;
5 CONSTRUCT full joint probability mass function p(y, f, c) = p(f, c)p(y|f, c)
   isx_redundancies ← ComputeIsxRedundancies(p(y, f, c));
6 pid_atoms ← ComputePIDAtoms(isx_redundancies);
7 goal ← scalar_product(goal_params, pid_atoms);
8 PERFORM autograd to maximize goal;

9 UPDATE neuron weights;


    Function 4: ComputeIsxRedundancies
  Input: Joint probability mass function p(y, f, c, l)
1 foreach antichain α do                                          W     V
2     COMPUTE conditional probability mass functions P(Y = y| a∈α i∈a Si = si );
3     COMPUTE marginal probability mass function P(Y = y);               W    V
                                                                  P(Y =y| a∈α i∈a Si =si )
      I∩sx (Y : Sα ) ← y,f,c,l P(Y = y, F = f, C = c, L = l) log2
                      P
4
                                                                          P(Y =y)          ;
5   return I∩sx (Y : Sα ) for all antichains α


    Function 5: ComputePIDAtoms
  Input: I∩sx (Y : Sα ) for all antichains α
                                                                    sx
                                                                                  P
1 COMPUTE pid atoms Πβ by inverting the linear system of equations I∩ (Y : Sα ) =
                                                                                    β⪯α Πβ
   where β ⪯ α ⇔ ∀a ∈ α ∃b ∈ β : a ⊆ b;
2 return Πβ for all antichains β


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2    D EFINITION OF S HARED -E XCLUSION R EDUNDANCY

In this section, we briefly motivate and explain the shared-exclusion redundancy measure I∩sx intro-
duced by Makkeh et al. (2021). The mutual information I(T : S1 , S2 ) between a target variable T
and two source variables S1 and S2 can be interpreted in a Bayesian sense as an average measure for
how the prior belief of the target event T = t, needs to be updated in light of the event of observing
both source events S1 = s1 and S2 = s2 simultaneously:
                              X                                           P(T = t|S1 = s1 ∧ S2 = s2 )
       I(T : S1 , S2 ) =              P(T = t, S1 = s1 , S2 = s2 ) log2                               .
                           t,s1 ,s2
                                                                                   P(T = t)

Makkeh et al. (2021) build on this logic and define redundancy as an average measure for how the
beliefs about the target event T = t need to be updated if instead it is only known that S1 = s1 or
S2 = s2 have occurred:
                               X                                             P(T = t|S1 = s1 ∨ S2 = s2 )
      I∩sx (T : S1 , S2 ) =              P(T = t, S1 = s1 , S2 = s2 ) log2                               .
                              t,s1 ,s2
                                                                                      P(T = t)

For more than two source variables si (where i is an index enumerating the set W  of source
                                                                                        V variables),
the term to condition on becomes a disjunction between conjunctions of the form a∈α i∈a Si = si
for the redundancy associated with the antichain α. The atoms Π can then be computed from these
redundancies via a Moebius inversion, as laid out in detail in Gutknecht et al. (2021).
The definition is symmetric with respect to permutation of the sources, fulfills a target chain rule and
is differentiable with respect to the underlying probability distribution (Makkeh et al., 2021), which
makes it a suitable definition for optimizing objective functions.

A.3    C OMPUTE R ESOURCES

For the figures in this paper, we performed a total of seven hyperparameter optimizations: Three
TPE optimizations and three CMA-ES optimizations of MNIST objective function parameter and a
single CMA-ES optimization for the CIFAR-10 task. Each of these optimizations took ≤ 12 hours
to compute on a HPC cluster node with 32 cpu cores and two NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 40 GB of
VRAM each.
Including evaluation runs and earlier computations not shown in the results, we estimate to have
utilized a total of 200 hours of compute time on a compute node equivalent to the one described
earlier.

A.4    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND M ODEL PARAMETERS

We implemented infomorphic networks as a flexible and efficient python package using py-
torch (Paszke et al., 2019) for automatic differentiation of the local goal functions. Furthermore, the
optuna (Akiba et al., 2019) package was used to compute the TPE and CMA-ES hyperparameter
optimizations as well as the computation of the parameter importance via the mean decrease in
impurity.
In this paper, we use the MNIST (LeCun et al., 2015) and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2012) datasets.
The MNIST dataset consists of 70,000 grayscale images of handwritten digits, each sized 28x28
pixels. The dataset is split into a training set of 60,000 samples and a test set of 10,000 samples. The
CIFAR-10 dataset consists of 60,000 images with three color channels and a resolution of 32x32
pixels. Of the 60,000 images, 50,000 are in the training set and 10,000 are in the test set. For each of
our training runs with either dataset, 20% of the training set samples are withheld randomly to be
used for validation.
The framework and the code to reproduce the results of this work are available under
https://github.com/Priesemann-Group/Infomorphic_Networks.
The parameters used to train the models shown in Fig. 3 are listed in Table 1. The backpropagation
model was trained to optimize the cross-entropy loss between the prediction and the true label.


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Model and training parameters for the models shown in Fig. 3. *The effect of different batch
sizes is analyzed in Fig. 10. **The effect of the number of bins is analyzed in Fig. 11

  Parameter                   Backprop Model       Hidden Layer               Output Layer
  NEpochs                            100                    100                   100
  NBatch                            1024                  1024*                  1024*
  Optimizer                         Adam                  Adam                   Adam
  Learning rate η                   0.001                  0.002                 0.003
  Weight decay                       0.0                 0.00035               0.00015
  Number of bins per dim.             -                    20**                   20**
  Binning ranges                      -                  (-20,20)              adaptive
  Objective function            cross-entropy          trivariate γ   γ = (−0.2, 0.1, 1.0, 0.1, 0.0)T


A.5   M ODEL DYNAMICS D URING T RAINING

As a measure for the dynamics of the neurons during training, we introduce the self-cosine distance
of the feedforward receptive field as
                                                    (t−1)    (t)
                                                   wF     · wF
                                    Dc(t) = 1 −                                                     (4)
                                                   w (t−1)
                                                  ∥w F       w (t)
                                                           ∥∥w F ∥

where w F corresponds to feedforward weights of a single neuron of the hidden layer. The median
           (t)
value of Dc for the hidden neurons of a trivariate model are shown in Fig. 5. While the self-cosine
distance consistently increases with layer size in the dense setups, it does not increase in the sparse
setup after a layer size of 100 neurons, which is also the number of lateral connections in all of the
larger sparse layers.


Figure 5: The median self-cosine distance of trivariate neurons for different layer sizes during the
course of training in a dense (left) and a sparse (right) lateral connected setup.


A.6   O PTIMIZED O BJECTIVE F UNCTIONS FOR THE T RIVARIATE N EURONS

To support the trivariate objective function that was obtained using hyperparameter optimization, we
repeated the optimizations three times for both, the TPE sampler and the CMA-ES sampler, with
parameter values being limited to the interval γi ∈ [−1, 1]. The resulting objective functions are
illustrated in Fig. 6. While the objective functions that were optimized with the TPE sampler included
all γ parameters, the optimization with the CMA-ES sampler was only performed for the parameters
that describe PID-atoms while the parameter for the residual entropy was set to 0. This was done
because we observed a strong correlation between the parameter for the unique information of the
feedforward input and the residual entropy which both had to be small. In the figure, the respective


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


values are set 0. In the figure, we also illustrate the mean decrease impurity score which is a measure
for the importance of a parameter.



                     TPE Sampler                                                     CMA-ES Sampler

        Parameter Value               Parameter Importance          Parameter Value                  Parameter Importance


            94.7 %                                                         95.4 %


            93.9 %                                                         94.4 %


            94.7 %                                                         95.4 %
        parameter value          mean decrease impurity             parameter value             mean decrease impurity

  1.0         0.0         1.0   0.0                      max 1.0               0.0       1.0   0.0                      max



Figure 6: The three objective functions shown in the first column were obtained by utilizing the TPE
sampler while the objective functions in the third column were obtained with the CMA-ES sampler.
The performance illustrated below each of the objective functions corresponds to the maximum
validation accuracy during optimization. The column next to the objective functions shows the
corresponding mean decrease impurity score of the corresponding goal parameter as a measure for
the importance of the parameters. While the objective functions obtained with CMA-ES have a
higher maximum validation accuracy than the goals obtained with the TPE, we observed that the
first objective function obtained with the TPE sampler (top-left) outperformed the others in terms of
median validation accuracy for larger layer sizes, which is why we used this objective function for
the main results.


A.7     T RIVARIATE C ONSISTENCY E QUATIONS


For arbitrary numbers of sources, the PID consistency equations can be written as


                                                                  X
                                                 I(Y : a) =             Πα .                                                (5)
                                                                  α⊆a


                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In particular, the seven consistency equations for three input variables F , C and L can be written as
        I(Y : F ) = Π{F } + Π{F }{C} + Π{F }{L} + Π{F }{CL} + Π{F }{C}{L}
        I(Y : C) = Π{C} + Π{F }{C} + Π{C}{L} + Π{C}{F L} + Π{F }{C}{L}
        I(Y : L) = Π{L} + Π{F }{L} + Π{C}{L} + Π{L}{F C} + Π{F }{C}{L}
      I(Y : F, C) = Π{F } + Π{C} + Π{F }{C} + Π{F }{L} + Π{C}{L} + Π{F }{CL}
                  + Π{C}{F L} + Π{L}{F C} + Π{F C}{F L}{CL} + Π{F C}{F L} + Π{F C}{CL}
                  + Π{F }{C}{L} + Π{F C}
      I(Y : F, L) = Π{F } + Π{L} + Π{F }{C} + Π{F }{L} + Π{C}{L} + Π{F }{CL}
                  + Π{C}{F L} + Π{L}{F C} + Π{F C}{F L}{CL} + Π{F C}{F L} + Π{F L}{CL}
                                                                                                               (6)
                  + Π{F }{C}{L} + Π{F L}
      I(Y : C, L) = Π{C} + Π{L} + Π{F }{C} + Π{F }{L} + Π{C}{L} + Π{F }{CL}
                  + Π{C}{F L} + Π{L}{F C} + Π{F C}{F L}{CL} + Π{F C}{CL} + Π{F L}{CL}
                  + Π{F }{C}{L} + Π{CL}
  I(Y : F, C, L) = Π{F } + Π{C} + Π{L} + Π{F }{C} + Π{F }{L} + Π{C}{L}
                  + Π{F }{CL} + Π{C}{F L} + Π{L}{F C} + Π{F C}{F L}{CL} + Π{F C}{CL}
                  + Π{F L}{CL} + Π{F C}{F L} + Π{F }{C}{L} + Π{F C} + Π{F L} + Π{F L}
                  + Π{F CL} .

A.8    T HE ATOMS OF THE PARTIAL I NFORMATION D ECOMPOSITION FOR T HREE S OURCE
       VARIABLES AND THEIR I NTERPRETATION

To improve the clarity and intuition for the atoms of the partial information decomposition with
three source variables, Fig. 7 shows a larger version of decomposition diagram already shown in
Fig. 2.C. As a guide for the reader, the meaning of the different information atoms are listed in Table 2.
Additionally, Table 3 explicitly lists the goal parameter values found via optimization together with
their interpretation.

                                                                I(Y : C)
                           {FC}{FL}{CL}                                                         {F}{C}{L}

                                                                 {CL}
                                                                           {FC
                                                                                     }{C
                                                                            {C             L}
                                                                                     }
                                                                     {C
                                      L}


                                                                          }{F
                                     {F


                                                                                L}
                                                              {F}{C}
                    I(Y : F)                                                                            H(Y)
                                                    {F}{CL}


                                              {F}                          {C}{L}
                                      {F


                                                              {F}{L}             }
                                          C


                                                                          {FC
                                          }{F


                                                                     {L}
                                     {F

                                              L}
                                      C


                                                                             {L}
                                       }


                                                                                    L}
                                                                                }{C
                                              {FC                           {FL
                                                    L}
                                                                                                     Hres


                                                                I(Y : L)
            Figure 7: Larger version of decomposition diagram already shown in Fig. 2.


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: A list of all atoms that are part of the Partial Information Decomposition with three source
variables and their meaning.

   Atom (ΠAntichain )    Meaning
      Π{F }{C}{L}        information that is redundant in all of the three sources
        Π{F }{C}         redundant information between feedforward and context input
        Π{F }{L}         redundant information between feedforward and lateral input
        Π{C}{L}          redundant information between context and lateral input
       Π{F }{CL}         information provided by both, the feedforward input and the synergy
                         between the context and the lateral input
       Π{C}{F L}         information provided by both, the context input and the synergy between
                         the feedforward and the lateral input
       Π{L}{F C}         information provided by both, the lateral input and the synergy between
                         the feedforward and the context input
          Π{F }          unique information provided by the feedforward input
          Π{C}           unique information provided by the context input
          Π{L}           unique information provided by the lateral input
    Π{F C}{F L}{CL}      information redundantly provided by each of the pairwise synergies
      Π{F C}{F L}        information provided by both, the synergy between the feedforward and
                         the context input and the synergy between the feedforward and the lateral
                         input
      Π{F C}{CL}         information provided by both, the synergy between the feedforward and
                         the context input and the synergy between the context and the lateral
                         input
      Π{F L}{CL}         information provided by both, the synergy between the feedforward and
                         the lateral input and the synergy between the context and the lateral input
         Π{F C}          synergy between the feedforward input and the context input
         Π{F L}          synergy between the feedforward input and the lateral input
         Π{CL}           synergy between the context input and the lateral input
        Π{F CL}          information encoded by all input sources synergistically



Table 3: The four most important non-zero goal parameters found through optimization on MNIST
and ablation lead to interpretable requirements on each neuron’s local information processing. Note
that the optimization was performed with parameter values being limited to the interval γi ∈ [−1, 1].

 parameter    definition               value    interpretation of local information processing goal
 γ{F }{C}     redundancy between       0.98     maximize information that is provided both by
              F and C                           feedforward AND context but not by other
                                                neurons—and thus relevant for the task
 γ{F }{L}     redundancy between       -0.99    minimize information that is redundant with other
              F and L                           neurons, but NOT provided by the context—and
                                                thus not relevant for the task
 γ{F }{C}{L} redundancy between         0.33    moderately maximize information that is redun-
             F , C and L                        dant with other neurons AND the context—thus
                                                relevant, but already encoded
 γ{F C}{F L} redundancy between        -0.97    minimize synergistic information that requires F
             synergies requiring F              and either C or L to be recovered


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Baseline Models


             Comparison of Heuristic Models                     Comparison of Optimized Models


Figure 8: An overview over the training and test performances of the heuristic (left) and optimized
(right) models with different model structures, neuron models and objective functions as well as the
performances of some baseline models. In the bivariate models, only one of the non driving inputs
(context or lateral) and the neurons optimized the heuristic objective functions illustrated in Fig. 2.D.
The corresponding optimized objectives were optimized with the CMA-ES sampler similar to the
trivariate objective function.


A.9    R ECURRENCE OF THE H IDDEN L AYER

To perform an information decomposition which includes the information of the lateral activity,
we include lateral connections within the hidden layer as illustrated in Fig. 3.A. As described in
Appendix A.1, we only perform two iterations within the hidden layer i.e.,one iteration to compute
the activity of the neurons within the layer and a second iteration to include this activity in the
final output of the neurons. Therefore, the lateral activity contributes to the neurons output. Due to
the stochasticity of the neurons, the lateral input will never fully converge. The continuous output
probabilities converge already after the second single iteration with only minor changes in the output
probabilities of the order of 10−4 . This is due to the small influence of the lateral input on the output
which is limited to 0.1 σ(2F L) i.e., a maximum change of ±0.1 in the activation.

A.10    D EEP I NFOMORPHIC N ETWORKS

A major factor in the success in many neural network architectures is their layered structure, allowing
the network to process the relevant information in successive steps to make them more accessible to
the final output layer. For this reason, scaling infomorphic networks to multiple hidden layers is the
canonical next step for making them applicable to more complex tasks.
In preliminary experiments we found that networks with more hidden layers work out-of-the-box
(without any further optimization of the goal or other hyperparameters) and perform equally well
or slightly better than comparable shallower networks. We provide two examples: First, networks
with layer sizes 800-200-10 and 600-200-200-10 (each layer receiving the label as context) reach
a mean final test accuracy of 97.2 % and 97.1 % on MNIST. This matches the performance of
architecture 1000-10 (setup 2) with a slightly smaller model complexity (same number of neurons,


                                                   22
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     0.930            0.935      0.940             0.945    0.950     0.955

                    (F)(C)(L)   Gamma Modification
                                   Set 0
                       (F)(C)      Reduced by 10%
                                   Increased by 10%
                                   Reduced by 0.1
                       (F)(L)
                                   Increased by 0.1

                       (C)(L)


                      (F)(CL)


                      (C)(FL)


                      (L)(FC)


                          (F)
Modified Gamma


                          (C)


                          (L)


                 (FC)(FL)(CL)


                     (FC)(FL)


                    (FC)(CL)


                     (FL)(CL)


                        (FC)


                         (FL)


                        (CL)


                       (FCL)


                       H_res

                                     0.930            0.935      0.940              0.945   0.950     0.955
                                                              Final Validation Accuracy


 Figure 9: To estimate the importance of the different parameters of the trivariate objective function,
 we modified individual parameters of the trivariate objective function. The performance change
 induced by setting the parameters to 0 was already shown in Fig. 4.B and was used for the results
 shown in Fig. 4.C. Additionally, we changed the individual goal parameter relative to the parameter
 strength (±10%), but also in an absolute manner (±0.1) to get a better intuition about the importance
 of the fine tuning of the parameters.


  fewer parameters). Second, an architecture of 1600-400-10 (each layer receiving label and feedback
  from the output layer as context) reaches a mean final test accuracy of 97.7 %, outperforming the
  performance of 2000-10 (setup 2) with 97.5 %. These results provide evidence that stacking multiple
  layers works in principle.
  In subsequent work, we will optimize the goal function parameters for a feedback setup to evaluate
  the efficacy of this approach and uncover differences to the setup with the label as context signal.
  Furthermore, we will conduct an investigation into how the optimal goal parameters differ between
  individual hidden layers of a deeper network.
 As shown in figure 2.D we now created the goal function for the trivariate neurons by maximizing
 the atom that corresponds to the overlap of the two bivariate atoms. This atom corresponds to the
 redundant information between the feedforward and the contextual input, that is uniquely provided
 by the two sources and not by the lateral input, resulting in the heuristic goal function of the form
 Gtriv = Π{F }{C} . It is important to note, that even if this goal looks identical to the bivariate goal that


                                                                 23
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   maximizes the redundant information between F and C, it is different as the meaning of the atoms
   depends on the number of sources despite the identical notation.

   A.11              Final Validation Error in %     BATCH S IZE AND N UMBER OF B INS

                                                   5.4                                                                    100
                                                                                                                                                                   Batch size
                                                   5.2


                                                                                                       Validation Error
                                                                                                                                                                        1024
                                                                                                                                                                        2048
                                                   5.0
                                                                                                                                                                        4096
                                                   4.8
                                                                                                                          10 1
                                                   4.6

                                                   4.4
                                                         1024       2048     4096                                                1        10       100     1000
                                                                Batch size                                                                     Epoch

   Figure 10: To evaluate whether a batch size of 1024 is sufficient for estimating the probability
   distributions required for information decomposition, we conducted additional experiments with the
   trivariate model. These experiments utilized the optimized goal function, and a hidden layer size of
   Nhid = 100, while varying the batch size. Each configuration was run in 10 different initializations
   and trained for 1000 epochs to ensure convergence, as demonstrated in the right figure. The left
   figure reveals that performance remains consistent across different batch sizes. However, models with
   smaller batch sizes converge faster, reducing the computational cost of optimization. Consequently, a
   batch size of 1024 appears adequate for the requirements of this study.


                                                                                                         100
Final Validation Error in %


                                7                                                                                                                               Number of Bins
                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                    Validation Error


                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                6                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                5                                                                      10 1                                                             32

                                4
                                                     2    4     8     16     32                                             1        10         100      1000
                                                         Number of Bins                                                                   Epoch
   Figure 11: Building on our analysis of the dependence of training on batch size, we conducted
   similar experiments, this time varying the number of bins used to estimate probability distributions.
   Theoretically, using too few bins results in greater information loss, as more distinct samples are
   grouped into the same bin. Conversely, too many bins make it challenging to reliably estimate
   information-theoretic quantities. As shown in the figure, a high number of bins accelerates con-
   vergence, while too few bins introduce noise into the training process. Consistent with theoretical
   expectations, the optimal number of bins falls within a balanced range.


                                                                                                                            24
