Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ECENTRALIZED S PORADIC F EDERATED L EARNING :
A U NIFIED A LGORITHMIC F RAMEWORK WITH C ON -
VERGENCE G UARANTEES

 Shahryar Zehtabi                         Dong-Jun Han                        Rohit Parasnis
 Purdue University                        Yonsei University                   MIT
 szehtabi@purdue.edu                      djh@yonsei.ac.kr                    rohit100@mit.edu

 Seyyedali Hosseinalipour                                Christopher G. Brinton
 University at Buffalo (SUNY)                            Purdue University
 alipour@buffalo.edu                                     cgb@purdue.edu


                                             A BSTRACT
         Decentralized federated learning (DFL) captures FL settings where both (i) model
         updates and (ii) model aggregations are exclusively carried out by the clients with-
         out a central server. Existing DFL works have mostly focused on settings where
         clients conduct a fixed number of local updates between local model exchanges,
         overlooking heterogeneity and dynamics in communication and computation ca-
         pabilities. In this work, we propose Decentralized Sporadic Federated Learning
         (DSpodFL), a DFL methodology built on a generalized notion of sporadicity in
         both local gradient and aggregation processes. DSpodFL subsumes many exist-
         ing decentralized optimization methods under a unified algorithmic framework by
         modeling the per-iteration (i) occurrence of gradient descent at each client and (ii)
         exchange of models between client pairs as arbitrary indicator random variables,
         thus capturing heterogeneous and time-varying computation/communication sce-
         narios. We analytically characterize the convergence behavior of DSpodFL for
         both convex and non-convex models and for both constant and diminishing learn-
         ing rates, under mild assumptions on the communication graph connectivity, data
         heterogeneity across clients, and gradient noises. We show how our bounds re-
         cover existing results from decentralized gradient descent as special cases. Exper-
         iments demonstrate that DSpodFL consistently achieves improved training speeds
         compared with baselines under various system settings.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Traditional works in federated learning (FL) have focused on a conventional вҖңstar topologyвҖқ con-
figuration where clients are connected directly to a central server (KonecМҢnyМҖ et al., 2016; Bonawitz
et al., 2019). In this setup (Fig. 1a), FL iterates between (i) client-side local model updates, typically
via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on local datasets, and (ii) server-side model aggregations.
However, a central server may not always be present/feasible for synchronization, e.g., in the grow-
ing body of direct peer-to-peer networks (Brinton et al., 2024). To address this, recent research has
proposed decentralized federated learning (DFL) (Koloskova et al., 2020), replacing the serverвҖҷs role
in FL aggregations with distributed optimization techniques (NedicМҒ et al., 2018). This introduces a
new challenge in DFL as clients need to reach consensus while optimizing their local models via
gradient descent (Figs. 1b-1d). Towards this end, clients exchange models with their neighbors over
the decentralized topology to form aggregations through gossip protocols (Huang et al., 2022).
FL settings are often dominated by heterogeneity and dynamics in various dimensions, including
client processing capabilities, communication capabilities, and local dataset statistics varying across
clients and over time (Li et al., 2020). This causes (i) computing gradients at every iteration to be
costlier (e.g., in terms of delay) at clients with weaker/slower processing units, and (ii) higher trans-
mission delays for clients with low-quality communication links (e.g., lower available bandwidth or
transmit power), among other impacts (Wang et al., 2021). Existing works in centralized FL have
addressed these issues by letting the number of local SGD steps between aggregations vary across


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          "                       рқ‘Ј! " = 1     рқ‘Ј! " = 1 вҲҖрқ‘ҳ рқ‘ҡрқ‘ңрқ‘‘ рқҗ· вү  0      рқ‘Ј! " = 1       рқ”ј рқ‘Ј! " = рқ‘‘!(")
    рқ‘Ј!        = 1 вҲҖрқ‘ҳ рқ‘ҡрқ‘ңрқ‘‘ рқҗ· вү  0                                                                             dynamic
          "                       рқ‘Ј$!#"   =1   рқ‘Ј-!#" = 1 вҲҖрқ‘ҳ рқ‘ҡрқ‘ңрқ‘‘ рқҗ· = 0   рқ”ј рқ‘Ј%!#" = рқ‘Ҹ!#    рқ”ј рқ‘Ј%!%" = рқ‘Ҹ!%"
    рқ‘Ј-!       = 1 вҲҖрқ‘ҳ рқ‘ҡрқ‘ңрқ‘‘ рқҗ· = 0                                                                            heterogeneous



                                                                                                           local update

                                                                                                            inter-client
                                                                                                          communication


(a) FL with a central server     (b) DGD        (c) DFedAvg              (d) RG         (e) DSpodFL (Ours)

Figure 1: Illustrations of centralized FL (Fig. 1a) and different consensus-based decentralized optimization
algorithms (Figs. 1b-1e). In decentralized gradient descent (DGD, Fig. 1b), local updates and inter-client com-
munications occur at every iteration of training. Fig. 1c depicts decentralized local SGD, or DFedAvg, where
communications occur only every D-th iteration. Communication and computation operations are carried out
in a deterministic pattern (solid lines, thickness representing relative frequency) in Figs. 1b and 1c. Random-
ized gossip (RG, Fig. 1d) adopts sporadic communications for aggregations. DSpodFL in Fig. 1e considers
sporadicity in both communications and computations (dashed lines), where the number of local SGDs and the
period of model aggregations are heterogeneous across clients and vary over time.

clients (Maranjyan et al., 2022), and also over training rounds (Yang et al., 2022), i.e., to deal with
differing and/or varying capabilities while maintaining convergence guarantees.
Motivation and key challenges. In the fully decentralized setting, by contrast, there has not yet
been a comprehensive study of how different forms of heterogeneity and dynamics jointly impact
the FL performance. Integrating these factors into DFL makes the analysis challenging because there
are multiple client aggregators without a central coordinator which must reach consensus under the
following conditions: (i) the aggregation periods across the system become heterogeneous as they
depend on the number of local SGDs conducted by each clientвҖҷs neighbors prior to sharing; and (ii)
these periods become time-varying depending on dynamics in communication/computation resource
availability of clients/links. Most existing DFL algorithms (Koloskova et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2022;
Mishchenko et al., 2022) have not taken these factors into account, resulting in longer times to
achieve a target accuracy in the presence of heterogeneous and time-varying resources. We thus aim
to answer the following key question in this paper:
  How can we integrate heterogeneity and dynamics of local SGDs and aggregations into decentral-
  ized FL to capture the impact of resource availability while maintaining convergence guarantees?
Contributions. We answer this question by developing a generalized algorithmic framework for
DFL that allows local model aggregations and transmissions to happen after any arbitrary number
of local updates. We refer to this as sporadicity in client participation, which enables capturing the
impacts of heterogeneity and dynamics in DFL. Our methodology, Decentralized Sporadic Federated
Learning (DSpodFL), encapsulates the joint effects of (i) sporadicity in local client computations
and (ii) sporadicity in inter-client communications arising from resource variations over clients and
time. In doing so, DSpodFL captures the impact of different numbers of local SGDs and different
aggregation periods across clients, and allows for these values to vary over the training process, not
constraining them to any prefixed deterministic pattern. We make the following novel contributions:

вҖў Sporadic DFL framework capturing resource heterogeneity and dynamics: We formulate
  DSpodFL by modeling the occurrences of (i) a local SGD step at each client and (ii) an exchange
  of models between a pair of clients in each training iteration as arbitrary indicator random vari-
  ables. This enables clients to conduct these processes intermittently according to their available
  resources without delaying DFL training. As illustrated in Fig. 1, DSpodFL (Fig. 1e) subsumes
  multiple decentralized optimization methods from existing research (Fig. 1b-1d), which can be
  seen as handling special cases of our generalized notion of sporadicity.
вҖў Convergence analysis under mild assumptions for convex and non-convex settings: We analyt-
  ically characterize the convergence behavior of DSpodFL for both strongly-convex and non-
  convex loss functions, under mild assumptions on the network graph, data heterogeneity, and
  gradient noises. We conduct our analysis for both constant (Thms. 4.11, 4.12) and diminishing
  learning rates (App. I, G), revealing conditions under which zero optimality/stationarity gap can be
  achieved. The introduction of sporadicity to DFL makes the analysis challenging, since both local
  SGDs and model aggregations occur without any predetermined pattern. We show how our results
  recover the convergence rates of existing DFL algorithms under special cases of sporadicity.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                          Properties of Algorithmic Framework Assumptions and Theoretical Results
                                                     Dynamic General. Loose    Last    Convex &
        Paper            Fully Sporadic Sporadic Resource     Data    Graph Iterates Non-Convex
                         Decen. SGDs       Aggr.
                                                       Het.   Het.a Conn. b Conv. c Analysis
Koloskova et al. (2020)    вң“                 вң“                 вң“       вң“                   вң“
Maranjyan et al. (2022)            вң“                                            вң“
   Yang et al. (2022)              вң“         вң“          вң“
   Sun et al. (2022)
                           вң“                                                    вң“
Mishchenko et al. (2022)
        Ours              вң“        вң“         вң“          вң“      вң“       вң“        вң“          вң“
   a
     In Assumptions 4.1-(c) and 4.2-(b), we consider a more general/milder data heterogeneity assumption
based on two parameters Оҙ and О¶. These assumptions are not restricting the gradient norms to a constant bound.
   b
     In Assumption 4.4, we neither require the underlying network graph to be static, nor B-connected.
   c
     Discussed in Sec. 4.5, and Appendix F.4(proof of Theorem 4.11 on convergence of convex models).
      Table 1: Summary of eight key properties of our paper compared to representative related works.
вҖў Experiments in heterogeneous and time-varying DFL settings: Our numerical experiments demon-
  strate that DSpodFL reaches target accuracies with significantly smaller delays compared to DFL
  baselines. Further, we find that DSpodFL consistently outperforms the baselines as the degrees
  of data heterogeneity, resource heterogeneity and dynamics, and the network properties vary.


2    R ELATED W ORKS
Table 1 summarizes key contributions of our work relative to closely related literature in centralized
and decentralized FL. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to consider sporadic SGDs
and aggregations simultaneously, capturing heterogeneous and time-varying resources in the fully
decentralized setting. Below, we discuss related works along DFLвҖҷs two key processes.
Local SGDs. Several works in centralized FL (Li et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2019; Karimireddy et al.,
2020; Woodworth et al., 2020; Mishchenko et al., 2022) proposed algorithms with multiple local up-
dates between consecutive model aggregations, assuming fixed number of local SGDs across clients.
In Maranjyan et al. (2022), an FL method is proposed where at each round of training, the number of
SGD steps differs for each client considering resource heterogeneity. However, the varying number
of local SGD steps across clients remains fixed throughout the training process. To alleviate this
issue, Anarchic FL was proposed Yang et al. (2022); similar to our notion of sporadicity, each client
chooses when to conduct computations/communications freely on its own throughout the training
process, generalizing all prior work discussed above. Compared to these works in centralized FL,
we focus on sporadicity in the decentralized setting. This introduces new challenges to our analysis,
including dealing with multiple client aggregators and the consensus process among the clients.
A few recent works have also considered decentralized counterparts of fixed local SGD methods
(Wang & Joshi, 2018; Sun et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024), without considering
the heterogeneity and dynamics of client resources. Compared to these works, our focus is on
the sporadic case in DFL, modeling heterogeneous number of local SGD steps for different clients
and allowing them to be time-varying as well. As a result, DSpodFL subsumes prior methods in
decentralized fixed local SGD as a special case. We will further show in Sec. 4 how our convergence
results (Thms. 4.11, 4.12) recover DGD-like methods when there is no sporadicity in SGDs. Finally,
we note that our contribution takes the consideration of sporadic SGDs a step further, by analyzing
the joint effects of sporadic SGDs and sporadic aggregations in DFL.
Consensus strategies. Sporadicity in communications for distributed consensus formation has been
studied in randomized gossip (RG) algorithms. Several works Boyd et al. (2006); Even et al. (2021);
Pu & NedicМҒ (2021) study gossip algorithms with two clients conducting consensus at each iteration,
while (Koloskova et al., 2019; Kong et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022) allow more
general mixing matrices. Saha et al. (2024) further deals with privacy constraints while implement-
ing gossip communications. In another direction, Srivastava & Nedic (2011); Lian et al. (2018);
Bornstein et al. (2022) have studied asynchronous DFL, where the communication delay between
inter-client model exchanges can be modeled as sporadic aggregations. The authors of Koloskova
et al. (2020) unify several existing DGD algorithms, under similar generalized data heterogeneity
and graph connectivity assumptions that we consider in our analysis. However, none of these works
in sporadic aggregations have considered sporadic SGDs in their methodology, making our work
among the first to analyze the efficacy of the joint consideration of sporadic SGDs and aggrega-
tions. A contemporary of our work Even et al. (2024) has also unified several DFL algorithms, but


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for the asynchronous setting without consideration for time variations in resource heterogeneity. In
this respect, compared to all prior works, our modeling using general indicator random variables
(Sec. 3.1) enables us to jointly incorporate heterogeneous and time-varying resource availability of
clients. This approach leads to more generalized results accompanied by new challenges in studying
convergence, making both our algorithmic framework and analysis unique.

3     D ECENTRALIZED S PORADIC F EDERATED L EARNING
In this section, we formalize our DSpodFL algorithmic framework and the notion of sporadicity. A
summary of notation used throughout this paper can be found in Appendix A.

3.1   DS P O D FL: D ECENTRALIZED FL WITH S PORADICITY
We consider a DFL system with m clients M := {1, . . . , m} and a series of training iterations k =
1, ..., K. The clients are connected through a time-varying communication graph G (k) = (M, E (k) ),
where (i, j) вҲҲ E (k) if clients i and j can directly communicate at iteration k. Define G = (M, E)
as a graph such that E (k) вҠӮ E for all k вүҘ 0. The goal of DFL is for clients to discover the globally
optimal model ОёвӢҶ = arg minОёвҲҲRn F (Оё) for a given global loss function F (Оё). To do so, each client
i вҲҲ M updates its own version Оёi of the model by (i) conducting SGDs on its local loss Fi (Оё) and
(ii) mixing its model with those received from its neighbors. We have
                                   1 X                        X
                          F (Оё) =         Fi (Оё), Fi (Оё) =         в„“(x,y) (Оё),                    (1)
                                   m
                                    iвҲҲM                             (x,y)вҲҲDi

in which Di is the local dataset of client i вҲҲ M, (x, y) denotes a data point with features x and label
y, and в„“(x,y) (Оё) is the loss incurred by ML model Оё on a data point (x, y).
Goal and motivation. Eq. 1 is the conventional objective function of FL, which we consider opti-
mizing for the decentralized setting under sporadicity. Specifically, we aim for each client to arrive
at Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёm = ОёвӢҶ . This means that the clients need to reach consensus through the local
exchange process alongside implementing local SGD (Nedic, 2020). Due to heterogeneity and time
variance in communication/computation resources, we allow for autonomy in the number of SGDs
conducted and in the periods between model sharing across client pairs. This will make the process
particularly challenging to analyze too.
Algorithmic framework. DSpodFL achieves the above goal by modeling sporadicity in client par-
ticipation for DFL, decoupling the number of SGD iterations conducted by a client from the time
between model exchanges with its neighbors and the resulting consensus mixing process. Specifi-
cally, at each iteration k, client iвҖҷs update is modeled in the following generalized manner:

                       (k+1)      (k)              (k)     (k)     (k)          (k) (k)
                                          X
                      Оёi      = Оёi +          rij Оёj вҲ’ Оёi        vМӮij вҲ’ Оұ(k) gi vi ,          (2)
                                         jвҲҲM
                                                                        |      {z      }
                                         |          {z               }    Sporadic SGD
                                             Sporadic aggregation
        (k)
where  Оёi   is the vector of model parameters of client i at iteration k, and gi(k) = вҲҮFi (Оёi(k) ) + Пө(k)
                                                                                                      i
is the local stochastic gradient with SGD noise Пө(k)i . In Eq. 2, vi
                                                                    (k)
                                                                        вҲҲ {0, 1} is a random indicator
variable, capturing the sporadicity in SGD iterations, which is 1 if the client performs SGD in that
                        (k)
iteration. Similarly, vМӮij  вҲҲ {0, 1} is a binary random variable capturing the sporadicity in model
aggregations, which indicates whether the link (i, j) is being used for communications at iteration
            (k)     (k)       (k)
k or not (vМӮij  = vМӮji and vМӮii = 0). ri,j вҲҲ [0, 1] is the mixing weight assigned to link (i, j), for
which the only requirement is that the mixing matrix R = [rij ]1вүӨi,jвүӨm is doubly stochastic. For
example, with the Metropolis-Hastings heuristic (Boyd et al., 2004), rij = 1/(1 + max {|Ni |, |Nj |})
when j вҲҲ Ni , and 0 if j вҲҲ  / Ni , in which Ni is the set of neighbors of client i in the physical graph
G = (M, E). Setting rii = 1 вҲ’ jвҲҲM rij and noting that rij = rji , i.e., R being symmetric,
                                      P
completes the design of a doubly stochastic mixing matrix R. The full pseudocode of DSpodFL
implementing Metropolis-Hastings mixing weights is given in Appendix B.
                                                                           (k)   (k)
The update rule of Eq. 2 with two different sporadicity terms vi and vМӮij , each capturing both
heterogeneous and time-varying characteristics, has not been considered in the DFL literature.

                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   K EY TAKEAWAYS FROM DS P O D FL
Interpreting sporadicity. The novelty of DSpodFL in the integration of the two sporadicity terms
(i.e, vi(k) and vМӮij
                  (k)
                      ) to model the impacts of resource heterogeneity and dynamics in DFL. Specifi-
cally, client i may set vi(k) = 0 for computation efficiency in iterations where computing a new SGD
is not feasible or does not significantly benefit the statistical/inference performance of the decen-
                                                          (k)
tralized system. Similarly, a pair of clients can set vМӮij    = 0 for communication efficiency when
using link (i, j) is too costly at iteration k relative to local resource availability and/or expected
performance impact. These two key parameters vi(k) and vМӮij    (k)
                                                                   can vary arbitrarily over the training
process according to decisions made by clients independently over time. This incorporation of spo-
radicity increases the degrees of freedom DSpodFL accounts for, thereby distinguishing it from the
literature in Sec. 2 (See Appendix P.2 for further remarks).
Unifying existing work. By introducing these two sporadicity terms, DSpodFL subsumes other
decentralized learning algorithms, including those shown in Fig. 1. Specifically, DSpodFL reduces
to DGD (Fig. 1b), DFedAvg (Fig. 1c), and RG (Fig. 1d) for specific configurations of vi(k) and vМӮij
                                                                                                 (k)
                                                                                                     .
However, these two sporadicity terms introduce several novel challenges when analyzing conver-
gence due to their creation of uncorrelated aggregation periods in DFL, which we address in Sec. 4.

3.3   M ATRIX F ORM OF U PDATES IN DS P O D FL

To facilite our convergence analysis, we can rewrite the update rule given in Eq. 2 compactly as
                                Оҳ(k+1) = P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) V(k) G(k) ,                                  (3)
         (k)        (k)                                                   (k)         (k)
where Оҳ and G are matrices with their rows comprised of                 (Оёi )T  and (gi )T  , respectively,
and V(k) is a diagonal matrix with vi(k) as its diagonal entries, for clients 1 вүӨ i вүӨ m. Here,
                                                                                                    (k)
G(k) = вҲҮ(k) + E(k) , where вҲҮ(k) (respectively, E(k) ) is the matrix whose i-th row is (вҲҮFi (Оёi ))T
(respectively, (Пөi(k) )T ) for 1 вүӨ i вүӨ m. The elements of P(k) = [p(k)
                                                                   ij ]           are defined as
                    (k)          (k)                  (k)
                                                                 X 1вүӨi,jвүӨm   (k)
                  pij = rij vМӮij ; i Мё= j,           pij = 1 вҲ’         rij vМӮij ; i = j.                (4)
                                                                   jвҲҲM
Note that the random matrix P(k) , by definition, is doubly stochastic and symmetric with non-
negative entries, i.e., P(k) 1 = 1 and (P(k) )T = P(k) . Finally, in our analysis, we will find it useful
                                                                           (k)
to define a row vector ОёМ„(k) as the average of model vectors Оё1(k) , ..., Оёm   across clients. Using Eq. 3,
                                      ОёМ„(k+1) = ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) gv (k) ,                                  (5)
            (k) T
                            P       (k) (k)
where (gv      ) = (1/m)       iвҲҲM gi vi .


4     C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
4.1   D EFINITIONS AND A SSUMPTIONS
Assumption 4.1 (Convex loss functions) For analysis in the strongly convex case, we assume the
local loss function Fi at each client i вҲҲ M is (a) ОІi -smooth and (b) Вөi -strongly convex. Also, (c) the
gradient diversity is measured via Оҙi > 0 and О¶i вүҘ 0 as вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi + О¶i вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ ,
 for all Оё вҲҲ Rn . We define ОІ = maxiвҲҲM ОІi , Вө = miniвҲҲM Вөi , Оҙ = maxiвҲҲM Оҙi and О¶ = maxiвҲҲM О¶i .

For the non-convex analysis in Sec. 4.5, we will replace Assumptions 4.1-(b)&(c) with the following:

Assumption 4.2 (Non-convex loss functions) The local loss function Fi at each client i вҲҲ M is
(a) ОІi -smooth. Also, (b) the gradient diversity across clients is measured via Оҙi > 0 and О¶i вүҘ 0 as
вҲҘвҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi + О¶i вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ , for all Оё вҲҲ Rn , i вҲҲ M. We let ОІ = maxiвҲҲM ОІi , Оҙ = maxiвҲҲM Оҙi
and О¶ = maxiвҲҲM О¶i .
                                                                                                     (k)
Assumption 4.3 (Random variables) For all i вҲҲ M and all k вүҘ 0, (a) The gradient noise Пөi of
each client is zero mean with bounded variance Пғi2 . We also let Пғ 2 = maxiвҲҲM Пғi2 . (b) Gradient
noise vectors Пөi(k) are uncorrelated across the clients, as are the indicator variables vi(k) . The indi-
                   (k)
cator variables vМӮij   are also uncorrelated among the network links. (c) Random variables Пө(k)   i  and
 (k)
vi are uncorrelated for all clients .


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 4.4 (Asymptotic graph connectivity) Denote the asymptotic graph union          of under-
lying time-varying communication network graphs by G = M, limKвҶ’вҲһ вҲӘK           k=0 E (k)
                                                                                         . We assume
                                                              (k)
that G is connected, and for every edge (i, j) вҲҲ G, (i, j) вҲҲ E for infinitely many iterations k.

More detailed mathematical expositions of our assumptions are provided in Appendix C. In Assump-
tions 4.1-(c)&4.2-(b), we do not make the stricter assumption of О¶ = 0 found in some works on DFL
(Sun et al., 2022; Mishchenko et al., 2022). The addition of this proximal term makes our analytical
bounds tighter as they only require a constant bound at optimal/stationary points (Lin et al., 2021).
Assumption 4.4 is milder than similar assumptions made in prior works, e.g., static connected graphs
(Sun et al., 2022; Mishchenko et al., 2022; Wang & NedicМҒ, 2023) or B-connected graphs (Nedic &
Ozdaglar, 2009). Table 1 summarizes this comparison along these and other dimensions.

Definition 4.5 We define Оһ(k) as the collection of random variables vi(r) , vМӮij       (r)
                                                                                           and Пө(r)
                                                                                                i   for all
                       (r)
i вҲҲ M, (i, j) вҲҲ E , and 0 вүӨ r вүӨ k. With this, the expected consensus rate (Koloskova
et al., 2020) can be characterized via ПҒМғ(k) , the spectral radius of the expected mixing ma-
                                       2                                     2
trix, as EОһ(k) [вҲҘP(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] вүӨ ПҒМғ(k) EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ], which we present/prove in
                                                        1
Lemma D.4-(c) and Appendix E.4-(c), respectively.
                                                                                             (k)           (k)
Definition 4.6 (Indicator variables) The expected values of variables vi                           and vМӮij are defined as
                           h     i                         h      i      h      i
                             (k)      (k)                     (k)           (k)   (k)   (k)
                      Ev(k) vi     = di ,            EvМӮ(k) vМӮij = EvМӮ(k) vМӮji = bij = bji , 2
                         i                               ij                      ji

             (k)
 in which   di вҲҲ (0, 1]  captures client iвҖҷs probability of conducting SGD, and b(k)
                                                                                  ij вҲҲ (0, 1] captures
the probability of link (i, j) being used for communication, at iteration k. We also define d(k) max =
          (k)        (k)               (k)
maxiвҲҲM di and dmin = miniвҲҲM di . Note that the probability distributions of these indicator
variables can be time-varying, allowing for an arbitrary range of profiles for vi(k) and vМӮij
                                                                                           (k)
                                                                                               .

4.2     AVERAGE M ODEL E RROR AND C ONSENSUS E RROR

To characterize the convergence behavior of DSpodFL, we first provide an upper bound on the
average model error EОһ(k) [вҲҘОёМ„(k+1) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 ] (Lemma 4.7), and also upper bound the consensus error
                              2
EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ] (Lemma 4.8), at each iteration k.

Lemma 4.7 (Average model error) (See Appendix F.1 for the proof.) Let Assumptions 4.1 and 4.3
hold. For each iteration k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound on the expected average model error:
                                     (k)                               2         (k)                               2       (k)
EОһ(k) [вҲҘОёМ„(k+1) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ2 ] вүӨ П•11 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ ] + П•12 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] + ПҲ1 ,
       (k)                                               2             (k)
                                                                       (k)
where П•11  = 1 вҲ’ ВөОұ(k) (1 + ВөОұ(k) вҲ’ (ВөОұ(k) ) ) + 2ОұВө (1 + ВөОұ(k) )(1 вҲ’ dmin )ОІ 2 ,
                         (k) (k)                                                                   (k) 2 (k)
 (k)                        dmax ОІ 2                         (k)                                      ) dmax Пғ 2
П•12 = (1 + ВөОұ(k) ) Оұ         mВө
                                         , and ПҲ1(k) = 2ОұВө (1 + ВөОұ(k) )(1 вҲ’ d(k)   2
                                                                             min )Оҙ +
                                                                                      (Оұ
                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                   .

In Lemma 4.7, the upper bound on the expected error at iteration k + 1 is expressed
                                                                        2
in terms of the scaled expected error П•(k)    11 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОёМ„
                                                              (k)
                                                                  вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ ], the scaled consensus error
  (k)                          2                                                              (k)
П•12 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] (which will be analyzed in Lemma 4.8), and the scalar ПҲ1 , all at
iteration k. We can see that this bound captures the impact of sporadicity in local SGDs at devices,
           (k)      (k)                                              (k)                    (k)
through dmin and dmax . It recovers the bound for DGD when dmin = 1, i.e., making vi = 1 for
all i вҲҲ M (e.g., see Lemma 5-b of Zehtabi et al. (2022)).

Lemma 4.8 (Consensus error) (See Appendix F.2 for the proof.) Let Assumptions 4.1, 4.3 and 4.4
hold. For each iteration k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound on the expected consensus error:
                                     2         (k)                           2         (k)                             2     (k)
EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ] вүӨ П•21 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ ] + П•22 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] + ПҲ2 ,
    1
     Our notation of EОһ(k) [ в—Ұ ] denotes the full expectation operator with respect to the random variables in
matrix Оһ(k) , i.e., EОһ(kвҲ’1) [EОҫ(k) [ в—Ұ |Оһ(kвҲ’1) ]] = EОҫ(0) [EОҫ(1) [В· В· В· EОҫ(kвҲ’1) [EОҫ(k) [ в—Ұ |Оһ(kвҲ’1) ]|Оһ(kвҲ’2) ] В· В· В· |Оҫ (0) ]].
   2             (k)      (k)
     Note that vi and vМӮij are thus Bernoulli random variables for each k. However, the expectation changes
                             (k)         (k)          (k)              (k)
over time, i.e., varying di        and bij , making vi        and vМӮij dynamic Bernoulli variables.


                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       (k)     1+ПҒМғ   (k)(k)            2           (k)      (k)             (k)          (k)   (k)        2
where П•21  = 3 1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k)
                       mdmax (Оұ(k) ) (О¶ 2 +2ОІ 2 (1вҲ’dmin )), П•22 = 1+ПҒМғ2               1+ПҒМғ
                                                                                   +3 1вҲ’     d
                                                                                        ПҒМғ(k) max
                                                                                                  (Оұ(k) ) (О¶ 2 +2ОІ 2 ),
 (k)              2 (k)         (k)
ПҲ2                        1+ПҒМғ
       = m(Оұ(k) ) dmax (3 1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k)
                                  Оҙ 2 + Пғ 2 ), and ПҒМғ(k) is defined in Definition 4.5.

Lemma 4.8 captures the impact of sporadicity in model exchanges, through ПҒМғ(k) (which is smaller
when the mixing matrix is better connected), and in SGDs. It also shows how gradient diversity
                                                                                       (k)
(О¶, Оҙ) makes the bound larger. It reduces to a bound for DGD when (a) О¶ = 0 and (b) dmin = 1 (i.e.,
 (k)                                (k)
di = 1 for all i), in turn forcing П•21 = 0 (e.g., see Lemma 5-c in Zehtabi et al. (2022)).
4.3     S UFFICIENT C ONDITION FOR C ONVERGENCE

We observe that the the average model error and consensus error from Lemmas 4.7 and 4.8 are cou-
pled. We next characterize their joint evolution and provide a condition for DSpodFL convergence.

Definition 4.9 (Error vector) We denote the error vector at iteration k as ОҪ (k) , defined as the con-
catenation of the average model error and the consensus error:
                                                                                  T
                                                2                             2
                     ОҪ (k) = EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ     , EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)       .                              (6)

Using this definition, it follows that
                                            ОҪ (k+1) вүӨ ОҰ(k) ОҪ (k) + ОЁ(k) ,                                          (7)
                 (k)                            (k)  (k)
with ОҰ(k) = [П•ij     ]1вүӨi,jвүӨ2 and ОЁ(k) = [ПҲ1 , ПҲ2 ]T . Recursively expanding the inequalities in
Eq. 7 gives us an explicit relationship between the expected model error and consensus error at each
iteration, and their initial values, which will be useful in Theorem 4.11:
                                                     k
                                                     X
                            ОҪ (k+1) вүӨ ОҰ(k:0) ОҪ (0) +    ОҰ(k:r) ОЁ(rвҲ’1) + ОЁ(k) ,                   (8)
                                                        r=1
where we have defined ОҰ(k:s) = ОҰ(k) ОҰ(kвҲ’1) В· В· В· ОҰ(s) for k > s, and ОҰ(k:k) = ОҰ(k) . Note that
                      2                    2
ОҪ (0) = [вҲҘОёМ„(0) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ , вҲҘОҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0) вҲҘ ]T .
From Eqs. 7 and 8, we can apply linear system theory to identify a sufficient condition for conver-
gence of DSpodFL: that the spectral radius of matrix ОҰ(k) is less than one, i.e., ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) < 1. In the
following proposition, we show this can be enforced through appropriate choice of learning rate.

Proposition 4.10 (Spectral radius) (See Appendix F.3 for the proof.) Let Assumptions 4.1, 4.3 and
4.4 hold. If the learning
                   (      rate satisfies the following condition for all k вүҘ 0:                    )
                                                                                1/3            2/3
      (k)            1      1      1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k)       1                 Вө                  1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k)
     Оұ < min Вө , вҲҡ (k) вҲҡ (k) вҲҡ 2                    2
                                                      ,
                                                            2     2     (k)

                                                                                        (k)         ,
                            2   3dmax   1+ПҒМғ       О¶ +2ОІ       12 О¶ +2ОІ     1вҲ’dmin               2dmax ОІ


then we have ПҒ ОҰ(k) < 1 for all k вүҘ 0, in which ПҒ(В·) denotes the spectral radius of a given matrix,
and ОҰ(k) is given in Eq. 7. The exact value of ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) is given in Appendix F.3.

Proposition 4.10 implies that limkвҶ’вҲһ ОҰ(k:0) = 0 in Eq. 8, which means the consensus and average
model errors will converge. The exact convergence rate depends on the choice of learning rate Оұ(k) .

4.4     M AIN T HEOREM AND D ISCUSSIONS FOR C ONVEX C ASE

We characterize the convergence bound of DSpodFL for the convex case in the following theorem.

Theorem 4.11 (Strongly-convex convergence result) (See Appendix F.4 for the proof.) Let As-
sumptions 4.1, 4.3 and 4.4 hold, and suppose a constant step size Оұ(k) = Оұ > 0 satisfying the con-
ditions outlined in Proposition 4.10 is employed. Let ПҒМғ = max0вүӨkвүӨK ПҒМғ(k) be the maximum expected
                                                                                            (k)
spectral radius of the mixing probabilities from Definition 4.5 and dmin = min0вүӨkвүӨK,iвҲҲM di be
the minimum of the SGD probabilities. Then, we can rewrite Eq. 8 as
                                               K+1 (0)         1
                              ОҪ (K+1) вүӨ ПҒ(ОҰ)       ОҪ +              ОЁ,                          (9)
                                                           1 вҲ’ ПҒ(ОҰ)

                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                   (k)
in which ОЁ = ОЁ(k) and ОҰ = ОҰ(k) from Eq. 7 for all k (given the bounds ПҒМғ(k) вүӨ ПҒМғ, dmax вүӨ 1 and
 (k)
dmin вүҘ dmin ), and ОҪ (k) is the error vector. This means for large enough K, we have
                                            "2                                2#

                              (K+1)      1 Вө (1 + ВөОұ)    (1 вҲ’ dmin ) Оҙ 2 + ОұПғ
                                                                            m
                      lim ОҪ          вүӨ
                                                           1+ПҒМғ 2      2
                                                                                 ,        (10)
                     KвҶ’вҲһ                2A          mОұ 3 1вҲ’   ПҒМғ Оҙ + Пғ
               2
where A = ОІВө (О“вӢҶ2 вҲ’ 1)(1 вҲ’ О“10 ) with О“0 , О“вӢҶ2 > 1 being constant scalars defined in Appendix F.3. Note
that Proposition 4.10 ensures ПҒ(ОҰ) < 1.

Discussion on convergence. The bound in Eq. 9 indicates that by using a constant step size,
DSpodFL obtains a geometric convergence rate (i.e., O(ПҒ(ОҰ)K )) as in other DFL methods
(Mishchenko et al., 2022; Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009), Eq. 10 characterizes the asymptotic optimality
gap as K вҶ’ вҲһ. We observe that this bound holds for any choice of time-varying SGD and ag-
                          (k)    (k)
gregation probabilities, di and bij through ПҒМғ(k) (see Appendix P.1), respectively. Additionally,
the optimality gap is reduced by (i) choosing a smaller learning rate Оұ and (ii) having a system
with a larger minimum SGD probability dmin . As discussed after Lemma 4.7, in the conventional
DFL setting where SGDs occur at every iteration, we have dmin = 1. In this setting, the optimality
gap in Eq. 10 would be proportional to Оұ, showing that DSpodFL recovers well-known results of
DGD-like algorithms (Maranjyan et al., 2022) in this special case of no sporadicity in local updates.
                                                          (k)
Diminishing learning rate. When diminishing step size ОұвҲҡ      is used, DSpodFL achieves zero
optimality gap with a sub-linear convergence rate O(ln K/ K), matching the rate achieved by
existing DGD-based methods (NedicМҒ & Olshevsky, 2014). See Appendix I for proofs and discussion.
Effects of sporadicity terms. Both ПҒ(ОҰ) (from Proposition 4.10) and the first term in the optimality
gap vector given in Eq. 10 can be made smaller by choosing a larger dmin = min0вүӨkвүӨK,iвҲҲM d(k)          i ,
which will result in a faster convergence rate and a lower average model error. Also, the communi-
                       (k)
cation probabilities bij   affect the bounds through the spectral radius parameter ПҒМғ (exact relationship
given in Appendix E.4). To elaborate, increasing the frequency of communications will lower the
spectral radius term ПҒМғ, leading to faster convergence and a smaller gap for the consensus error. How-
ever, this is not always desirable since choosing di and bij solely based on the convergence rate can
result in longer iteration lengths, due to resource-limited clients. As we will see in Sec. 5, choosing
di and bij considering resource availability leads to speedup in achieving performance targets.

4.5    A NALYSIS FOR N ON -C ONVEX C ASE
Our discussion so far has revolved around strongly convex loss functions. For the non-convex case,
we follow a similar roadmap for our analysis as in Sec. 4.2-4.4. The detailed supporting lemmas and
propositions can be found in Appendix G. Ultimately, we arrive at the following theorem:

Theorem 4.12 (Non-convex convergence result) (See Appendix H.7 for the proof.) Let Assump-
tions 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 hold, and suppose a constant learning rate Оұ(k) = Оұ with Оұ > 0 satisfying the
constraints given in Proposition G.6 is employed. Let ПҒМғ = max0вүӨkвүӨK ПҒМғ(k) for the spectral radius
and dmin = min0вүӨkвүӨK,iвҲҲM di(k) for the local SGDs. Then,
PK                      (r)   2
                                                                            2

   r=0 EОһ(rвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„     )вҲҘ ]   1    F (ОёМ„ (0) )вҲ’F вӢҶ   вҲҘОҳ(0) вҲ’1m ОёМ„ (0) вҲҘ w2     2
            K+1                  вүӨ w1     Оұ(K+1)        +        K+1            + Оұ   w w
                                                                                       2 3 + (1 вҲ’ dmin )w 4 + Оұw5 ,

in which F вӢҶ = minОёвҲҲRn F (Оё) is the globally optimal loss, and w1 = 12 (1 вҲ’ О“10 )(1 вҲ’ О“12 )(1 вҲ’ О“12 ),
                                                                                                               4
        ОІ 2 dmax (1+О“3 )                     1+ПҒМғ 2                                                 2
w2 =                        , w3 = mdmax (16 1вҲ’ПҒМғ
                                                  Оҙ + Пғ 2 ), w4 = (1 + О“3 )Оҙ 2 and w5 = ОІdmax
                                                                                          2m
                                                                                              Пғ
                                                                                                . Also, the
       m(1вҲ’ПҒМғ)     1вҲ’ О“1
                        1
conditions on the constant scalars О“i are О“0 , О“1 , О“2 , О“4 > 1 and О“3 > 0. Letting K вҶ’ вҲһ, we obtain
                                          (r) 2
                   PK
                     r=0 EОһ(rвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„     )вҲҘ ]       Оұ2 w2 w3 + (1 вҲ’ dmin )w4 + Оұw5
             lim                                     вүӨ                                  .
            KвҶ’вҲһ                K +1                                    w1
Discussion. Theorem 4.12 shows that many takeaways from Theorem 4.11 extend to the non-convex
case. Specifically, Theorem 4.12 generalizes results of existing DFL works by capturing the effect of
sporadicity with non-convex losses. As in Theorem 4.11, by setting dmin = min0вүӨkвүӨK,iвҲҲM d(k)  i  = 1,
our work recovers well-known convergence guarantees in DGD when there is no sporadicity in
SGDs Koloskova et al. (2020) (see Appendix. P.4 for further discussion). Additionally, the sta-
tionarity gap, which is bounded regardless of the di values, can be reduced by choosing a smaller


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



           0.8                                                                                                                                                0.8
                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                0.5                                                                                           0.6
           0.6



accuracy


                                                     accuracy


                                                                                                          accuracy


                                                                                                                                                   accuracy
                                                                0.4                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                              0.4
           0.4                                                  0.3
                                                                                                                     0.2                                      0.2
                                                                0.2
           0.2
                                                                0.1                                                  0.0                                      0.0
                 0   2500   5000      7500   10000                    0   2000   4000   6000   8000                        0     1000       2000                    0    20000          40000
                      overall delay                                          overall delay                                      overall delay                           overall delay

                 (a) FMNIST, IID.                               (b) FMNIST, Non-IID.                                       (c) CIFAR10, IID.             (d) CIFAR10, Non-IID.
Figure 2: Accuracy vs. latency plots. DSpodFL achieves the target accuracy much faster with less delay,
emphasizing the benefit of sporadicity in DFL for SGD iterations and model aggregations simultaneously.


learning rate Оұ and/or a larger minimum SGD probability dmin . One key difference from Theo-
rem 4.11 is that Theorem 4.12 provides sub-linear convergence (i.e., O(1/K)) of average gradient
norms as opposed to geometric convergence of modelsвҖҷ last iterates across clients. We also provide
analysis for the diminishing learning rate case in Appendix K.

5                N UMERICAL E VALUATION
Models and datasets. To evaluate our methodology, we consider image classification tasks using
the Fashion-MNIST (FMNIST) (Xiao et al., 2017) and CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) datasets.
We use FMNIST to train the Support Vector Machine (SVM) model (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995), while
CIFAR10 is adopted for training VGG11 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015).
Settings. By default, we consider m = 10 clients connected via a random geometric graph (RGG)
with radius 0.4 (Penrose, 2003). We adopt a constant learning rate Оұ = 0.01, and use a batch size
of 16. The SGD probability di for each client and exchange probability bij for each link are ran-
domly chosen according to either the Beta distribution Beta(Оұ, ОІ), uniform distribution U [0, 1] or
Bimodal Truncated Gaussian distribution 0.5(NМғ[0,1] (Вө1 , Пғ12 )+ NМғ[0,1] (Вө2 , Пғ22 )), and are held constant
over iterations k. Choosing Оұ = ОІ < 1 for the Beta distribution results in an inverted bell-shaped
distribution, which corresponds to scenarios where the clients and communications links exhibit
significant heterogeneity. For FMNIST, we use di , bij вҲј Beta(0.5, 0.5), and for CIFAR10, we use
di , bij вҲј Beta(0.8, 0.8). We consider two different data distribution scenarios: (i) IID, where each
client receives samples from all 10 classes in the dataset, and (ii) non-IID, where each client re-
ceives samples from just 1 class for the FMNIST dataset, and from 3 classes for CIFAR10. Unless
stated otherwise, our experiments are done under the non-IID setup. We measure the test accu-
racy of each scheme achieved over the average total delay incurred up to iteration k. Specifically,
 (k)       (k)        (k)             (k)                         P (k)
П„total = П„trans + П„proc , in which П„trans = [ m
                                                  P                                Pm              P
                                                    i=1 (1/|Ni |)  j vМӮij /bij ]/[   i=1 (1/|Ni |)   j 1/bij ] and
 (k)              (k)
П„proc = [ m
          P                  Pm
                v
            i=1 i     /di ]/[ i=1 1/d i ] are the per-client transmission   delays    incurred across   links and
processing delays incurred across clients in iteration k, respectively (see Appendix P.3 for further
discussion). For a fair comparison, we determine the aggregation frequency                 D for the DFedAvg
algorithm (depicted in Fig. 1) based on these di , i.e., D = вҢҲ(1/m) m
                                                                                P
                                                                                   i=1 1/di вҢү. We conduct the
experiments based on a cluster of three NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 40GB memory. We run the
experiments multiple times in each setup, and present the mean and 1-sigma standard deviation.
Baselines. We compare DSpodFL with four baselines that are tailored to decentralized settings: (a)
Distributed Gradient Descent (DGD), where SGDs and local aggregations occur at every iteration
(Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009); (b) the Randomized Gossip (RG) algorithm (Koloskova et al., 2020),
which is equivalent to Sporadic Aggregations (with constant SGDs); (c) Sporadic SGDs (with con-
stant aggregations); and (d) Decentralized Federated Averaging (DFedAvg) (Sun et al., 2022). Note
that all these baselines can be viewed as special cases of DSpodFL as elaborated in Fig. 1.
Accuracy vs. delay comparisons. Fig. 2 compares the test accuracies of different schemes in terms
of overall delay. By allowing for sporadicity in both SGDs and aggregations, DSpodFL outperforms
all baselines for both data distributions and models/datasets. In the IID setups of Figs. 2a and 2c,
the performances of the baselines are reasonably similar. Meanwhile, our DSpodFL is able to
significantly outperform those algorithms by an accuracy margin of 10 вҲ’ 20% in the initial stages of
training. The gain of DSpodFL becomes more significant for non-IID data distributions as shown in
Figs. 2b and 2d. Inter-client communications become more crucial in non-IID setups, as each client
has access only to a small portion of the distribution of the whole dataset. Depending on the baseline
and dataset, DSpodFL is able to achieve 10 вҲ’ 40% improvement in accuracy for a particular delay.


                                                                                                      9
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   0.7                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                                        0.6                                                      0.4


                                                                                                                                                                              acc. after = 500
acc. after = 500


                                                                                                                     acc. after = 500
                                                       acc. after = 500
                   0.6
                                                                          0.5                                                           0.5
                   0.5                                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                          0.4                                                           0.4
                   0.4
                                                                                                                                        0.3                                                      0.2
                   0.3                                                    0.3
                                                                                                                                        0.2
                   0.2                                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                         2    4      6        8   10                            0.2   0.4       0.6     0.8   1.0                             10   20     30        40   50                            0.4   0.6   0.8
                             number of labels                                           radius of the RGG                                           number of clients                                        =

   (a) Varying number of la- (b) Varying the radius of (c) Varying the number of (d) Varying Оұ = ОІ in the
   bels per client.          random geometric graph. clients m in the network. Beta(Оұ, ОІ) distribution.
   Figure 3: Effects of system parameters on FMNIST. In Figs. 3a, 3b and 3c, client and link capabilities di and
   bij are sampled from a uniform distribution U(0, 1]. The overall results confirm the advantage of DSpodFL.

   Effects of system parameters. In Fig. 3, we study the accuracy reached by a certain training delay
   as system parameters are varied. In contrast to Fig. 2 where client/link capabilities were sampled
   from Beta distribution, for completeness, Figs. 3a-3c are sampled from uniform distribution. In
   Fig. 3a, we see how increasing number of labels possessed by each client (moving from non-IID to
   IID) improves the achieved accuracy of all methods. Further, DSpodFL outperforms the baselines
   for each data distribution. In Fig. 3b, we see that increasing the radius of the underlying RGG (which
   controls the density of connections) improves the achievable accuracy for all baselines. Again,
   DSpodFL performs the best for all choices of radii, confirming the benefit of integrating the notion
   of sporadicity in both communications and computations. Fig. 3c depicts the impact of the number
   of clients in the system. DSpodFL obtains the largest improvement as the size of the network
   increases, whereas the baselines are more likely to suffer from resource bottlenecks if weak nodes
   are added. Finally, in Fig. 3d, we analyze the effects of parameters Оұ = ОІ in the Beta distribution,
   which control the communication/computation heterogeneity across clients. Note that increasing
   these parameters to 1 brings the distribution closer to uniform. We see that DSpodFL is robust to
   the underlying resource distribution, and the gap between our approach and other baselines become
   more significant when levels of heterogeneity in client/link resources are higher, i.e., lower Оұ = ОІ.
   Generalization of results to various settings.
   In Fig. 4, we provide experimental results          0.6
                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                    acc. after = 500


                                                                                                                                                                              acc. after = 500
   where some of the default system parameters         0.5
                                                                                      0.5
   that were used for Figs. 2 and 3 are changed.       0.4
                                                                                      0.4
   In Fig. 4a, a total of 50 clients are considered    0.3
                                                                                      0.3
                                                       0.2
   for the decentralized system. The results illus-                                   0.2
                                                       0.1
   trate that the improvements become more pro-            2   4      6        8 10       0.0  0.1  0.2 0.3 0.4
                                                              number of labels
   nounced with m = 50, confirming the trend
   seen with increasing m in Fig. 3a. In Fig. 4b, (a) Varying number of la- (b) Varying Вө in di , bij вҲј
   a Bimodal Truncated Gaussian distribution is bels per client in a network 0.5(NМӮ[0,1] (Вө, 0.01)          +
   used to generate probabilities di and bij , which of m = 50 clients.             NМӮ[0,1] (1 вҲ’ Вө, 0.01)).
   for small values of variance when the means of
                                                     Figure 4: Scalability to larger clients and robustness
   the two modes are far from each other, gives against distributions on FMNIST.
   heterogeneous clients. We see that when vary-
   ing Вө, a wider margin of improvement (15%) with lower Вө where Вө1 = Вө and Вө2 = 1вҲ’Вө is achieved.
   This confirms that DSpodFL is most advantageous relative to the baselines under higher levels of
   heterogeneity, similar to how the improvements under the inverted bell-shaped Beta distribution
   were more pronounced than those under the uniform distribution in Fig. 3d.
   Additional results. In Appendix O, we report experimental results when time-varying SGD and
   aggregation probabilities are used, as well as under other configurations of resource heterogeneity.

    6                    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
   We proposed DSpodFL, a DFL algorithmic framework that generalizes the notion of sporadicity to
   fully decentralized scenarios. By considering (i) sporadic gradient computations and (ii) sporadic
   client-to-client communications simultaneously, our approach tackles the challenges in heteroge-
   neous and time-varying resource settings and subsumes well-known decentralized optimization al-
   gorithms. We analyzed the convergence behavior of DSpodFL, and showed how our results recover
   existing DGD-like algorithms under special cases of sporadicity. Through experiments, we demon-
   strated the advantage of DSpodFL compared to DFL baselines. Future work could consider further
   validating DSpodFL on larger datasets and more expansive set of tasks beyond image classification.


                                                                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grants CNS-
2146171 and CPS-2313109, the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under grant N00014-22-1-2305,
and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) under grant FA9550-24-1-0083.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We use open-source datasets detailed in Section 5. Complete code for training and testing is available
in the supplementary material. Pseudo-code of our algorithm is given in Appendix B. The assump-
tions for our theoretical results are outlined in Sec. 4.1, and the proofs of our Lemmas, Propositions
and Theorems (Secs. 4.2-4.5) are given in Appendices D-H.


R EFERENCES
Keith Bonawitz, Hubert Eichner, Wolfgang Grieskamp, Dzmitry Huba, Alex Ingerman, Vladimir
  Ivanov, Chloe Kiddon, Jakub KonecМҢnyМҖ, Stefano Mazzocchi, Brendan McMahan, et al. Towards
  federated learning at scale: System design. Proceedings of machine learning and systems, 1:
  374вҖ“388, 2019.

Marco Bornstein, Tahseen Rabbani, Evan Z Wang, Amrit Bedi, and Furong Huang. Swift: Rapid de-
 centralized federated learning via wait-free model communication. In The Eleventh International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

LeМҒon Bottou, Frank E Curtis, and Jorge Nocedal. Optimization methods for large-scale machine
   learning. SIAM review, 60(2):223вҖ“311, 2018.

Stephen Boyd, Persi Diaconis, and Lin Xiao. Fastest mixing markov chain on a graph. SIAM review,
  46(4):667вҖ“689, 2004.

Stephen Boyd, Arpita Ghosh, Balaji Prabhakar, and Devavrat Shah. Randomized gossip algorithms.
  IEEE transactions on information theory, 52(6):2508вҖ“2530, 2006.

Christopher G Brinton, Mung Chiang, Kwang Taik Kim, David J Love, Michael Beesley, Morris
  Repeta, John Roese, Per Beming, Erik Ekudden, Clara Li, et al. Key focus areas and enabling
  technologies for 6g. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07029, 2024.

Yiming Chen, Kun Yuan, Yingya Zhang, Pan Pan, Yinghui Xu, and Wotao Yin. Accelerating gossip
  sgd with periodic global averaging. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1791вҖ“
  1802. PMLR, 2021.

Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20(3):273вҖ“297,
  1995.

Mathieu Even, RaphaeМҲl Berthier, Francis Bach, Nicolas Flammarion, Pierre Gaillard, Hadrien Hen-
 drikx, Laurent MassoulieМҒ, and Adrien Taylor. A continuized view on nesterov acceleration for
 stochastic gradient descent and randomized gossip. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
 ing Systems, pp. 1вҖ“32, 2021.

Mathieu Even, Anastasia Koloskova, and Laurent MassoulieМҒ. Asynchronous sgd on graphs: a unified
 framework for asynchronous decentralized and federated optimization. In International Confer-
 ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 64вҖ“72. PMLR, 2024.

Yan Huang, Ying Sun, Zehan Zhu, Changzhi Yan, and Jinming Xu. Tackling data heterogeneity:
  A new unified framework for decentralized sgd with sample-induced topology. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9310вҖ“9345. PMLR, 2022.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 5132вҖ“5143. PMLR, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anastasia Koloskova, Nicolas Loizou, Sadra Boreiri, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. A unified
  theory of decentralized sgd with changing topology and local updates. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 5381вҖ“5393. PMLR, 2020.
Anastasiia Koloskova, Tao Lin, Sebastian Urban Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Decentralized deep learn-
  ing with arbitrary communication compression. In Proceedings of the 8th International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, number CONF, 2019.
Jakub KonecМҢnyМҖ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter RichtaМҒrik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Lingjing Kong, Tao Lin, Anastasia Koloskova, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. Consensus control
  for decentralized deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5686вҖ“
  5696. PMLR, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE signal processing magazine, 37(3):50вҖ“60, 2020.
Xiang Li, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. Communication-efficient local decen-
  tralized sgd methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09126, 2019.
Xiangru Lian, Ce Zhang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Wei Zhang, and Ji Liu. Can decentralized
  algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for decentralized parallel stochastic
  gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Xiangru Lian, Wei Zhang, Ce Zhang, and Ji Liu. Asynchronous decentralized parallel stochastic
  gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3043вҖ“3052. PMLR,
  2018.
Frank Po-Chen Lin, Seyyedali Hosseinalipour, Sheikh Shams Azam, Christopher G Brinton, and
  Nicolo Michelusi. Semi-decentralized federated learning with cooperative d2d local model ag-
  gregations. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 39(12):3851вҖ“3869, 2021.
Tao Lin, Sebastian Urban Stich, Kumar Kshitij Patel, and Martin Jaggi. DonвҖҷt use large mini-
  batches, use local sgd. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2019.
Yue Liu, Tao Lin, Anastasia Koloskova, and Sebastian U Stich. Decentralized gradient tracking with
  local steps. Optimization Methods and Software, pp. 1вҖ“28, 2024.
Artavazd Maranjyan, Mher Safaryan, and Peter RichtaМҒrik. Gradskip: Communication-accelerated
  local gradient methods with better computational complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16402,
  2022.
Konstantin Mishchenko, Grigory Malinovsky, Sebastian Stich, and Peter RichtaМҒrik. Proxskip: Yes!
  local gradient steps provably lead to communication acceleration! finally! In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 15750вҖ“15769. PMLR, 2022.
Angelia Nedic. Distributed gradient methods for convex machine learning problems in networks:
  Distributed optimization. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3):92вҖ“101, 2020.
Angelia NedicМҒ and Alex Olshevsky. Distributed optimization over time-varying directed graphs.
  IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 60(3):601вҖ“615, 2014.
Angelia Nedic and Asuman Ozdaglar. Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimiza-
  tion. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 54(1):48вҖ“61, 2009.
Angelia NedicМҒ, Alex Olshevsky, and Michael G Rabbat. Network topology and communication-
  computation tradeoffs in decentralized optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 106(5):953вҖ“976,
  2018.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Edward Duc Hien Nguyen, Sulaiman A Alghunaim, Kun Yuan, and CeМҒsar A Uribe. On the perfor-
  mance of gradient tracking with local updates. In 2023 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and
  Control (CDC), pp. 4309вҖ“4313. IEEE, 2023.
Mathew Penrose. Random geometric graphs, volume 5. OUP Oxford, 2003.
Shi Pu and Angelia NedicМҒ. Distributed stochastic gradient tracking methods. Mathematical Pro-
  gramming, 187:409вҖ“457, 2021.
Guannan Qu and Na Li. Harnessing smoothness to accelerate distributed optimization. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Control of Network Systems, 5(3):1245вҖ“1260, 2017.
Rajarshi Saha, Mohamed Seif, Michal Yemini, Andrea J. Goldsmith, and H. Vincent Poor. Privacy
  preserving semi-decentralized mean estimation over intermittently-connected networks. IEEE
  Transactions on Signal Processing, pp. 1вҖ“14, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TSP.2024.3473939.
K Simonyan and A Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
  In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2015). Computational and
  Biological Learning Society, 2015.
Kunal Srivastava and Angelia Nedic. Distributed asynchronous constrained stochastic optimization.
  IEEE journal of selected topics in signal processing, 5(4):772вҖ“790, 2011.
Tao Sun, Dongsheng Li, and Bao Wang. Decentralized federated averaging. IEEE Transactions on
  Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(4):4289вҖ“4301, 2022.
S Sundhar Ram, Angelia NedicМҒ, and Venugopal V Veeravalli. Distributed stochastic subgradient
  projection algorithms for convex optimization. Journal of optimization theory and applications,
  147:516вҖ“545, 2010.
Jianyu Wang and Gauri Joshi. Cooperative sgd: A unified framework for the design and analysis of
   communication-efficient sgd algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07576, 2018.
Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. A novel framework
   for the analysis and design of heterogeneous federated learning. IEEE Transactions on Signal
   Processing, 69:5234вҖ“5249, 2021.
Yongqiang Wang and Angelia NedicМҒ. Decentralized gradient methods with time-varying uncoor-
  dinated stepsizes: Convergence analysis and privacy design. IEEE Transactions on Automatic
  Control, 2023.
Blake Woodworth, Kumar Kshitij Patel, Sebastian Stich, Zhen Dai, Brian Bullins, Brendan Mcma-
  han, Ohad Shamir, and Nathan Srebro. Is local sgd better than minibatch sgd? In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10334вҖ“10343. PMLR, 2020.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms, 2017.
Ran Xin, Usman A Khan, and Soummya Kar. An improved convergence analysis for decentralized
  online stochastic non-convex optimization. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 69:1842вҖ“
  1858, 2021.
Haibo Yang, Xin Zhang, Prashant Khanduri, and Jia Liu. Anarchic federated learning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 25331вҖ“25363. PMLR, 2022.
Shahryar Zehtabi, Seyyedali Hosseinalipour, and Christopher G Brinton. Event-triggered decentral-
  ized federated learning over resource-constrained edge devices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12640,
  2022.
Tongtian Zhu, Fengxiang He, Lan Zhang, Zhengyang Niu, Mingli Song, and Dacheng Tao.
  Topology-aware generalization of decentralized sgd. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 27479вҖ“27503. PMLR, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     N OTATION
Arguments for functions are denoted with parentheses, e.g., f (x) implies x is an argument for
function f . The iteration index for a parameter is indicated via superscripts, e.g., h(k) is the value of
                                                                                 (k)
the parameter h at iteration k. client indices are given via subscripts, e.g., hi refers to parameter
belonging to client i. We write a graph G with a set of nodes (clients) V and a set of edges (links) E
as G = (V, E).
We denote vectors with lowercase boldface, e.g., x, and matrices with uppercase boldface, e.g., X.
All vectors x вҲҲ RdГ—1 are column vectors, except in certain cases where average vectors xМ„ вҲҲ R1Г—d
and optimal vectors wвӢҶ вҲҲ R1Г—d are row vectors. вҹЁx, xвҖІ вҹ© and вҹЁX, XвҖІ вҹ© denote the inner product of
two vectors x, xвҖІ of equal dimensions and the Frobenius inner product of two matrices X, XвҖІ of
equal dimensions, respectively. Moreover, вҲҘxвҲҘ and вҲҘXвҲҘ denote the 2-norm of the vector x, and the
Frobenius norm of the matrix X, respectively. The spectral norm of the matrix X is written as ПҒ(X).

B     A LGORITHM P SEUDOCODE

Algorithm 1 Decentralized Sporadic Federated Learning (DSpodFL)
                                                                       (k)                (k)
 1: Input:         K,         {G (k) = (M, E (k) )}0вүӨkвүӨK ,           {vi }iвҲҲM,0вүӨkвүӨK ,   {vМӮij }(i,j)вҲҲE (k) ,0вүӨkвүӨK ,
      {Оұ(k) }0вүӨkвүӨK
                   (K+1)
 2: Output: {Оёi               }iвҲҲM
                                     (0)                    (0)                 (0)
 3: k вҶҗ 0, Initialize Оё (0) , {Оёi           вҶҗ Оё(0) }iвҲҲM , {vi     вҶҗ 0}iвҲҲM , {vМӮij вҶҗ 0}(i,j)вҲҲE (0)
 4: while k вүӨ K do
 5:  for all i вҲҲ M do
          (k)         (k)
 6:     gi вҶҗ 0, aggri вҶҗ 0
             (k)
 7:       if vi = 1 then
                                 (k)
 8:          sample mini-batch Оҫi вҲҲ Di
               (k)          (k) (k)
 9:          gi вҶҗ вҲҮFi (Оёi ; Оҫi )
10:       end if
                        (k)
11:       for all j вҲҲ Ei do
                  (k)
12:          if vМӮij = 1 then
13:              rij вҶҗ 1/(1 + max {|Ni |, |Nj |})
                        (k)           (k)           (k)    (k)
14:            aggri вҶҗ aggri + rij Оёj вҲ’ Оёi
15:        end if
16:     end for
17:   end for
18:   for all i вҲҲ M do
          (k+1)      (k)    (k)       (k)
19:     Оёi       вҶҗ Оёi + aggri вҲ’ Оұ(k) gi
20:   end for
21:   k вҶҗk+1
22: end while



C     A SSUMPTION S TATEMENTS
In this section, we state the mathematical inequalities that follow from the assumptions we made in
Sec. 4.1, which are used in our subsequent Lemmas and Propositions.

        вҖў Assumption 4.1:
          (a): ОІi -smoothness: вҲҘвҲҮFi (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (ОёвҖІ )вҲҘ вүӨ ОІi вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ вүӨ ОІ вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ,
                                                                                          2               2
          (b): Вөi -strong convexity: вҹЁвҲҮFi (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (ОёвҖІ ), Оё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҹ© вүҘ Вөi вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ вүҘ ВөвҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ ,
          (c): Оҙi , О¶i -gradient diversity: вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi + О¶i вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙ + О¶ вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ,


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         for all (ОёвҖІ , Оё) вҲҲ Rn Г— Rn and all i вҲҲ M, where Вө = miniвҲҲM Вөi , ОІ = maxiвҲҲM ОІi ,
         Оҙ = maxiвҲҲM Оҙi and О¶ = maxiвҲҲM О¶i .
         Note that these measures are related to each other via the inequalities Вө вүӨ Вөi вүӨ ОІi вүӨ ОІ,
         0 вүӨ О¶i < ОІi + ОІ and 0 вүӨ О¶ вүӨ 2ОІ (see Appendix E.1). We will also find the relationship
                                                            2
         F (Оё) вүӨ F (ОёвҖІ ) + вҹЁвҲҮF (ОёвҖІ ), Оё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҹ© + ОІ2 вҲҘОёвҖІ вҲ’ ОёвҲҘ useful in our treatment of smoothness.
       вҖў Assumption 4.2:
         Note that it is possible to make this assumption even for convex models instead of Assump-
         tion 4.1-(c), since smoothness implies that вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ ОІвҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ. However, we choose to
         use Assumption 4.1-(c) instead of Assumption 4.2-(b) for convex models, since it is a less
         strict assumption.
       вҖў Assumption 4.3:
                                                                                                        (k)
         (a): Zero mean and bounded variance of stochastic gradient noise: EПө(k) [Пөi ] = 0,
                                                                                                  i
                (k) 2
         E[вҲҘПөi вҲҘ2 ] вүӨ Пғi2 вүӨ Пғ 2 ,
         where Пғ 2 = maxiвҲҲM Пғi2 , for all i вҲҲ M and all k вүҘ 0.
                                                         (k)            (k)                     (k)            (k)
         (b): Let us define SGD noise vectors Пөi               and Пөj , indicator variables vi        and vj , and
          (k)           (k)
         vМӮi,j and vМӮl,q . Then for all i Мё= j, and (i, j) Мё= (l, q), we have:
                                  D                          E
                  (k) (k)                   (k)          (k)             (k) (k)  (k)        (k)
         EОҫ(k) [вҹЁПөi , Пөj вҹ©] = EПө(k) [Пөi ], EПө(k) [Пөj ] , EОҫ(k) [vi vj ] = Ev(k) [vi ]Ev(k) [vj ],
                                       i             j                                      i              j
                  (k) (k)                 (k)            (k)            (k) (k)          (k)        (k)
         EОҫ(k) [vМӮi,j vМӮl,q ] = EvМӮ(k) [vМӮi,j ]EvМӮ(k) [vМӮl,q ], EОҫ(k) [Пөi vi ] = EПө(k) [Пөi ]Ev(k) [vi ].
                                   i,j        l,q                                  i          i

       вҖў Assumption 4.4:
                                                              (k)
         This assumption implies that if P(k) = [pij ]1вүӨi,jвүӨm and R = [rij ]1вүӨi,jвүӨm as defined in
         Eqs. 4 and 2 are the doubly-stochastic mixing matrices assigned to G (k) and G, respectively,
         we have
                                 2                     2
          P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вүӨ Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) ,
                                 2                                  2
          RОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вүӨ ПҒ2r В· Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) ,
                                                                                 1
         with 0 < ПҒr < 1, where ПҒr denotes the spectral radius of the matrix R вҲ’ m 1m 1Tm .

C.1   G RADIENT D IVERSITY A SSUMPTIONS FOR C ONVEX AND N ON -C ONVEX M ODELS

In this section, we will discuss why we change the gradient diversity assumption when we treat
non-convex models, i.e., move from Assumption 4.1-(c) to Assumption 4.2-(b).
We note that if we are dealing with strongly-convex models, i.e., we make Assumption 4.1-(b)
for Вө-strongly convex models, the inequality in Assumption 4.2-(b) for data heterogeneity is a
much stronger assumption than Assumption 4.1-(c). To show this, we first note that making the
ОІ-smoothness assumption (made in both Assumptions 4.1-(a) and 4.2-(a)) implies that
                                           вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ ОІвҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ,
where ОёвӢҶ is a point where вҲҮF (ОёвӢҶ ) = 0, i.e., a globally optimal point for convex models and a
stationary point for non-convex models (note that we present and prove this result in Lemma D.1-
(b)). Then, since we have вҲҘвҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi + О¶i вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ according to Assumption 4.2-(b), we can
conclude that
вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi + (1 + О¶i )вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi + (1 + О¶i )ОІвҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ.
We observe that defining ОҙiвҖІ = Оҙi and О¶iвҖІ = (1 + О¶i )ОІ > 0, Assumption 4.1-(c) is implied with
parameters ОҙiвҖІ and О¶iвҖІ . The converse is not necessarily true though, i.e., Assumption 4.1-(c) does not
imply Assumption 4.2-(b).

D     I NTERMEDIARY L EMMAS
Lemma D.1 (Gradient bounds) (See Appendix E.1 for the proof.) Let Assumption 4.1 hold. We
have


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) The global loss function F (Оё) is ОІ-smooth and Вө-strongly convex, i.e.,
                                                                                                              2
         вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёвҖІ )вҲҘ вүӨ ОІ вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ ,            вҹЁвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёвҖІ ), Оё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҹ© вүҘ ВөвҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ .


(b) The gradients of the global and local loss functions, and the gradient of the local loss function
    at the optimal point are bounded as

                                               2                   2
        вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ ОІ вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ , вҲҘвҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ 2 ОІi2 вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ + Оҙi2 , вҲҘвҲҮFi (ОёвӢҶ )вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi .


Part-(a) of Lemma D.1 outlines the smoothness and convexity behaviour of the global loss function
based on the measures of local loss functions, and part (b) provides upper bounds on the gradients.
Note how these show that we are not making the bounded gradients assumption for all Оё вҲҲ Rn , but
only bounded local gradients at the globally optimal point ОёвӢҶ .
Next, we provide upper bounds on the expected Frobenius norms of the following quantities related
to SGD noises.

Lemma D.2 (Expected value of SGD noise average and deviation) (See Appendix E.2 for the
proof.) Let Assumption 4.3 hold. For every iteration k вүҘ 0, the average SGD noise and their
deviation from this average can be bounded as

                      2                                                     2
        EОҫ(k) Пөv (k)      вүӨ d(k)
                             max Пғ 2
                                     /m,   E  Оҫ (k)   V (k) (k)
                                                           E    вҲ’ 1m Пөv (k)
                                                                                вүӨ md(k)  2
                                                                                    max Пғ ,

                  1
                      Pm    (k) (k)
in which Пөv (k) = m    i=1 Пөi vi .

                       (k)
Note that by setting dmax = 1 in D.2, we get back the well-known estimation bounds for these
quantities (e.g., see Lemma 2 in Pu & NedicМҒ (2021)).
Next, we find an upper bound on the expected deviation of the gradients from their average (similar
to the second quantity in Lemma D.2).

Lemma D.3 (Gradient deviation bound) (See Appendix E.3 for the proof.) Let Assumption 4.1
hold. For each iteration k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound on the expected error of gradients from
their average
                                              "
            (k) (k)           (k) 2                                                            2
                                      вүӨ 6dmax mОҙ 2 + О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)
                                          (k)

  EОһ(k) V вҲҮ вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv
                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                              2
                                                                       (k)
                                          + m О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2          1 вҲ’ dmin        EОһ(kвҲ’1)        ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ             .

                                                                                                (k)               (k)
in which вҲҮ(k) is a matrix whose rows are comprised of the gradient vectors вҲҮFi (Оёi ), and вҲҮv                            =
 1
   Pm           (k) (k)
m    i=1 вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi .

Finally, we analyze the behaviour of the random mixing matrix P(k) defined in Eqs. 3 and 4.

Lemma D.4 (Expected mixing matrix) (See Appendix E.4 for the proof.) Let Assumption 4.4 hold.
For each iteration k вүҘ 0, we have

(a) The expected mixing matrix, denoted as RМ„(k) , is irreducible
                                                          (         and doubly-stochastic:
                                                              (k)
            (k)             h
                               (k)
                                   i
                                                   (k)      b     r
                                                              ij ij              i Мё= j
    EVМӮ(k) P      вүң RМ„(k) = rМ„ij            ,   rМ„ij =            Pm (k)                .
                                    1вүӨi,jвүӨm                 1 вҲ’ j=1 bij rij i = j
          h        2 i         2      (k)
(b) EVМӮ(k) P(k)        = RМ„(k) + R0 вүң RМғ(k) ,
             (k)
    where R0 is a matrix whose rows and columns sum to zero. Thus, RМғ(k) will be irreducible
    and doubly-stochastic.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



            h                          2
                                           i                     h                     2
                                                                                           i
(c) EОһ(k)       P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)           вүӨ ПҒМғ(k) EОһ(kвҲ’1)       Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)        ,
                                                                  1
      in which ПҒМғ(k) is the spectral radius of the matrix RМғ(k) вҲ’ m 1m 1Tm .


E     P ROOFS OF I NTERMEDIARY L EMMAS

E.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA D.1

(a) First, we use Eq. 1, triangle inequality and the smoothness property given in Assumption 4.1-(a)
to get

                                       m                                          m
                                  1 X                           1 X
      вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёвҖІ )вҲҘ =             (вҲҮFj (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFj (ОёвҖІ )) вүӨ       вҲҘвҲҮFj (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFj (ОёвҖІ )вҲҘ
                                  m j=1                         m j=1
                                       m
                                 1 X
                             вүӨ         ОІj вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ = ОІМ„ вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ вүӨ ОІ вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ .
                                 m j=1

Next, using Eq. 1 and the strong convexity property of Assumption 4.1-(b), we have
                                              m                                      m
                                           1 X                                    1 X               2
      вҹЁвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёвҖІ ), Оё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҹ© =             вҹЁвҲҮFj (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFj (ОёвҖІ ), Оё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҹ© вүҘ       Вөj вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ
                                           m j=1                                  m j=1
                                                       2                  2
                                    = ВөМ„вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ вүҘ ВөвҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ .

(b) Since вҲҮF (ОёвӢҶ ) = 0 by definition, we can use the results of part (a) of this lemma to show that

                                               вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ ОІ вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ .

Once again noting that вҲҮF (ОёвӢҶ ) = 0, we next use the gradient diversity bound outlined in Assump-
tion 4.1-(c) to get
                                                  вҲҘвҲҮFi (ОёвӢҶ )вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi .                                    (11)

Finally, using Eq. 11 and Assumption 4.1-(a), we write

                2                            2         2                 2
      вҲҘвҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ 2 вҲҘвҲҮFi (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (ОёвӢҶ )вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮFi (ОёвӢҶ )вҲҘ вүӨ 2 ОІi2 вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ + Оҙi2 ,

finishing the proof.
To explain the statement written after Assumption 4.1 on how these measures relate to each other,
we first have
                                                  Вө вүӨ Вөi вүӨ ОІi вүӨ ОІ,

in which Вөi вүӨ ОІi is a well-known fact (see Bottou et al. (2018) as a reference), and Вө вүӨ Вөi and
ОІi вүӨ ОІ follow from the definitions given in Assumption 4.1. Moreover, if we upper-bound the
gradient diversity term вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ without using Assumption 4.1-(c), we will have

       вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (ОёвӢҶ ) + вҲҮFi (ОёвӢҶ ) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оё)вҲҘ
                          вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮFi (ОёвӢҶ )вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮFi (Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (ОёвӢҶ )вҲҘ                              (12)
                          вүӨ Оҙi + ОІi вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙi + (ОІi + ОІ) вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ ,

in which we used the triangle inequality, Assumption 4.1-(a) and the results of Lemma D.1-(b). Now
comparing Eq. 12 with the assumption made in 4.1-(c) for the same expression, we conclude that

                                           О¶i вүӨ ОІi + ОІ,              О¶ вүӨ 2ОІ.


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA D.2

We start by finding an upper bound for the average SGD noise, by expanding the terms using their
definitions and employing the properties given in Assumption 4.3 and Definition 4.6.
                              пЈ®                    пЈ№         пЈ®                              пЈ№
                                   m             2                 m X m D
                  2             1                              1                           E
                                        (k) (k)                            (k) (k) (k) (k)
                                  X                               X
    EОҫ(k) Пөv (k)      = EОҫ(k) пЈ°        Пө v         пЈ» = EОҫ(k) пЈ°            Пө v , Пөj vj пЈ»
                                m i=1 i i                      m2 i=1 j=1 i i
                     m
                                                                     2
                                                                                     m m
              1 X                           (k) (k)                              1 XXD           h
                                                                                                   (k) (k)
                                                                                                           i         h
                                                                                                                         (k) (k)
                                                                                                                                 iE
          =         E (k)                 Пөi v i                             +              E (k) Пөi  v i    , E (k)   Пө j  v j
              m2 i=1 Оҫi                                                          m2 i=1 j=1 Оҫi                  Оҫj

                                                                                               jМё=i
                 m
                                                     2

               1 X                         (k)               (k)
         =               EОҫ(k)           Пөi              vi
              m2 i=1          i

                           m m
                       1 XXD           h
                                         (k)
                                             i     h
                                                     (k)
                                                         i       h
                                                                   (k)
                                                                       i      h
                                                                                (k)
                                                                                    iE
                   +              E (k) Пөi    E (k) vi    , E (k) Пөj     E (k) vj
                       m2 i=1 j=1 Пөi           vi            Пөj           vj

                                         jМё=i
                 m                                                             m           (k)
                                                                                          dmax Пғ 2

               1 X                                       2         h     i   1 X (k) 2
                                           (k)                       (k)
          =                  EПө(k)        Пөi                  Ev(k) vi     = 2    di Пғi вүӨ          .
              m2 i=1           i                                i           m i=1            m


Next, we found an upper bound for deviance of the error matrix from its average, using a simi-
lar approach as above. Noting that вҲҘ В· вҲҘ is the Frobenius norm for matrices, Assumption 4.3 and
Definition 4.6 implies that

                                   2
     EОҫ(k) V(k) E(k) вҲ’ 1m Пөv (k)

                                 2     D                  E              2
           = EОҫ(k) V(k) E(k) вҲ’ 2 V(k) E(k) , 1m Пөv (k) + 1m Пөv (k)
                   "m               #           "m                   #
                     X (k) (k) 2                 X D (k) (k)        E                   2
                                                                (k)                 (k)
           = EОҫ(k)        Пө i vi       вҲ’ 2EОҫ(k)      Пөi vi , Пөv        + EОҫ(k) m Пөv
                         i=1                                                             i=1
               m
                                                2
                                                                                    m
                                                                                                             2

               X                     (k)             (k)           2 X                                 (k)        (k)
           =         EОҫ(k)         Пөi               vi           вҲ’      E (k)                         Пөi         vi
               i=1
                         i                                         m i=1 Оҫi
                            m
                               *                   m
                                                                       +
                         2 X          h         i X        h         i                   2
                                        (k) (k)              (k) (k)                 (k)
                       вҲ’         EОҫ(k) Пөi vi ,        EОҫ(k) Пөj vj        + mEОҫ(k) Пөv
                         m i=1     i
                                                  j=1
                                                        j

                                                                                        jМё=i
                                           m
                                           X
                                                                                        2

                         2   1                                                   (k)
                                                                                                  h
                                                                                                    (k)
                                                                                                        i
           =       1вҲ’      +                             EПө(k)                 Пөi            Ev(k) vi
                         m m                    i=1
                                                                 i                             i

                                                              m X
                                                                m D
                                                         2    X         h
                                                                          (k)
                                                                              i   h
                                                                                    (k)
                                                                                        i   h
                                                                                              (k)
                                                                                                  i   h
                                                                                                        (k)
                                                                                                            iE
                                                вҲ’                  EПө(k) Пөi Ev(k) vi , EПө(k) Пөj Ev(k) vj
                                                         m i=1 j=1   i          i         j         j

                                                                             jМё=i
                   m
                1 X (k) 2
           = 1вҲ’      d Пғ вүӨ (m вҲ’ 1) d(k)  2    (k)  2
                                    max Пғ вүӨ mdmax Пғ .
                m i=1 i i


E.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA D.3

Noting that

                                   (k) 2                                                                         2                             (k) 2
      V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv                         вүӨ 2 V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ V(k) вҲҮF(k)                                            + 2 V(k) вҲҮF(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv           ,


                                                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


according to YoungвҖҷs inequality, we first find an upper bound for each of the two terms above
separately. For the first term, noting that вҲҘ В· вҲҘ is the Frobenius norm for matrices, we have
                                                     2       m                                   2
                                                                           (k)   (k)   (k)   (k)
                                                             X
              V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ V(k) вҲҮF(k)                     =            вҲҮFi Оёi vi вҲ’ вҲҮF Оёi vi
                                                             i=1
                m                                                 2                 m                                        2
                                    (k)                   (k)          (k)                                     (k)                (k)
                X                                                                   X
            =          вҲҮFi Оёi                 вҲ’ вҲҮF Оёi                 vi        вүӨ           Оҙ i + О¶i Оё i             вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ        vi
                i=1                                                                   i=1
              m                                      2
                          (k)                           (k)
              X
            вүӨ    Оҙi + О¶i Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) + О¶i ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ    vi
                i=1
                  m                                          2                                  2

                                            (k)                                                          (k)
                  X
            вүӨ3             Оҙi2 + О¶i2       Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)            + О¶i2     ОёМ„   (k)
                                                                                      вҲ’Оё    вӢҶ
                                                                                                        vi ,
                 i=1

where Assumption 4.1-(c), triangle inequality and YoungвҖҷs inequality were used for the inequalities,
respectively. For the second term, again noting that вҲҘ В· вҲҘ is the Frobenius norm for matrices, using
Eq. 1 and the triangle inequality, we can write
                                                                      m
                                                         (k) 2                                 (k) 2

                                                                                     (k)   (k)
                                                                      X
                          (k)        (k)
                      V         вҲҮF         вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv               =               вҲҮF Оёi vi вҲ’ вҲҮv
                                                                      i=1
                                                                                                                2
                       m              m
                       X            1 X
                                               (k)

                                                     (k)

                                                           (k)

                                                                 (k)

                   =                      вҲҮFj Оёi vi вҲ’ вҲҮFj Оёj vj
                       i=1
                                    m j=1
                       m   m                                             2
                       X 1 X
                                                   (k)

                                                         (k)

                                                               (k)

                                                                     (k)
                   вүӨ                          вҲҮFj Оёi vi вҲ’ вҲҮFj Оёj vj        ,
                       i=1
                                m j=1

Continuing from there and using YoungвҖҷs inequality and Assumption 4.1-(a), we have
      m m
   1 XX
                   (k)

                          (k)

                                             (k)

                                                              (k)         (k)
 =           вҲҮFj Оёi vi вҲ’ вҲҮFj ОёМ„(k) vi + вҲҮFj ОёМ„(k) vi вҲ’ вҲҮFj (ОёвӢҶ )vi
   m i=1 j=1
                                                                                  2
                          (k)                (k)               (k)     (k)    (k)
             + вҲҮFj (ОёвӢҶ )vi вҲ’ вҲҮFj ОёМ„(k) vj + вҲҮFj ОёМ„(k) vj вҲ’ вҲҮFj Оёj vj
      m m                                2                             2                 2
   3 XX
                     (k)

                                             (k)

                                                                            (k)     (k)
 =            вҲҮFj Оёi       вҲ’ вҲҮFj ОёМ„(k)      vi + вҲҮFj ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ вҲҮFj (ОёвӢҶ )     vi вҲ’ vj
   m i=1 j=1
                                             2
                         (k)           (k)       (k)
             + вҲҮFj ОёМ„          вҲ’ вҲҮFj Оёj        vj
        m m                   2                       2
     3 XX           (k)         (k)                       (k)   (k)  (k) (k)

 вүӨ             ОІj2 Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) vi + ОІj2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ        vi + vj вҲ’ 2vi vj
     m i=1 j=1

                                                       2
                                                   (k)    (k)
                                    + ОІj2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оёj     vj
      m       m               2                       2
   3 X 2X           (k)           (k)                      (k)      (k)      (k) (k)

 =       ОІj        Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) vi + ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ             vi + vj вҲ’ 2vi vj
   m j=1     i=1

                                                        2
                                          (k)      (k)     (k)
                                      + ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оёj           vj
        " m                             m
   3ОІ 2    X (k)            2
                              (k)
                                       X               (k)
                                                             2
                                                                (k)
 вүӨ       m       Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) vi + m           ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оёj        vj
    m       i=1                        j=1
                           пЈ«                                                     пЈ¶#
                         2      m
                               X (k)            m               m X m
                                                     (k)                 (k) (k)
                                              X                X
            + ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ пЈӯm         vi + m         vj вҲ’ 2               vi vj пЈё
                                               i=1                 j=1                      i=1 j=1



                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                      пЈ«                        !2 пЈ¶
                    m                   2                m             m        2
                    X (k)           (k)
                                                        X    (k)   1  X    (k)
         вүӨ 6ОІ 2      Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) vi + 6ОІ 2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ пЈӯ      vi вҲ’          vi      пЈё
                i=1                                     i=1
                                                                   m  i=1
                    пЈ®                             пЈ«               пЈ¶пЈ№
                 m                 2            2         m
                X
                    пЈ° Оёi(k) вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) + ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ пЈӯ1 вҲ’ 1  X    (k)    (k)
         вүӨ 6ОІ 2                                              vj пЈёпЈ» vi ,
                i=1
                                                      m  j=1


where for the last three inequalities we used the properties of the binary indicator random variables
 (k)
vi вҲҲ {0, 1}. Now, by combining the two components together we get

                            (k) 2                                                     2                                           (k) 2
    V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv        = 2 V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ V(k) вҲҮF(k)                                   + 2 V(k) вҲҮF(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv
       m
          "
      X                       (k)       2
   вүӨ6       Оҙi2 + О¶i2 + 2ОІ 2 Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)
        i=1
                                        пЈ«                  пЈ«     пЈ¶пЈ¶           #
                                                          m                 2
                                                       1 X   (k)                (k)
                                    + пЈӯО¶i2 + 2ОІ 2 пЈӯ1 вҲ’      v пЈёпЈё ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ    vi .
                                                       m j=1 j


Finally, we have to take the expected value of the above inequality to conclude the proof. Towards
                   (k)
this, we multiply vi inside the parentheses and use Definition 4.6 to get

                            (k) 2
    EОһ(k)V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv
       m
         "
                                                2         h     i                                                     h     i
                                      (k)                   (k)                                                         (k)
       X
            Оҙi2 + О¶i2 + 2ОІ 2 EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)                                                              О¶i2 Ev(k) vi

    вүӨ6                                               Ev(k) vi     +
                                                                                          i                              i
         i=1
                                                                    m
                                                                                   !!
                              h
                                (k)
                                    i  1     h
                                               (k)
                                                   i  1     h
                                                              (k)
                                                                  iX        h
                                                                              (k)
                                                                                  i
                +2ОІ 2    Ev(k) vi     вҲ’ Ev(k) vi     вҲ’ Ev(k) vi        Ev(k) vj
                           i           m i            m i          j=1
                                                                         j

                                                                                              jМё=i
                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                   (k)        вӢҶ
                                                                                              EОһ(kвҲ’1)         ОёМ„         вҲ’Оё

       m
         "
                                            2
                                 (k)              (k)                                                (k)
       X
            2    2     2                (k)
                                                                                                О¶i2 di

    =6     Оҙi + О¶i + 2ОІ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„          di +
         i=1
                        пЈ«                                                   пЈ¶
                                          m
                                                   !                   #
                            1      1                                2
                        (k)    (k)    (k)    (k)
                                          X
                +2ОІ 2 пЈ¬                                      (k)  вӢҶ
                      пЈ¬                          пЈ·
                      пЈӯdi вҲ’ m di вҲ’ m di     dj пЈ· пЈё EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оё
                                                           j=1
                                                           jМё=i
         m
                    "
                                                  2
            (k)                         (k)
         X
           di Оҙi2 + О¶i2 + 2ОІ 2 EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)

    =6
         i=1
                                                     "     m
                                                                   #!!                    #
                                                   1                                   2
                                                               (k)
                                                          X
                        +   О¶i2 + 2ОІ 2          1вҲ’     1+     dj                (k)
                                                                      EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ
                                                   m      j=1
                                                                     jМё=i
                "
                                                                                      2
    вүӨ 6d(k)         2       2       2                          (k)              (k)

        max     mОҙ + О¶ + 2ОІ                 EОһ(kвҲ’1)        Оҳ         вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                                                                           i                       #
                                                       1 h                                      2
                                2           2                          (k)               (k)  вӢҶ
                        +m О¶ + 2ОІ                   1вҲ’     1 + (m вҲ’ 1)dmin     EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оё
                                                       m


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                         "
                                                                                                          2
        = 6d(k)             mОҙ 2 + О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 EОһ(kвҲ’1)                          Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)

            max


                                                                              #
                                          1                                2
                                                2  (k)       2      (k)  вӢҶ
                     + m О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’           1 вҲ’ dmin    EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оё
                                         m
                "
                                                          2
        вүӨ 6dmax mОҙ 2 + О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)
            (k)


                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                             2
                                                                          (k)
                                  + m О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2                     1 вҲ’ dmin            EОһ(kвҲ’1)         ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ                   ,

where the last four lines are algebraic manipulations to simplify the bound.

E.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA D.4

(a) We take the expected value of the matrix P(k) by looking at its individual elements. Using Eq. 4
and Definition 4.6, we have
                                                пЈұh            h     ii
                                                                (k)
            h     i h        h     ii           пЈІ rij EvМӮ(k) vМӮij
                                                пЈҙ                                         i Мё= j
                               (k)
      EVМӮ(k) P(k) = EvМӮ(k) pij
                                                          ij           1вүӨi,jвүӨm
                                              = h        P  m
                                                                           h
                                                                             (k)
                                                                                 ii
                          ij          1вүӨi,jвүӨm   пЈі 1 вҲ’ j=1 rij EvМӮ(k) vМӮij
                                                пЈҙ                                         i=j
                                                                        ij          1вүӨiвүӨm
                      пЈұh (k) i
                      пЈІ bij rij                       i Мё= j
                    = h           1вүӨi,jвүӨm i
                                                               = RМ„(k)
                      пЈі 1 вҲ’ m b(k) rij
                               P
                                                      i  =  j
                                 j=1 ij
                                                                       1вүӨiвүӨm

                                                                                                   2
(b) Similar to the proof of the previous part, we take the expected value of (P(k) )T P(k) = P(k)
by looking at its individual elements. Again, using Eq. 4 and Definition 4.6, Assumption 4.3 implies
that
  if i Мё= j :
         "m           #
           X (k) (k)
  EVМӮ(k)      pil plj
             l=1
              пЈ®                                                                                                                                         пЈ№
              m                                                   m
                                                                                     !                                 m
                                                                                                                                            !
            пЈҜX            (k) (k)                                              (k)             (k)                                    (k)             (k) пЈә
                                                                  X                                                    X
   = EVМӮ(k) пЈ°   ril rlj vМӮil vМӮlj +                        1вҲ’             riq vМӮiq       rij vМӮij +           1вҲ’             rjq vМӮjq           rij vМӮij пЈ»
                    l=1                                           q=1                                                  q=1
                   lМё=i,j
              "m                                            m
                                                                                      !           #

                                   (k) (k)                           (k)        (k)           (k)
               X                                            X
   = EVМӮ(k)              ril rlj vМӮil vМӮlj +             2вҲ’    riq vМӮiq + rjq vМӮjq      rij vМӮij
                   l=1                                           q=1
                                                     пЈ«                                                    пЈ¶
             " m                                                 m
                                   (k) (k)                                        (k)        (k) пЈ·        (k)
              X                              пЈ¬                   X
  = EVМӮ(k)                                   пЈӯ2 вҲ’
                         ril rlj vМӮil vМӮlj + пЈ¬                              riq vМӮiq + rjq vМӮjq пЈ· пЈё rij vМӮij
                l=1                                               q=1
                                                                 qМё=i,j
                                                                                                     #

                                                               (k)        (k)                  (k)
                                            вҲ’            rij vМӮij + rji vМӮji             rij vМӮij

       m                   h      i    h      i
                              (k)         (k)
       X
   =         ril rlj EvМӮ(k) vМӮil EvМӮ(k) vМӮlj
                             il            lj
       l=1
                   пЈ«                                                                             пЈ¶
                   m              h      i              h      i пЈ·          h      i               h       i
                                     (k)                   (k)   пЈ· rij E (k) vМӮ (k) вҲ’ 2rij             (k)
                   X
                                                                                        2
              пЈ¬
             +пЈ¬2 вҲ’     riq EvМӮ
                               (k) vМӮiq    + rjq EvМӮ
                                                     (k) vМӮjq
                                                                        vМӮ     ij          EvМӮ
                                                                                               (k)  vМӮ ij
              пЈӯ                                 iq               пЈё              jq                                ij                               ij
                               q=1
                              qМё=i,j


                                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                              пЈ«                                            пЈ¶
                    m                                  m                           пЈ·
                            (k)     (k)                           (k)       (k)       (k)        (k) 2
                    X                        пЈ¬         X
              =                              пЈӯ2 вҲ’
                           bil ril blj rlj + пЈ¬                                     пЈё bij rij вҲ’ 2bij rij
                                                                 biq riq + bjq rjq пЈ·
                    l=1                                 q=1
                                                       qМё=i,j

On the other hand,
   if i = j :
                               пЈ®                                                                           пЈ№
          "m         #           m                                                 m
                                                                                                      !2
           X (k) (k)           пЈҜX            (k) (k)
                                                                                   X            (k)
              pil plj = EVМӮ(k) пЈ°   ril rli vМӮil vМӮli +                        1вҲ’          riq vМӮiq
                                                                                                           пЈә
   EVМӮ(k)                                                                                                  пЈ»
          l=1                                 l=1                                  q=1
                                              lМё=i
               "m                            m                   m X
                                                                   m
                                                                                                #
                           2 (k)                         (k)                          (k) (k)
                X                            X                   X
   = EVМӮ(k)               ril vМӮil + 1 вҲ’ 2         riq vМӮiq +               riq rit vМӮiq vМӮit
                l=1                          q=1                 q=1 t=1
            пЈ®                                                                    пЈ№
              m                  m            m m                     m
            пЈҜX 2 (k)             X       (k)
                                              XX            (k) (k)
                                                                      X
                                                                         2 (k) пЈә
   = EVМӮ(k) пЈ°   ril vМӮil + 1 вҲ’ 2   riq vМӮiq +     riq rit vМӮiq vМӮit +   riq vМӮiq пЈ»
                    l=1                      q=1                 q=1 t=1                              q=1
                                                                     tМё=q
        m               h      i      m           h        m X
                                                         i X m               h      i    h      i
                           (k)                       (k)                        (k)         (k)
        X                             X
               2
   =2         ril EvМӮ(k) vМӮil + 1 вҲ’ 2   riq EvМӮ(k) vМӮiq +      riq rit EvМӮ(k) vМӮiq EvМӮ(k) vМӮit
                      il                                  iq                                          iq       it
        l=1                                   q=1                            q=1 t=1
                                                                                 tМё=q
        m              m           m X
                                     m
           (k) 2          (k)           (k)     (k)
        X              X           X
   =2     bil ril +1вҲ’2   biq riq +     biq riq bit rit
        l=1                         q=1                q=1 t=1
                                                           tМё=q
                                                                   2
Finally, comparing the above expression with the elements of RМ„(k) , we get
                         "      "m           ##
                   2             X (k) (k)
              (k)
    EVМӮ(k) P           = EVМӮ(k)      pil plj
                                             l=1                  1вүӨi,jвүӨm
               пЈұh                       i
             2 пЈІ вҲ’2b(k)
                     ij
                                  (k)
                           1 вҲ’ bij rij     2
                                                                                 i Мё= j           2
                                                                                                     (k)
     = RМ„(k) + hPm         (k)

                                        (k)
                                               1вүӨi,jвүӨm
                                                   i                                      = RМ„(k) + R0 вүң RМғ(k) ,
                                                2
               пЈі
                   l=1  2b il    1 вҲ’  b il     ril                               i=j
                                                                      1вүӨiвүӨm

              (k)
in which R0 is a matrix whose rows and columns sum to zero.
(c) In order to prove this inequality, we expand the left-hand side Frobenius norm by its columns
and use the results of part (b) of this lemma. We have
                                                пЈ®                         пЈ№

                                    2
                                                  m                     2
                                                           (k)   (k)
                                                 X
    EОһ(k) P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)          = EОһ(k) пЈ°    P(k) Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m пЈ»
                                                                j=1
                 пЈ®                           пЈ№       пЈ®                        пЈ№
                   m                       2           m                    2
                           (k)   (k)                           (k)   (k)
                  X                                   X
         = EОһ(k) пЈ°   P(k) Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j P(k) 1m пЈ» = EОһ(k) пЈ°   P(k) Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m     пЈ»
                           j=1                                                          j=1
                 пЈ®                                             пЈ№
                   m                T        T
                        (k)   (k)                  (k)   (k)
                  X
         = EОһ(k) пЈ°     Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m      P(k) P(k) Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m пЈ»
                           j=1
                   пЈ®                                               пЈ№
                     m               T     h         i
                          (k)   (k)                     (k)  (k)
                    X
         = EОһ(kвҲ’1) пЈ°     Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m EVМӮ(k) P(k) P(k) Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m пЈ»
                              j=1
                   пЈ®                                    пЈ№
                     m               T
                          (k)   (k)         (k)   (k)
                    X
         = EОһ(kвҲ’1) пЈ°     Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m RМғ(k) Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m пЈ»
                              j=1



                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                         пЈ®                       пЈ№
                           m                   2

                                                                                 2

                                    (k)   (k)
                          X
               вүӨ EОһ(kвҲ’1) пЈ°   ПҒМғ(k) Оёj вҲ’ ОёМ„j 1m пЈ» вүӨ ПҒМғ(k) EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)    .
                             j=1

Note how we used the double stochasticity of P(k) in the second line.


F      P ROOFS OF M AIN R ESULTS

F.1     P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.7

Using Lemma D.1-(b) on ОёМ„(k) , the average model parameters at iteration k, we get
                                       2
                                                              2
                          вҲҮFi ОёМ„(k)       вүӨ 2 ОІi2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ + Оҙi2 .                                       (13)

                    2
Now, if 0 < Оұ(k) вүӨ Вө+ОІ , we can write
                     2                                 2
      ОёМ„(k+1) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ = ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) gv (k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ
                     (k)       2     D             (k)
                                                                            E             2        2
    = ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮv вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲ’ 2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮv вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ , Оұ(k) Пөv (k) + Оұ(k)                    Пөv (k)
                                                2
    вүӨ 1 + ВөОұ(k) ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮF ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ
                                     (k)  2 X m
                              1       Оұ
                                                            (k)

                                                                             (k)

                                                                                     (k)
                                                                                         2
                   + 1+        (k)
                                                  вҲҮF i   ОёМ„       вҲ’ вҲҮF i   Оё i     vi
                           ВөОұ           m i=1
                       D                (k)
                                                             E         2              2
                   вҲ’ 2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮv вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ , Оұ(k) Пөv (k) + Оұ(k)              Пөv (k)
                                                              m
                           2           2  Оұ(k)               X
                                                                              (k)
                                                                                  2
    вүӨ 1 + ВөОұ(k) 1 вҲ’ ВөОұ(k)    ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ +        1 + ВөОұ(k)       ОІi2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оёi
                                          mВө                 i=1
                                                                                   (k)
                                                                                  vi     =1
                                                     m
                             2Оұ(k)

                                                     X                       2
                         +             1 + ВөОұ(k)            ОІi2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ       + Оҙi2
                             mВө                      i=1
                                                    (k)
                                                   vi =0
                        D               (k)
                                                           E         2         2
                     вҲ’ 2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮv вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ , Оұ(k) Пөv (k) + Оұ(k)      Пөv (k)
      "                                                     m
                                                                             #
                                    2 2Оұ(k)               X                               2
                 (k)           (k)                   (k)        2      (k)
    =     1 + ВөОұ       1 вҲ’ ВөОұ        +        1 + ВөОұ           ОІi 1 вҲ’ vi       ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ
                                        mВө                 i=1
                                m                                               m
             Оұ(k)              X
                                        (k)
                                                  2
                                                    (k)     2Оұ(k)              X
                                                                                            (k)

           +        1 + ВөОұ(k)      ОІi2 Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) vi +              1 + ВөОұ(k)      Оҙi2 1 вҲ’ vi
              mВө               i=1
                                                             mВө                i=1
              D               (k)
                                                 E          2         2
                 (k)    (k)           вӢҶ  (k) (k)       (k)       (k)
           вҲ’ 2 ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оұ вҲҮv вҲ’ Оё , Оұ Пөv               + Оұ         Пөv        ,

                                                                                         (k)   (k)   (k)
in which the relationship in first four lines follow from (i) Eq. 5, (ii) gi = вҲҮi + Пөi for all
i вҲҲ M, (iii) YoungвҖҷs inequality, (iv) Lemma 10 in Qu & Li (2017), Assumption 4.1-(a) and Eq. 13.
Next, we take the expected value of the above inequality and use Definition 4.6, Assumption 4.3 and
Lemma D.2 to get

                        2                                       2
            (k+1)    вӢҶ
  EОһ(k) ОёМ„        вҲ’Оё        вүӨ Ev(k) 1 + ВөОұ(k) 1 вҲ’ ВөОұ(k)
                                                               m
                                           2Оұ(k)
                                                              X                                      2
                                                                           (k)
                                       +           1 + ВөОұ(k)      ОІi2 1 вҲ’ vi      EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ
                                            mВө                i=1


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 m
           Оұ(k)

                             X                                       2         h     i
                                                    (k)                          (k)
       +          1 + ВөОұ(k)      ОІi2 EОһ(kвҲ’1)       Оёi     вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)         Ev(k) vi
           mВө                i=1
                                                                                i

                                 m
         2Оұ(k)                   X        h
                                                 (k)
                                                     i
       +         1 + ВөОұ(k)       Оҙi2 Ev(k) 1 вҲ’ vi
          mВө                 i=1
                                       i

                                                                                      2
                      hD                  (k)
                                                               h     iEi                       2
      вҲ’ 2EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲӘv(k) ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮv вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ , Оұ(k) EE(k) Пөv (k)            + Оұ(k) EОҫ(k) Пөv (k)
  "                                                         m
                                                                               #
                               2 2Оұ(k)                     X
             (k)          (k)                         (k)        2        (k)
вүӨ     1 + ВөОұ       1 вҲ’ ВөОұ        +            1 + ВөОұ           ОІ 1 вҲ’ di
                                      mВө                   i=1

                                                                                  2
                                                                      (k)       вӢҶ
                                                           EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оё
                                 m
           Оұ(k)

                             X                                              2
                                  (k)                      (k)
       +          1 + ВөОұ(k)      di ОІi2 EОһ(kвҲ’1)           Оёi     вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)
           mВө                i=1
                             m                          2 (k)
       2Оұ(k)          (k)
                           X
                                 2

                                           (k)
                                                   Оұ(k) dmax Пғ 2
    +          1 + ВөОұ           Оҙi 1 вҲ’ di        +
        mВө                  i=1
                                                        m
                                                                                2
                    hD                  (k)
                                                          h       iEi                          2
                         (k)     (k)             вӢҶ (k)        (k)          (k)             (k)
    вҲ’ 2EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲӘv(k) ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оұ вҲҮv вҲ’ Оё , Оұ EE(k) Пөv                      + Оұ          EОҫ(k) Пөv
 "                                                                              #
                                      2   2Оұ(k)
                                                                      (k)
= 1 вҲ’ ВөОұ(k) 1 + ВөОұ(k) вҲ’ ВөОұ(k)             +         1 + ВөОұ(k) 1 вҲ’ dmin ОІ 2
                                                Вө

                                                                                      2
                                                               EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ
                           Оұ(k) d(k) ОІ 2
                                                                            2

                   (k)           max                    (k)           (k)
       + 1 + ВөОұ                   EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                           mВө
                                                2 (k)
         2Оұ(k)          (k)

                                   (k)

                                         2 Оұ(k) dmax Пғ 2
       +         1 + ВөОұ       1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ +               .
           Вө                                    m

F.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.8

Using Eqs. 3 and 5, we first expand the left-hand side norm, and then use YoungвҖҷs inequality to get
                         2                                                                  2
   Оҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) = P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) V(k) G(k) вҲ’ 1m gv (k)
                                                            (k)
                                                                  2
 вүӨ P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv
              D                                                        (k)
                                                                                                     E
     вҲ’ 2Оұ(k) P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv                   , V(k) E(k) вҲ’ 1m Пөv (k)
               2                              2
     + Оұ(k)       V(k) E(k) вҲ’ 1m Пөv (k)
         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                                                  2
                        (k) (k)              (k)
 вүӨ 1+                 P    Оҳ      вҲ’   1 m ОёМ„
           2ПҒМғ(k)                                                                                      (14)
                                     (k)

                                 2ПҒМғ                    2                      (k) 2

                     + 1+              (k)
                                                 Оұ(k)     V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv
                               1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ

                                                                                       (k)
                     вҲ’2Оұ(k) P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv                    ,

                                                                          1       T     (k) (k)
                                                                   Im вҲ’ 1m 1m V E
                                                                         m
                                2                              2
                     + Оұ(k)        V(k) E(k) вҲ’ 1m Пөv (k) .


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we take the expected value of the above inequality and use Lemmas D.2, D.3 and D.4-(c) to
get
                                     1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k)

                               2                                              2
           (k+1)         (k+1)                                (k)         (k)
 EОһ(k) Оҳ         вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„           вүӨ          ПҒМғ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                                       2ПҒМғ(k)
             1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k)   (k)  2

                                                                                       2
                                         2      2    2                (k)         (k)

         +3           d      Оұ        mОҙ + О¶ + 2ОІ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
             1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max

                                                                                             2
                                                   2     2        (k)                  (k) вӢҶ
                                           + m О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оё
                            "
                                                                                  (k)

         вҲ’2Оұ(k) EОһ(k) \E(k) P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv               ,
                                                                                   #
                                                            1             h     i
                                                                 T   (k)    (k)
                                                        Im вҲ’ 1m 1m V EE(k) E
                                                            m
                     2
            + m Оұ(k) d(k)
                       max Пғ
                             2

        "                                                  #
        1 + ПҒМғ(k)    1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k)   (k)  2 2

                                                                                    2
                                                       2                 (k)   (k)

      вүӨ           +3           d       Оұ       О¶ + 2ОІ        EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
           2         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max
                     1 + ПҒМғ(k)                 2
                                                                                          2
                                   (k)    (k)       2      2       (k)            (k)   вӢҶ
                  +3           mdmax Оұ             О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin EОһ(kвҲ’1) ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оё
                     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                         1 + ПҒМғ(k) 2
                             2
                        (k)      (k)                     2
                  +m Оұ         dmax 3              Оҙ +Пғ .
                                         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

F.3     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.10

Step 1: Setting up the proof. We want to find the conditions under
                                                               n       which weowill have ПҒ ОҰ(k) <
                                                                    (k)    (k)            (k)
1. As we have ОҰ(k) = [П•ij ]1вүӨi,jвүӨ2 and ПҒ ОҰ(k) = max О»1 , О»2                      where О»i are the
                                                                              n               o
                                                                                 (k)     (k)
eigenvalues of the matrix ОҰ(k) for i = 1, 2, we need to show that max О»1 , О»2                   < 1.
Therefore, we first write the eigenvalue equation of the matrix as

       (k)          (k)       (k) (k)                     (k)      (k)       (k) (k)     (k) (k)
  О» вҲ’ П•11    О» вҲ’ П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 = 0 вҮ’ О»2 вҲ’ П•11 + П•22 О» + П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 = 0.

Since this is a quadratic equation in the form of aО»2 n
                                                      +bО»+c = 0, we
                                                                  o know that
                                                                          вҲҡ
                                                                              if b < 0, and a, c > 0
                                                        (k)   (k)      вҲ’b+ b2 вҲ’4ac
and the determinant is positive, we will have max О»1 , О»2           =      2a       . Therefore, we
               вҲҡ
                   2
solve for вҲ’b+ 2a
               b вҲ’4ac
                      < 1 as follows
            p
              b2 вҲ’ 4ac < b + 2a вҮ’         4a (b + c) + 4a2 > 0     вҮ’          a + b + c > 0.
Now, rewriting the above inequality in terms of the actual coefficients, we get

        (k)     (k)    (k) (k)     (k) (k)                      (k)          (k)   (k) (k)
  1 вҲ’ П•11 вҲ’ П•22 + П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 > 0 вҮ’                 1 вҲ’ П•11      1 вҲ’ П•22 > П•12 П•21 .     (15)
                                                                                 2
                                         (k)   (k)                    (k)   (k)
Furthermore, note that a = 1 > 0, b = вҲ’ П•11 + П•22 < 0 and b2 вҲ’ 4ac = П•11 вҲ’ П•22     +
  (k) (k)
4П•12 П•21 > 0 hold by definition, so we only need to check for
                                        (k) (k)        (k) (k)
                                   c = П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 > 0.                                  (16)
                                                                      (k)

Eqs. 15 and 16 lay out the necessary conditions in order to get ПҒ ОҰ           < 1.
Step 2: Simplifying the conditions. Starting off with the more important of the two, we first
                                                                                   (k)
solve for Eq. 15. In order to simplify this inequality, we choose to have (i) 0 < П•11 вүӨ 1 and (ii)


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (k)                                                (k)
0 < П•22 вүӨ 1 for the main diagonal entries. For П•11 as defined in Lemma 4.7, we have
                                                           2
                (k)                  1 + ВөОұ(k) вҲ’ ВөОұ(k)          2ОІ 2        (k)

              П•11 вүӨ 1       вҮ’                                вүҘ         1 вҲ’ dmin .                  (17)
                                            1 + ВөОұ(k)            Вө2
To better characterize the condition on Оұ(k) based on the above inequality, we put the following
                (k)
constraints on dmin and Оұ(k) to get
                                                                                     (k)
                                              (k)          1                        О“1
                            Constraints 1: dmin вүҘ          (k)
                                                               ,       Оұ(k) вүӨ
                                                         О“0                          Вө
                                                          !
                                          2                                               2
                                      2ОІ             1
                                                                        (k)

                                                                                     (k)
                  вҮ’         ВөОұ(k) вүҘ           1вҲ’                   1 + О“1         + О“1      вҲ’ 1,
                                       Вө2            (k)
                                                    О“0
        (k)           (k)
where О“0 вүҘ 1 and О“1 > 0 are scalars. The above condition requires the learning rate Оұ(k) to be
lower-bounded, which is something we want to avoid. Thus, if the right-hand side of the inequality
is non-positive, this condition only requires us to choose a non-negative value for the learning rate,
which is sensible. So, we have
                                              !
                           2ОІ 2           1
                                                        (k)

                                                                      (k)
                                                                           2
                                   1 вҲ’            1 + О“ 1      +   О“  1      вҲ’1вүӨ0
                            Вө2          О“0
                                          (k)
                                                     !!                                 !    !

                      (k)
                           2       2ОІ 2          1          (k)        2ОІ 2           1
         вҮ’           О“1      +             1 вҲ’ (k)        О“1 +                1 вҲ’ (k) вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 0
                                    Вө2          О“0                      Вө2         О“0
                                                         !                          !
                                           2                        2
                                 (k)    ОІ            1            ОІ             1
                     вҮ’          О“1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ (k)                вүӨ 2 1 вҲ’ (k) вҲ’ 1
                                        Вө           О“0            Вө           О“0
                             пЈұ
                                  1           Вө2             (k)    2ОІ 2          1
                                     вүӨ   1  вҲ’    :   1 вүӨ  О“      вүӨ          1 вҲ’         вҲ’1
                             пЈҙ
                             пЈҙ
                             пЈІ (k)
                                О“0            ОІ2             1       Вө2           (k)
                                                                                 О“0
                    вҮ’                          2        2

                                                                                    (k)
                                  1
                                     вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІВө2 : 2ОІ                1
                                                             1 вҲ’ (k)       вҲ’ 1 вүӨ О“1 вүӨ 1
                             пЈҙ
                             пЈҙ
                             пЈі (k)
                                О“0                    Вө2          О“0
                    (                        !     )                      (                  ! )
                          2ОІ 2          1                  (k)                2ОІ 2         1
      вҮ’        min 1, 2 1 вҲ’ (k) вҲ’ 1 вүӨ О“1 вүӨ max 1, 2 1 вҲ’ (k) вҲ’ 1 .
                           Вө           О“                                       Вө          О“
                                      0                                             0
                                                                       (k)
We observe that we found a lower and upper bound for the choice of О“1 . Next, in order to simplify
  (k)
П•11 as defined in Lemma 4.7, we can use Eq. 17 to write
                                                       2                   !
                                 1 + ВөОұ(k) вҲ’ ВөОұ(k)           2ОІ 2       1       (k)
                  Constraint 2:                           вүҘ 2 1 вҲ’ (k) О“2 ,
                                        1 + ВөОұ(k)             Вө       О“0
           (k)
in which О“2 вүҘ 1 ensures that the constraint is satisfied, since we solved for Eq. 17 and found the
                       (k)      (k)
conditions on Оұ(k) , О“0 and О“1 to do so. Hence, for the bounds defined in Lemma 4.7, we get

                                                                                    (k)   (k)
                                                                             1 + О“1 dmax ОІ 2
                                                    !
   (k)       2
                        (k)

                               (k)
                                                  1      2 (k)      (k)
 П•11 вүӨ 1 вҲ’       1 + О“1       О“2 вҲ’ 1       1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ Оұ ,           П•12 вүӨ                      Оұ(k) ,
             Вө                                  О“0                                   mВө
                                                                       2 (k)
                      (k)    2Оұ(k)         (k)

                                                       (k)

                                                              2   Оұ(k) dmax Пғ 2
                    ПҲ1 вүӨ             1 + О“1      1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ +                     ,
                              Вө                                                       m
                                                 (k)   (k)     (k)
and there are no changes to the upper bounds of П•21 , П•22 and ПҲ2 , which were defined in Lemma
                        (k)              (k)
4.8. Note that matrix ОҰ and vector ОЁ in Eq. 7 were used as upper bounds, therefore we can
                                                                                       (k)
always replace their values with new upper bounds for them. Furthermore, note that in ПҲ1 , the
       (k)
term dmin was intentionally not interchanged with its lower bound. Consequently, with this new
           (k)
value for П•11 , we continue as
                 (k)                                        Вө
                П•11 > 0 вҮ’ Оұ(k) <                                           .
                                                (k)     (k)            1
                                        2 1 + О“1       О“2 вҲ’ 1     1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2
                                                                                           О“0



                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 (k)                                               (k)
Finally, we check the next conditions on П•22 defined in Lemma 4.8, i.e., 0 < П•22 вүӨ 1. Note that
       (k)  (k)      (k)                              (k)          (k)
for П•11 , П•12 and П•21 the lower bound is 0, but for П•22 it is 1+2ПҒМғ . Therefore, the lower-bound
                (k)                                                    (k)
condition of П•22 > 0 is already met. For the upper-bound condition П•22 вүӨ 1, noting that we have
     (k)                    (k)       (k)
3+ПҒМғ
   4     < 1, we can write П•22 вүӨ 3+4ПҒМғ to enforce this constraint. We have


         1 + ПҒМғ(k)    (k)  3 + ПҒМғ(k)                            1     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)      1
                   вүӨ П•22 вүӨ                   вҮ’     0 вүӨ Оұ(k) вүӨ q       p          p
            2                 4                                              (k)  О¶ + 2ОІ 2
                                                                                   2
                                                             2 3dmax 1 + ПҒМғ
                                                                  (k)


                                                                                                         (k)
Step 3: Determining the constraints. Now that we have made sure that (i) 0 < П•11 вүӨ 1 and (ii)
      (k)
0 < П•22 вүӨ 1 in the previous step, we can continue to solve Eq. 15. For the left-hand side of the
inequality, we have

                                    "                                               !              #

              (k)

                           (k)
                                        2       (k)

                                                       (k)
                                                                  1                       2 (k)

                                                                                                                     (k)

         1 вҲ’ П•11      1 вҲ’ П•22 =            1 + О“1     О“2 вҲ’ 1  1 вҲ’ (k)                   ОІ Оұ                1 вҲ’ П•22
                                        Вө                        О“             0
                                    "                                               !              #
                                        2 (k)

                                                 (k)
                                                            1                                          1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                 вүҘ   1 + О“1     О“2 вҲ’ 1  1 вҲ’ (k)                         ОІ 2 Оұ(k)                 .
                                   Вө                       О“0                                             4


Now, putting this back to Eq. 15, we get

                "                                       !            #
                                                                              (k)
                 2                                   1       2 (k) 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ

                           (k)     (k)                                                  (k) (k)
                    1 + О“1       О“2 вҲ’ 1       1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ Оұ                          > П•12 П•21
                 Вө                                 О“0                     4
              пЈ®       (k)

                             (k)
                                         пЈ№
                 1 + О“1 dmax ОІ 2
                                                      1 + ПҒМғ(k)   2                                     2
                                                                                         (k)
    вҮ’         пЈ°                     Оұ(k) пЈ» 3md(k) max              О¶   + 2ОІ  2
                                                                                 1  вҲ’  d min     Оұ (k)
                       mВө                             1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                "                                        !            #
                                                                               (k)
                  2                                   1       2 (k) 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ

                            (k)     (k)
              <      1 + О“1       О“2 вҲ’ 1        1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ Оұ
                  Вө                                 О“0                      4
                                           q
                                               (k)
                                                       q
                                                                 1

                                             О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ (k)            1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                               О“
                    вҮ’        Оұ(k) <                      r 0                            .
                                      вҲҡ (k) p
                                                                                   (k)
                                        6dmax 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin


                                                                                                               (k)         (k)
Finally, we solve for Eq. 16. Noting that by solving Eq. 15 we made sure that 1 вҲ’ П•11 вҲ’ П•22 +
 (k) (k)     (k) (k)
П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 > 0, we can write


                                   (k) (k)       (k) (k)                 (k)        (k)
                    c>0  вҮ’ П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 > 0 вҮ’ П•11 + П•22 вҲ’ 1 > 0
                                                         !
                       2       (k)

                                       (k)
                                                       1            1 + ПҒМғ(k)
            вҮ’       1вҲ’    1 + О“1     О“2 вҲ’ 1      1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2 Оұ(k) +           вҲ’1>0
                       Вө                             О“0                2

                               (k)                 Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                       вҮ’      Оұ <                                       .
                                             (k)     (k)           1
                                      4 1 + О“1      О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2
                                                                               О“0



                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 4: Putting all the constraints together. Reviewing all the constraints on Оұ(k) from the begin-
ning of this appendix, we can collect all of the constraints together and simplify them as
              (
                  (k)
  (k)            О“1          1         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)          1                              Вө
Оұ < min               , q            p             p               ,                                       ,
                  Вө                           (k)       2        2
                                                      О¶ + 2ОІ 2 1 + О“(k) О“(k) вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ 1
                       2 3dmax 1 + ПҒМғ

                               (k)
                                                                              1      2               (k)  ОІ2
                                                                                                    О“0

                                         Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                      ,
                                   (k)      (k)                   1
                       4 1 + О“1            О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2
                                                                О“0
                              q
                                   (k)
                                            q
                                                      1

                                 О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ (k)             1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                              )
                                                    О“0
                       вҲҡ (k) p
                                               r
                                                                        (k)
                          6dmax 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin
        (
            (k)

           О“1          1        1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)           1                          Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
= min           , q            p             p               ,                                        ,
            Вө                            (k)    О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 4 1 + О“(k) О“(k) вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ 1
                  2 3dmax 1 + ПҒМғ

                         (k)
                                                                          1      2              (k)  ОІ2
                                                                                               О“0
                 q
                     (k)
                              q
                                         1

                    О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ (k)            1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                 )
                                        О“0
           вҲҡ (k) p
                                  r                              ,
                                                           (k)
             6dmax 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin

while satisfying
                                              (k)               (k)
                                            О“0 вүҘ 1,            О“2 > 1,
        (          (                         !   ))                             (                             !     )
               2ОІ 2                     1                   (k)                    2ОІ 2                 1                  (18)
  max 0, min 1, 2                 1вҲ’    (k)
                                                вҲ’1       вүӨ О“1 вүӨ max              1, 2             1вҲ’    (k)
                                                                                                                  вҲ’1 .
                Вө                      О“0                                           Вө                  О“0
                                                                                                                         (k)
Note that one of the terms in the above minimization function was trivially removed since 1+2ПҒМғ <
1. In order to simply the condition on Оұ(k) further, we take the minimum of these terms with respect
to each variable separately to get
                   (       (                  (
                               (k)

        (k)                   О“1                                 Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
       Оұ < min min                 , min                                                   ,
                       (k)
                      О“1       Вө О“(k)2 ,О“0
                                          (k)

                                                          (k)

                                                                   (k)               1
                                                4 1 + О“1          О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2
                                                                                   О“0
                                                 q
                                                      (k)
                                                               q
                                                                         1

                                                    О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ (k)          1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                              ))
                                                                       О“0
                                                                                                , (19)
                                            вҲҡ (k) p
                                                                   r
                                                               (k)     2      2         (k)
                                               6dmax 1 + ПҒМғ          О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin
                                                            )
                           1       1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)        1
                       q         p             p               .
                     2 3dmax 1 + ПҒМғ
                             (k)           (k)   О¶ + 2ОІ 2
                                                  2


                                                                                            (k)                      (k)
Solving for the inner minimization in Eq. 19 first using
                                                    !
                                                         О“2                                       by defining c1               =
         r
                       (k)                                  (k)
               (1вҲ’ПҒМғ )
                1
             1вҲ’ (k)
               О“0
                                                       4 1+О“1     1вҲ’      1
                                                                          (k)
                                                                                 ОІ   2
                                       (k)                               О“0
вҲҡ (k) вҲҡ
              r                   and c2 =                                               , we have
                                                                Вө(1+ПҒМғ(k))

                            (k)
 6dmax 1+ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 +2ОІ 2 1вҲ’dmin

                        пЈұ     q
                        пЈІc(k)
                        пЈҙ
                          1
                                (k)
                               О“2 вҲ’ 1 вүӨ               (k)
                                                          1
                                                          (k)   ;
                                                                                (k)
                                                                      1 < О“2 вүӨ О“вӢҶ2 (k)
                                                      2 (О“2 вҲ’1)
                                                     cq
                                                                                                  ,                        (20)
                                             (k)         (k)            (k)
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈі (k)       1
                                    (k)   вүӨ c1         О“2 вҲ’ 1;        О“2 вүҘ О“вӢҶ2 (k)
                             c2   (О“2 вҲ’1)


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (k)
in which О“2 > 1 is due to Eq. 18. We can see that in Eq. 20, one of the expressions is increasing
                 (k)                                                                          вӢҶ(k)
with respect to О“2 , and the other one is decreasing. Thus, we find the optimal value for it О“2 as


                               3
                                                       1                                             1
                   q
                    О“вӢҶ2 (k) вҲ’ 1 =                (k) (k)
                                                                       вҮ’         О“вӢҶ2 (k) =                 2/3 + 1
                                                c1 c2                                          (k) (k)
                                                                                               c1 c2
              пЈ«вҲҡ                 r                                             пЈ¶2/3
                (k)                  2 + 2ОІ 2 1 вҲ’ d(k)
                    p
              6d      1 + ПҒМғ (k)   О¶
                max

                                                   min       Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
вҮ’ О“вӢҶ2 (k) = пЈ¬
            пЈ¬                                                                  пЈ·
                     q
                                1         (k)
                                                                             пЈ· пЈё +1
                        1 вҲ’ (k) 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ

                                                               (k)
            пЈӯ
                                               О“0        4 1+О“        1вҲ’ 1  ОІ2                   1                   (k)
                                                                                                                 О“0

                         вҲҡ
                             r
                                                (k) пЈ«                                 пЈ¶2/3
             (1 + ПҒМғ(k) ) 3 3 3 О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin                   (k)
                                                                    dmax Вө
           =                                          пЈӯ                             пЈё +1
                                                                (k)           (k)
                           2 1 вҲ’ (k) 1                  (1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ     )   1 + О“ 1    ОІ2
                                                О“0


             (k)             (k)вӢҶ
Choosing О“2 = О“2                    , we get


       пЈұ                                     q        q                         пЈј
                                                 (k)          (k)
       пЈҙ                                                                        пЈҙ
                                                О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ dmin 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                     Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
       пЈҙ
       пЈІ                                                                        пЈҙ
                                                                                пЈҪ
 min                                     ,
                      О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ dmin ОІ 2 вҲҡ6d(k) 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 1 вҲ’ d(k) пЈҙ
                                                          r
  (k)          (k)     (k)         (k)
 О“2 пЈҙ пЈі 4 1 + О“1
      пЈҙ                                          p                              пЈҙ
                                                                                пЈҫmax                                             min

                                       пЈ«        2/3
                                                  пЈ¶1/3
                         (k) (k)
          Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k) c1 c2                 (k) 2
                                         (c    )
        =                            = пЈӯ 1(k) пЈё
                 (k)          (k)
         4 1 + О“1       1 вҲ’ dmin ОІ 2       c2
         пЈ«                                     пЈ¶1/3               !2/3
                                                              (k)
                             Вө                        1 вҲ’  ПҒМғ
        =пЈӯ                                    пЈё          (k)
                                                                       .
                   (k)                 (k)
           6(1 + О“1 ) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin              2dmax ОІ



                                                                       (k)                               (k)
Note that by making this minimization over О“2 , the dependency on О“0 was removed as well.
                                                      (k)
Moving on to the second minimization in Eq. 19 using О“1 , we note that finding the optimal value
 вӢҶ(k)
О“1 would be analytically cumbersome
                          n         due to the conditions
                                                   o       that neednto be satisfied
                                                                                     for
                                                                                         it; First,
                                                                                                o
 (k)                                               2             (k)                   (k)                       2             (k)
О“1     > 0, and second, min 1, 2ОІ
                                Вө2                         1 вҲ’ dmin вҲ’ 1          вүӨ О“1        вүӨ max 1, 2ОІ
                                                                                                       Вө2             1 вҲ’ dmin вҲ’ 1 .
Thus, in order to get a more intuitive upper bound for Оұ(k) , we settle for a possible suboptimal value
                       (k)
for it. If we choose О“1 = 1 which is the only point satisfying the conditions in Eq. 18 and it also
                               (k)
does not rely on the value of dmin , we get


                                       (       пЈ«                                         пЈ¶1/3                    !2/3
                       (k)                 1 пЈӯ           Вө                                           1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                   Оұ         < min          ,                          пЈё                                 (k)
                                                                                                                           ,
                                           Вө 12 О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 1 вҲ’ d(k)                                  2dmax ОІ
                                                                                 min
                                                                              )
                                                                           (k)
                                                       11 вҲ’ ПҒМғ         1
                                                q       p         p            .
                                               2 3d
                                                    (k)  1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2
                                                           max


                                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 5: Obtaining ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ). We established ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) < 1 in the previous steps. The last step is to
determine what ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) is. We have
                                                           r                      2
          вҲ’b + вҲҡb2 вҲ’ 4ac
                                           (k)     (k)             (k)       (k)            (k) (k)  (k) (k)
                                         П•11 + П•22 +            П•11 + П•22            вҲ’ 4 П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21
 ПҒ ОҰ(k) =                            =
                     r2a                   2
                                                                                2
      (k)     (k)           (k)       (k)          (k) (k)
    П•11 + П•22 +           П•11 вҲ’ П•22           + 4П•12 П•21
  =
                               2                            !
                                                                              1 + ПҒМғ(k)

    1        2          (k)

                                  (k)
                                                       1
  =     1вҲ’       1 + О“1         О“2 вҲ’ 1           1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2 Оұ(k) +
    2        Вө                                       О“0                            2
                                                   1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k)

                                                                                2
                                                                          (k)        2      2

                                               +3             d         Оұ          О¶   + 2ОІ
                                                   1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max
             "                                                         !
           1           2           (k)

                                             (k)
                                                                   1
         +      1вҲ’         1 + О“1          О“2 вҲ’ 1         1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2 Оұ(k)
           2          Вө                                         О“0
                     1 + ПҒМғ(k)        1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k)                                 2

                                                                 2
                                                           (k)         2        2
                  вҲ’              вҲ’3              d       Оұ           О¶   +  2ОІ
                         2            1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max

                             (k)     (k)
                      1 + О“1 dmax ОІ 2                                                                        1/2
                                                                                                             #
                                                            (k)                     2
                                                (k) 1 + ПҒМғ

                                                                     (k)       (k)       2       2    (k)
               +4                             Оұ 3               mdmax Оұ                 О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin
                              mВө                    1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                             !
    3 + ПҒМғ(k)   1          (k)

                                     (k)
                                                          1
  =           вҲ’     1 + О“1         О“2 вҲ’ 1          1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2 Оұ(k)
       4        Вө                                       О“0
                         (k)                       (k)  2
                3 1 + ПҒМғ      (k)      2       2

              +              dmax    О¶   + 2ОІ        Оұ
                2 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                  "                                                          !
                1    1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)      2            (k)

                                                         (k)
                                                                          1
              +                 вҲ’        1 + О“1        О“2 вҲ’ 1        1 вҲ’ (k) ОІ 2 Оұ(k)
                2         2         Вө                                   О“0
                                             (k)                    (k)  2 2

                                      1 + ПҒМғ       (k)    2     2

                                вҲ’3               d      О¶ + 2ОІ        Оұ
                                      1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max

                                  (k)
                           1 + О“1 ОІ 2 1 + ПҒМғ(k)                                                 3 1/2
                                                                                                 #
                                                              2
                                                         (k)       2     2       (k)       (k)
                   + 12                                 d         О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin        Оұ            .
                                Вө          1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max
                                                         3+ПҒМғ      (k)                                    2
Therefore, ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) follows as ПҒ(ОҰ(k) )           =         4    вҲ’ A(k) Оұ(k) + B (k) (Оұ(k) ) +
  q
           (k)                           2  2               3                    вӢҶ(k)
1
2   ( 1вҲ’2ПҒМғ вҲ’ 2(A(k) Оұ(k) + B (k) (Оұ(k) ) )) + C (k) (Оұ(k) ) , where A(k) = Вө1 (О“2    вҲ’ 1)(1 вҲ’
                     1+ПҒМғ(k) (k)                                 2
                                                                   1+ПҒМғ(k)   (k) 2                   (k)
 1     2
 (k) )ОІ , B
            (k)
                = 32 1вҲ’      d
                        ПҒМғ(k) max
                                  (О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 ) and C (k) = 24 ОІВө 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                           (dmax ) (О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 (1 вҲ’ dmin )).
О“0
                               вӢҶ(k)
The value for the constant О“2 > 1 was given in step 4.

F.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.11

Note that by the properties of spectral radius, we have that ОҰвҲҘ В· вҲҘ вүӨ ПҒ(ОҰ)вҲҘ В· вҲҘ. Now, using Eq. 8,
we can write
пЈ®           h                2
                               i     пЈ№              "                         # K
      EОһ(K) ОёМ„(K+1) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ                        K+1       ОёМ„ (0)
                                                                 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ 2         X       KвҲ’r+1
пЈ°      h                          2
                                    iпЈ» вүӨ ПҒ(ОҰ)                               2  +     ПҒ(ОҰ)      ОЁ+ОЁ.
            (K+1)          (K+1)                         (0)            (0)
 EОһ(K) Оҳ           вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„                             Оҳ       вҲ’ 1 m ОёМ„          r=1


We emphasize that the time index k in ОҰ(k) and ОЁ(k) was dropped, since we are using a constant
                                                (k)          (k)
learning rate, and substituting the bounds for dmax вүӨ 1 and dmin вүҘ dmin and ПҒМғ(k) вүӨ ПҒМғ. This

                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


results in the constant matrix ОҰ(k) = ОҰ and the constant vector ОЁ(k) = ОЁ. Focusing on the term
PK           KвҲ’r+1
   r=1 ПҒ(ОҰ)         ОЁ + ОЁ, we get
                                                                           вҲһ
       K                         K+1                     K
                                                                   !                 !
      X         KвҲ’r+1
                                 X        KвҲ’r+1
                                                        X        u
                                                                          X        u
           ПҒ(ОҰ)        ОЁ+ОЁ=          ПҒ(ОҰ)        ОЁ=         ПҒ(ОҰ) ОЁ вүӨ          ПҒ(ОҰ) ОЁ
     r=1                                   r=1                                 u=0                    u=0
                                            1            1
                                      =          ОЁ=            ОЁ.
                                        1 вҲ’ ПҒ(ОҰ)    |1 вҲ’ ПҒ(ОҰ)|
Putting the above inequalities together concludes the proof of Eq. 9. Finally, noting that ПҒ(ОҰ) < 1
following 4.10, We can let K вҶ’ вҲһ to get Eq. 10. Note that 1 вҲ’ ПҒ(ОҰ) вүҘ 2AОұ, where A =
ОІ2   вӢҶ            1              вӢҶ
 Вө (О“2 вҲ’ 1)(1 вҲ’ О“0 ) with О“0 , О“2 > 1 being constant scalars defined in Appendix F.3.

We also note that Eqs. 9 and 10 are derived for the consensus error and the average model error
themselves, i.e., their last iterates. As summarized in Table 1, this is an improvement over existing
works with sporadic aggregations (Koloskova et al., 2020; Lian et al., 2017; Sundhar Ram et al.,
2010) where only the Cesaro sums (i.e., the running averages of the iterates) of these error terms are
bounded.


G    N ON -C ONVEX A NALYSIS

In this appendix, we analyze the convergence of our methodology when non-convex loss functions
are utilized. Our approach will be entirely different than the one done in Sec. 4, as we will be using
the non-convexity assumption (Assumption 4.2) instead of strong convexity (Assumption 4.1).
                                                                                                                2
We will still characterize the expected consensus error as EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ], but con-
trary to what was done in Sec. 4, instead of the distance of the average model from the optimal
solution, we will analyze the norm of the average model gradients EОһ(k) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k+1) )вҲҘ2 ]. As an
alternative to Lemma 4.7, we first provide an upper bound on the average model performance at each
iteration for the non-convex case, i.e., EОһ(k) [F (ОёМ„(k+1) )], in Lemma G.3. Then, as an alternative to
Lemma 4.8, we also calculate an upper bound on the consensus error for non-convex models, i.e.,
                               2
EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ], in Lemma G.4.
We first need two preliminary Lemmas, each of which will be useful in the proof of Lemmas G.3
and G.4, respectively.

Lemma G.1 (Gradient bounds for non-convex models) (See Appendix H.1) Let Assumptions 4.1-
(a), 4.1-(c) and M.1 hold. The following upper bounds related to the gradient of the global loss
function can be obtained in terms of the gradient norms EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )вҲҘ2 ] and the consensus
                                 2
error EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ].

                                           (k) 2                                           (k)                        2
     (a) EОһ(k) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮv                вҲҘ ]          вүӨ         2О¶ 2 (1      вҲ’   dmin )EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )вҲҘ ]       +
           ОІ 2 d(k)                 (k)               (k) 2          (k)
             m
                max
                      EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ         вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„       вҲҘ ] + 2(1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 .
                                           (k)                                             (k)                            2
     (b) вҲ’EОһ(k) [вҹЁвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮv                вҹ©]     вүӨ     вҲ’( 12 вҲ’ О¶ 2 (1 вҲ’ dmin ))EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )вҲҘ ] +
           ОІ 2 d(k)                                       2              (k)
             2m
                max
                      EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] + (1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 .

                           (k) 2                                                          (k)                         2
     (c) 21 EОһ(k) [вҲҘвҲҮv        вҲҘ ]           вүӨ            [1       +    2О¶ 2 (1    вҲ’      dmin )]EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )вҲҘ ]      +
           ОІ 2 d(k)                 (k)               (k) 2          (k)
             m
                max
                      EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ         вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„       вҲҘ ] + 2(1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 .

Next, we find an upper bound on the expected deviation of the gradients from their average for
non-convex models, similar to Lemma D.3 which was derived for strongly convex models.

Lemma G.2 (Gradient deviation bound for non-convex models) (See Appendix H.2 for the
proof.) Let Assumption 4.2 hold. For each iteration k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound on the


                                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


expected error of gradients from their average
                                                 "
              (k) (k)           (k) 2        (k)   2       (k)      (k)
                                                                        2
    EОһ(k) V вҲҮ вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv                   вүӨ 8dmax ОІ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                 2
                                                            2                            (k)                  2
                                                      + 2mО¶ EОһ(kвҲ’1)         вҲҮF ОёМ„                     + 2mОҙ           .

                                                                                                (k)               (k)
in which вҲҮ(k) is a matrix whose rows are comprised of the gradient vectors вҲҮFi (Оёi ), and вҲҮv                              =
 1
   Pm           (k) (k)
m    i=1 вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi .

Now, we can continue with our key lemmas for the non-convex case. Similar to the con-
vex case, we first derive counterparts for average model error and consensus error, i.e., Lem-
mas 4.7 and 4.8 for convex models, respectively. we first provide an upper bound on the aver-
age model performance EОһ(k) [F (ОёМ„(k+1) )] (Lemma G.3), and also upper bound the consensus error
                             2
EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ] (Lemma G.4), at each k.

Lemma G.3 (Average model performance for non-convex models) (See Appendix H.3 for the
proof.) Let Assumptions 4.2 and 4.3 hold. For each iteration k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound
on the expected average model performance:
                                                                        (k)                                   2
EОһ(k) [F (ОёМ„(k+1) )]   вүӨ        EОһ(kвҲ’1) [F (ОёМ„(k) )]             вҲ’     П•11 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )вҲҘ ]                       +
 (k)              (k)  (k) 2   (k)
П•12 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„ вҲҘ ] + ПҲ1 ,
        (k)                        (k)                    (k)               (k)         ОІ 2 d(k)
where П•11 = Оұ(k) [ 12 вҲ’ О¶ 2 (1 вҲ’ dmin ) вҲ’ ОІ(1 + 2О¶ 2 (1 вҲ’ dmin ))Оұ(k) ], П•12 =             2m Оұ
                                                                                             max (k)
                                                                                                     (1 + 2ОІОұ(k) )
     (k)                (k)                                  Пғ2
and ПҲ1 = Оұ(k) [(1 вҲ’ dmin )(1 + 2ОІОұ(k) )Оҙ 2 + ОІ2 Оұ(k) dmax  m     ].

In Lemma G.3, the upper bound on the expected error at iteration k + 1 is expressed in terms of the
                                                                      (k)                      2
expected performance EОһ(kвҲ’1) [F (ОёМ„(k) )], the scaled gradient norms П•11 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )вҲҘ ], the
                           (k)                          2
scaled consensus error П•12 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] (which will be presented in Lemma G.4),
              (k)
and a scalar ПҲ1 , all at iteration k. We next bound the consensus error in the following lemma.

Lemma G.4 (Consensus error for non-convex models) (See Appendix H.4 for the proof.) Let As-
sumptions 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 hold. For each iteration k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound on the
expected consensus error:
                              2          (k)                     2    (k)                                             2
EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ] вүӨ П•21 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )вҲҘ ] + П•22 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] +
 (k)
ПҲ2 ,
        (k)    1+ПҒМғ    (k)   (k)           2   (k)         (k)           (k)      (k)            2                (k)
where П•21 = 16 1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k)
                       mdmax (Оұ(k) ) О¶ 2 , П•22 = 1+2ПҒМғ               1+ПҒМғ
                                                                 + 8 1вҲ’      d
                                                                        ПҒМғ(k) max
                                                                                  (Оұ(k) ) ОІ 2 and ПҲ2                      =
        2 (k)     1+ПҒМғ(k) 2
m(Оұ(k) ) dmax (16 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                           Оҙ + Пғ 2 ), where ПҒМғ(k) is defined in Definition 4.5 and Lemma D.4-(c).

From this point forward, our analysis method will differ from the one done in Sec. 4. Instead of
forming an error vector like Eq. 6 and analyzing their joint behavior, we first expand the consensus
error recursively to get the next lemma.

Lemma G.5 (Explicit consensus error for non-convex models) (See Appendix H.5 for the proof.)
                                                                             1   вҲҡ 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
Let Assumptions 4.2 and 4.4 hold. If the learning rate Оұ(k) satisfies Оұ(k) вүӨ (k)   (k)
                                                                                                ,
                                                                                           О“1
                                                                                            (k)  4ОІ    dmax (1+ПҒМғ         )
      (k)
with О“1 > 1,
then for each iteration k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound on the expected consensus error:
                              2                                         (k:0)                             2
EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ]                вүӨ               П•22 вҲҘОҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0) вҲҘ                                     +
Pk      (k:r+1) (r)                      2     k   (k:r+1) (r)
               П•21 EОһ(rвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(r) )вҲҘ ] + r=0 П•22
                                             P
  r=0 П•22                                                 ПҲ2 ,
        (k:r)   Q k    (s)                    (k) (k)      (k)
where П•22 = s=r П•22 , and the values of П•21 , П•22 and ПҲ2 are given in Lemma G.4.


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, we use the upper bound derived in Lemma G.5 in Lemma G.3 to derive the following
proposition.

Proposition G.6 (Explicit average model performance for non-convex models) (See                         Ap-
pendix H.6 for the proof.) Let Assumptions 4.2 and 4.3 hold. If a non-increasing learning rate is
used, i.e., Оұ(k+1) вүӨ Оұ(k) , which also satisfies the following condition

                                                                  1      2         (k)
                                                                    вҲ’          вҲ’
                   (
                     О“3
                       (k)
                              1         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ (k)
                                                             1    2    О¶     1    dmin
      Оұ(k) < min           ,                              , (k)                              ,
                      2ОІ О“(k)
                                   q
                                                                                      (k)
                              1 4ОІ
                                        (k)
                                       dmax (1 + ПҒМғ ) (k)   О“2 ОІ  1 +  2О¶  2   1 вҲ’  d min
                             s                               r
                                        1                 1

                                1 вҲ’ (k)    2       1 вҲ’ (k)      1
                                                                  вҲ’ О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ d(k)                     )
                                                        О“2
                                     (О“1 )                      2                min      1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                          q                           (k)
                                                                                        p             ,
                                  4О“
                                      (k)
                                            1+О“
                                                    (k)             dmax О¶ОІ                1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                                                   4                  3

then for each iteration k вүҘ 0 we have the following bound on the expected average model perfor-
mance:
                                                     Pk       (r) (r)                     2
EОһ(k) [F (ОёМ„(k+1) )]       вүӨ        F (ОёМ„(0) )  вҲ’       r=0 Оұ    w1 EОһ(rвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(r) )вҲҘ ] +
  (0) (0)     (0)      (0) 2  P kвҲ’1 (r) (r) (r)     P k     (r)
Оұ w2 вҲҘОҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„ вҲҘ + r=0 Оұ w2 ПҲ2 + r=0 ПҲ1 ,
                                                                                                                               (k)
           (k)                               (k)                                                 (k)           ОІ 2 d(k) (1+О“         )
in which w1       = ( 21 вҲ’ О¶ 2 (1 вҲ’ dmin ))(1 вҲ’                 1
                                                                (k)   )(1 вҲ’       (k)
                                                                                     1
                                                                                           ), w2       = m(1вҲ’ПҒМғmax
                                                                                                               (k) )(1вҲ’
                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                                             , and the
                                                               О“2               (О“4 )2                                        (k) 2
                                                                                                                            (О“1 )
            (k)              (k)
values of ПҲ1      and ПҲ2           were given in Lemmas G.3 and G.4.

H     P ROOFS FOR N ON -C ONVEX A NALYSIS
H.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA G.1

(a) For this deviation term, we use Eq. 1 and triangle inequality to write
                                                   m                                                       2
                              (k) 2        1 X
               (k)                                                    (k) (k)
      вҲҮF (ОёМ„         ) вҲ’ вҲҮv              =       вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi
                                           m i=1
                              m                             2
                         1 X                        (k) (k)
                     вүӨ         вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi
                         m i=1
                            m                                                    2          m                           2
                         1 X                                              (k)            1 X
                     =                    вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оёi )                   +                   вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) )
                         m i=1                                                           m i=1
                              (k)                                                            (k)
                             vi     =1                                                      vi     =0
                              m                                 2               m
                                                                                                                2

                         1    X                          (k)              2     X
                     вүӨ                   ОІi2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оёi             +                     Оҙi2 + О¶i2 вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
                         m     i=1
                                                                          m      i=1
                              (k)                                               (k)
                             vi =1                                             vi =0
                            m               2         m
                                                                               2
                         1 X 2 (k)      (k)    (k) 2 X 2                                (k)

                     =         ОІi ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оёi     vi +        Оҙi + О¶i2 вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )     1 вҲ’ vi ,
                         m i=1                     m i=1
where in the line second to last, smoothness and gradient diversity (Assumptions 4.2-(a) and 4.2-(b))
were used. Taking the expected value of the above inequality concludes the proof.
(b) Second, for this inner product term, we have
             D                (k)
                                  E     D              (k)
                                                                                   E
          вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮv         = вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮv вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
                                                    2   D                           (k)
                                                                                        E
                                    = вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮv
                                                       вҲ’1            2  1                  (k) 2
                                               вүӨ          вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) +   вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮv       .
                                                       2                2

                                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, taking the expected value of this inequality and using part (a) of this lemma, we get

             hD               (k)
                                  Ei      1                           2
                     (k)                                         (k)
    вҲ’EОһ(k) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ ), вҲҮv              вүӨ вҲ’ EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )
                                          2
                                                    (k)
                                               ОІ 2 dmax

                                                                                       2
                                                                         (k)      (k)
                                             +           EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                                                  2m

                                                                                         2
                                                2           (k)                    (k)
                                             + О¶ 1 вҲ’ dmin EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )

                                                        (k)
                                             + 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2

            1                                               2
                          (k)
    вүӨвҲ’        вҲ’ О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
            2
                                          (k)
                                     ОІ 2 dmax

                                                                              2
                                                               (k)        (k)               (k)
                                   +          EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„                  + 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2 .
                                        2m

(c) Finally, for the norm term, we have
 1    (k) 2   1   (k)                         2             2                   (k) 2
   вҲҮv       =   вҲҮv вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вүӨ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮv       .
 2            2
Taking the expected value of this inequality and utilizing part (a) of this lemma
                                                            (k)
                                                       ОІ 2 dmax

  1            (k) 2                       (k)
                                                2
                                                                              (k)       (k)
                                                                                            2
    E (k) вҲҮv           вүӨ EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )           +           EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
  2 Оһ                                                      m

                                                                               2
                                       2        (k)                      (k)                (k)
                                   + 2О¶ 1 вҲ’ dmin EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )                  + 2 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2
                                                                                         (k)
                                                                                    ОІ 2 dmax

      h                              i                                    2                                        2
                 2            (k)                               (k)                                   (k)      (k)
  вүӨ 1 + 2О¶               1 вҲ’ dmin        EОһ(kвҲ’1)       вҲҮF (ОёМ„         )           +          EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                                                                                        m

                                                                                             (k)
                                                                                  + 2 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2 .


H.2       P ROOF OF L EMMA G.2

We have using the definition of Frobenius norms on matrices and triangle inequality that
                                                m
                                    (k) 2       X                (k)          (k)          (k) 2
          V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv                 =           вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi                 вҲ’ вҲҮv
                                                i=1
                                                                                      2
           m             m
           X     1       X   (k) (k)       (k) (k)

      =                вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi вҲ’ вҲҮFj (Оёj )vj
           i=1
                 m j=1
                 m       m                       2
           1 XX            (k) (k)       (k) (k)
      вүӨ              вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi вҲ’ вҲҮFj (Оёj )vj
           m i=1 j=1
                 m       m
            1 XX            (k) (k)              (k)              (k)              (k)
      вүӨ               вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi вҲ’ вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) )vi + вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) )vi вҲ’ вҲҮFj (ОёМ„(k) )vj
            m i=1 j=1
                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                   (k)             (k)      (k)
                                                                                  + вҲҮFj (ОёМ„(k) )vj       вҲ’ вҲҮFj (Оёj )vj
                 m       m                     2                 2                 2
            4 XX            (k)                  (k)               (k)               (k)
      вүӨ               вҲҮFi (Оёi ) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) ) vi + вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) ) vi + вҲҮFj (ОёМ„(k) ) vj
            m i=1 j=1
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                             (k)         (k)
                                                                              + вҲҮFj (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮFj (Оёj )               vj


                                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      m m                    2
                                                            2
    4 X X 2 (k)                (k)

                                                                (k)
  вүӨ          ОІi Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) vi + 2 Оҙi2 + О¶i2 вҲҮF ОёМ„(k)           vi
   m i=1 j=1
                                                            2
                                                                                     2
                                                                (k)              (k)    (k)
                                   + 2 Оҙj2 + О¶j2 вҲҮF ОёМ„(k)      vj + ОІj2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оёj     vj
    " m                            m
                        2                                   2
              (k)          (k)                                  (k)
      X                            X
          2         (k)                 2      2      (k)
  =4     ОІi Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„       vi + 2       Оҙi + О¶i вҲҮF ОёМ„           vi
         i=1                                                      i=1
            m                               m
                                                                                                               #
                                    2                          2
                                        (k)                (k)    (k)
            X                               X
         +2    Оҙj2 + О¶j2 вҲҮF ОёМ„(k)      vj +   ОІj2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оёj     vj
               j=1                                                               j=1
      m                                       2
                                                                                         2
                         (k)                                                                     (k)
      X
 =8            ОІi2 Оёi          вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)            + 2 Оҙi2 + О¶i2 вҲҮF ОёМ„(k)                        vi
      i=1
            m                             2
                                                                            2       m
                                                                                    X
                     (k)                          (k)                                  (k)
            X
 вүӨ 8ОІ 2             Оёi     вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)            vi        + 16 О¶ 2 вҲҮF ОёМ„(k)     + Оҙ2    vi ,
             i=1                                                                                     i=1


where in the sixth line above, smoothness and gradient diversity assumptions of Assumption 4.2
were used. We next take the expected value of the expression above and use uncorrelatedness or
random variables of Assumption 4.3-(b) and Definition 4.6 to get


                                                   (k) 2
 EОһ(k)        V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv
            m
                                                             2
                                                                       h     i
                                        (k)                              (k)
            X
        2
 вүӨ 8ОІ              EОһ(kвҲ’1)             Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)                 Ev(k) vi
                                                                    i
             i=1
                                                                                              2        m
                                                                                                       X      h     i
                                                                                                                (k)
                                                                  + 16 О¶ 2 EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF ОёМ„(k)      + Оҙ2    Ev(k) vi
                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                   i=1
             m
                                                  2
                                                                                    2        m
                                                                                             X
                                        (k)           (k)                                       (k)
             X
  вүӨ 8ОІ 2           EОһ(kвҲ’1)             Оёi вҲ’ ОёМ„(k)    di + 16 О¶ 2 EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF ОёМ„(k)      + Оҙ2    di
             i=1                                                                                                         i=1
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                     2
  вүӨ 8ОІ 2 d(k)
          max EОһ(kвҲ’1)       Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)       + 16md(k)      2
                                                         max О¶ EОһ(kвҲ’1)        вҲҮF ОёМ„(k)      + Оҙ2
                                                                                    2
                                                2
  = 8d(k)
      max     ОІ 2
                  EОһ (kвҲ’1)   Оҳ (k)
                                   вҲ’ 1m  ОёМ„ (k)
                                                    + 2mО¶ 2
                                                            EОһ(kвҲ’1)   вҲҮF   ОёМ„ (k)
                                                                                       + 2mОҙ 2
                                                                                                 .



H.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA G.3

We have

                            D                              E ОІ                     2
F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вүӨ F (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), ОёМ„(k+1) вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) +        ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёМ„(k+1)
                                                                2
                            D                            E ОІ                   2
                    (k)              (k)       (k)   (k)
             = F (ОёМ„ ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„ ), вҲ’Оұ gv                   +     Оұ(k) gv (k)
                                  D                     E     2 D                     E
                    (k)       (k)         (k)       (k)
             = F (ОёМ„ ) вҲ’ Оұ          вҲҮF (ОёМ„ ), вҲҮv           вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), Пөv (k)
                            ОІ   (k)  2        (k) 2     ОІ   (k)  2           2           2 D (k)       E
                          +     Оұ        вҲҮv          +      Оұ       Пөv (k) + ОІ Оұ(k)         вҲҮv , Пөv (k) ,
                            2                            2

in which the relationship in each of the three lines follow from (i) Smoothness (Assumption 4.2-(a)),
                   (k)    (k)     (k)
(ii) Eq. 5, (iii) gi = вҲҮi + Пөi for all i вҲҲ M. Next, we take the expected value of the above


                                                                             35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


inequality and use Assumptions 4.3, and Lemmas D.2 and G.1 to get


     h            i         h          i         1                                              2
                                                                 (k)
EОһ(k) F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вүӨ EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ Оұ(k)      вҲ’ О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin        EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
                                                 2
                                 2 (k)

                               ОІ dmax (k)                                  2
                                                          (k)         (k)                   (k)
                             +           Оұ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„                   + Оұ(k) 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2
                                  2m
                                                                  2
                                 h                      i                                2
                                          2        (k)       (k)                     (k)
                             + ОІ 1 + 2О¶ 1 вҲ’ dmin           Оұ        EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )
                                        (k)
                                   ОІ 3 dmax   (k)  2

                                                                             2
                                 +           Оұ       EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)
                                       m

                                             (k)
                                                            2 ОІ        2       Пғ2
                                 + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2 Оұ(k) +         Оұ(k) d(k)
                                                                          max
         h          i                                         2                m
вүӨ EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) )

                     1                                                               2
                                   (k)                         (k)
          вҲ’ Оұ(k)       вҲ’ О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin вҲ’ ОІ 1 + 2О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin Оұ(k) EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
                     2
              2 (k)

            ОІ dmax (k)                                                  2
                                      (k)                (k)       (k)
          +            Оұ      1 + 2ОІОұ       EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
               2m
                                                       ОІ (k) dmax Пғ 2

              (k)           (k)             (k)    2
          +Оұ          1 вҲ’ dmin 1 + 2ОІОұ            Оҙ + Оұ                 .
                                                       2        m


H.4   P ROOF OF L EMMA G.4

Note that we proved a similar bound for the case of convex models in Lemma 4.8. Thus, we start
from Eq. 14 derived in the proof of that lemma in Appendix 4.8. We take the expected value of the
inequality in Eq. 14 and use Lemmas D.2, G.2 and D.4-(c) to get

                                          1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k)

                                     2                                        2
                 (k+1)       (k+1)                             (k)        (k)
   EОһ(k)       Оҳ     вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„           вүӨ           ПҒМғ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                                            2ПҒМғ(k)
                                        "
                  1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k)   (k)  2 2

                                                                    2
                                                        (k)    (k)
               +8          d     Оұ        ОІ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                  1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max
                                                                                    #
                                                                         2
                                                     2             (k)            2
                                              + 2mО¶ EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF ОёМ„           + 2mОҙ
                                    "
                                                                                       (k)

               вҲ’2Оұ(k) EОһ(k) \E(k)        P(k) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оұ(k) V(k) вҲҮ(k) вҲ’ 1m вҲҮv       ,
                                                                                         #
                                                                  1             h     i
                                                                       T   (k)    (k)
                                                              Im вҲ’ 1m 1m V EE(k) E
                                                                  m
                          2
              + m Оұ(k) d(k)  max Пғ
                                   2

             "                                          #
               1 + ПҒМғ(k)    1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k)   (k)  2 2

                                                                                     2
                                                                      (k)        (k)
           вүӨ             +8           d       Оұ      ОІ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                  2         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max
                              1 + ПҒМғ(k)                 2                         2
                                            (k)    (k)     2                (k)
                         + 16           mdmax Оұ           О¶ EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF ОёМ„
                              1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                  1 + ПҒМғ(k) 2
                                     2
                                (k)     (k)                       2
                         +m Оұ          dmax 16              Оҙ +Пғ .
                                                  1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.5    P ROOF OF L EMMA G.5

We expand the bound derived in Lemma G.4 to get

                                  2
             (k+1)         (k+1)
 EОһ(k) Оҳ           вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„            вүӨ
     k
             !                          k k
                                                    !
                                   2                                          2
         (r)                                    (s)    (r)                          (r)
    Y                                  X  Y
                   (0)        (0)                                       (r)
       П•22      Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„            +        П•22     П•21 EОһ(rвҲ’1) вҲҮF ОёМ„          + ПҲ2 .
      r=0                                          r=0      s=r+1

We need to make sure that the consensus error diminishes over the iterations. Towards this goal, we
             (k)                                            (k)
ensure that П•22 < 1 for all k вүҘ 0. Using the definition of П•22 from Lemma G.4, we have
       1 + ПҒМғ(k)    1 + ПҒМғ(k) (k) (k) 2 2                                                                      1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                 +8          d    (Оұ ) ОІ < 1                                вҮ’              Оұ(k) <                                  .
                    1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max
                                                                                                         q
          2                                                                                                     (k)
                                                                                                    4ОІ         dmax (1 + ПҒМғ(k) )

We will find it useful later in the proof of Proposition G.6 to define the following equivalent con-
straint
                                    1         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)             (k)
                          Оұ(k) вүӨ (k) q                          , О“1 > 1.
                                  О“1 4ОІ d(k)  max (1 + ПҒМғ
                                                          (k) )

                   (k)             (k)                   (k)
This results in П•22 вүӨ 1+2ПҒМғ              +      1
                                               (k) 2
                                                     1вҲ’ПҒМғ
                                                       2       .
                                             (О“1 )


H.6    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION G.6

Step 1: Recursively expanding consensus error. We substitute the upper bound derived in
Lemma G.5 in Lemma G.3 to get

     h            i         h          i                          2
                                           (k)
EОһ(k) F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вүӨ EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ П•11 EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
                (
                                                               2
              (k)         (kвҲ’1:0)
            +П•12      П•22            Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)

                             kвҲ’1                                                             2               )
                                    (kвҲ’1:r+1)          (r)                                            (r)              (k)
                             X
                                                                                     (r)
                         +         П•22                П•21 EОһ(rвҲ’1)          вҲҮF ОёМ„                   + ПҲ2            + ПҲ1
                             r=0

         h          i                          2                                  2
                        (k)                           (k) (kвҲ’1:0)
вүӨ EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ П•11 EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )     + П•12 П•22      Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)
                      kвҲ’1                                                       2         kвҲ’1
                (k)             (kвҲ’1:r+1) (r)                                         (k)
                      X                                                                   X (kвҲ’1:r+1) (r)  (k)
            + П•12              П•22       П•21 EОһ(rвҲ’1)                 вҲҮF ОёМ„(r)      + П•12      П•22    ПҲ2 + ПҲ1 .
                         r=0                                                                         r=0


Now, summing both sides of the inequality from k = 0 to k = K, we get
          h             i              K
                                                                  2

                                            (k)
                                      X
                 (K+1)          (0)                          (k)
     EОһ(K) F (ОёМ„       ) вүӨ F (ОёМ„ ) вҲ’       П•11 EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )
                                                       k=0
                                                       K                                                   2
                                                               (k) (kвҲ’1:0)
                                                       X
                                                  +          П•12 П•22             Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)
                                                       k=0
                                                       K             kвҲ’1                                                      2
                                                               (k)          (kвҲ’1:r+1) (r)
                                                       X             X
                                                  +          П•12           П•22       П•21 EОһ(rвҲ’1)                   вҲҮF ОёМ„(r)
                                                       k=0           r=0
                                                       K             kвҲ’1                             K
                                                               (k)          (kвҲ’1:r+1)        (r)               (k)
                                                       X             X                               X
                                                  +          П•12           П•22             ПҲ2 +            ПҲ1
                                                       k=0           r=0                             k=0


                                                                     37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           K
                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                    K
                                                                                                                                   2X
                                  (k)                                                                                                       (k) (kвҲ’1:0)
                           X
                (0)                                                (k)                              (0)                  (0)
      = F (ОёМ„         )вҲ’         П•11 EОһ(kвҲ’1)             вҲҮF (ОёМ„            )               + Оҳ            вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„                         П•12 П•22
                           k=0                                                                                                      k=0
                           KвҲ’1                                                  K
                                                                             2  X
                                     (r)                                                                  (k) (kвҲ’1:r+1)
                           X
                       +         П•21 EОһ(rвҲ’1)             вҲҮF ОёМ„(r)                                     П•12 П•22
                           r=0                                                             k=r+1
                           KвҲ’1              K                                              K
                                     (r)                (k) (kвҲ’1:r+1)                                (k)
                           X                X                                              X
                       +         ПҲ2                 П•12 П•22                            +         ПҲ1
                           r=0             k=r+1                                           k=0
                           KвҲ’1
                                 "                       K
                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                2
                                      (k)   (k)                  (r) (rвҲ’1:k+1)
                           X                             X
                (0)
      = F (ОёМ„         )вҲ’             П•11 вҲ’ П•21                  П•12 П•22                                  EОһ(kвҲ’1)               вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
                           k=0                          r=k+1

                                                                           2
                                                                                                                              K
                                                                                                                             2X
                             (K)                                                                                                          (k) (kвҲ’1:0)
                       вҲ’ П•11 EОһ(KвҲ’1)                вҲҮF (ОёМ„(K) )                    + Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)                                   П•12 П•22
                                                                                                                               k=0
                           KвҲ’1              K                                              K
                                     (k)                (r) (rвҲ’1:k+1)                                (k)
                           X                X                                              X
                       +         ПҲ2                 П•12 П•22                            +         ПҲ1
                           k=0             r=k+1                                           k=0


                                                                                                                                                        (k)       (k)
Step 2: Simplifying using non-increasing learning rate. Using the definitions of П•12 and П•22
                                                                                         (k)
from Lemmas G.3 and G.4, a non-increasing learning rate means that the upper bounds for П•12 and
  (k)                                        (k)         (k)
П•22 is non-increasing as well, knowing that di вүӨ 1 and ПҒМғ < 1. Thus, we have


            h            i
       EОһ(K) F (ОёМ„(K+1) ) вүӨ F (ОёМ„(0) )
               KвҲ’1
                    "                  K
                                                         #
               X (k)                               rвҲ’1вҲ’k                       2
                             (k) (k+1)      (k+1)
                                       X
             вҲ’        П•11 вҲ’ П•21 П•12        П•22             EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
                       k=0                                    r=k+1

                                                                   2

                                                                                                                     2             K         k
                       (K)                                                                                                   (0)        (0)
                                                                                                                                   X
                 вҲ’ П•11 EОһ(KвҲ’1)                 вҲҮF (ОёМ„(K) )                 + Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)                             П•12           П•22
                                                                                                                                   k=0
                      KвҲ’1                       K           rвҲ’1вҲ’k XK
                              (k) (k+1)              (k+1)            (k)
                      X                         X
                 +           ПҲ2 П•12                 П•22          +   ПҲ1
                       k=0                     r=k+1                                                k=0
                             KвҲ’1
                                   "                                KвҲ’1вҲ’k
                                                                                                               #
                                                                     X                                    u                                               2
                                        (k)   (k) (k+1)                                      (k+1)
                             X
                 (0)                                                                                                                            (k)
       вүӨ F (ОёМ„         )вҲ’              П•11 вҲ’ П•21 П•12                                        П•22                    EОһ(kвҲ’1)             вҲҮF (ОёМ„         )
                             k=0                                           u=0

                                                                               2

                                                                                                                               2          вҲһ         k
                              (K)                                                                                                   (0)        (0)
                                                                                                                                          X
                        вҲ’ П•11 EОһ(KвҲ’1)                вҲҮF (ОёМ„(K) )                       + Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)                           П•12        П•22
                                                                                                                                          k=0
                             KвҲ’1                        KвҲ’1вҲ’k
                                                         X                                  u       K
                                       (k) (k+1)                           (k+1)                               (k)
                             X                                                                      X
                        +          ПҲ2 П•12                              П•22                      +          ПҲ1
                             k=0                         u=0                                        k=0
                                                        вҲһ
                             KвҲ’1
                                   "                                  #
                                                                    u                     2
                                        (k)   (k) (k+1)      (k+1)
                             X                          X
       вүӨ F (ОёМ„(0) ) вҲ’                  П•11 вҲ’ П•21 П•12        П•22                       (k)
                                                                        EОһ(kвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )
                             k=0                                    u=0

                                                                               2

                                                                                                                               2          вҲһ         k
                              (K)                                                                                                   (0)        (0)
                                                                                                                                          X
                        вҲ’ П•11 EОһ(KвҲ’1)                вҲҮF (ОёМ„(K) )                       + Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)                           П•12        П•22
                                                                                                                                          k=0
                             KвҲ’1                        вҲһ                       u              K
                                       (k) (k+1)                (k+1)                                    (k)
                             X                          X                                      X
                        +          ПҲ2 П•12                      П•22                         +         ПҲ1
                             k=0                        u=0                                    k=0


                                                                           38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         KвҲ’1
                                 "                                          #
                                           (k) (k+1)
                                                                                                                             2

              (0)
                         X            (k) П• П•                                                                 (k)
    вүӨ F (ОёМ„         )вҲ’               П•11 вҲ’ 21 12
                                               (k+1)
                                                                                EОһ(kвҲ’1)              вҲҮF (ОёМ„          )
                         k=0              1 вҲ’ П•22
                                                                                                                                     2 (0)       KвҲ’1    (k) (k+1)
                                                                                                Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)

                           (K)
                                                                                 2                                                    П•12        X     ПҲ2 П•12
                    вҲ’ П•11 EОһ(KвҲ’1)                         вҲҮF (ОёМ„(K) )                    +                           (0)
                                                                                                                                             +            (k+1)
                                                                                                           1 вҲ’ П•22                               k=0 1 вҲ’ П•22
                         K
                                 (k)
                         X
                    +          ПҲ1
                         k=0
                         KвҲ’1
                                 "                                  #
                                           (k) (k)
                                                                                                                     2

              (0)
                         X            (k) П• П•                                                              (k)
    вүӨ F (ОёМ„         )вҲ’               П•11 вҲ’ 21 12
                                               (k)
                                                                        EОһ(kвҲ’1)                 вҲҮF (ОёМ„           )
                         k=0              1 вҲ’ П•22
                                                                                                                                     2 (0)       KвҲ’1    (k) (k)
                                                                                                Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)

                       (K)                                          (K)
                                                                                 2                                                    П•12        X     ПҲ2 П•12
                    вҲ’ П•11 EОһ(KвҲ’1)                         вҲҮF (ОёМ„            )            +                           (0)
                                                                                                                                             +            (k)
                                                                                                           1 вҲ’ П•22                               k=0 1 вҲ’ П•22
                         K
                                 (k)
                         X
                    +          ПҲ1
                         k=0

Step 3: We need to ensure that the gradient descents result in lowering the average model loss.
                                                                                                       (k)   (k)
                                                            (k)                          (k)          П•21 П•12                                                       (k)
Thus, we need to make sure that П•11 > 0 and П•11 вҲ’                                                        (k)         > 0. Using the definitions of П•11
                                                                                                      1вҲ’П•22
                                                                  (k)
from Lemmas G.3, we first solve for П•11 > 0 to get

                     1
                                     (k)

                                                              (k)

              Оұ(k)     вҲ’ О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin вҲ’ ОІ 1 + 2О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin Оұ(k) > 0
                     2

                                                1            (k)
                                                2 вҲ’ О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin
                        вҮ’        0 < Оұ(k) <                           .
                                                               (k)
                                            ОІ 1 + 2О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin

Note that the above inequality implicitly assumes the following constraint as well
                      1
                                     (k)

                                                             (k)          1
                        вҲ’ О¶ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin > 0          вҮ’       dmin > 1 вҲ’ 2 ,
                      2                                                  2О¶
which alternatively is equal to
                                                      (k)                       1        1                   (k)
                                                    dmin вүҘ 1 вҲ’               (k)  2
                                                                                                ,          О“0 > 1.
                                                                            О“0 2О¶
                                          (k)       (k)
                           (k)        П•         П•
Next, to solve for П•11 вҲ’ 21 (k)
                             12
                                > 0, we need two extra constraints on Оұ(k) . The first one follows
                         1вҲ’П•22
as
                                               1
                                  1      1 вҲ’ (k)
                                             О“0              (k)
                          Оұ(k) вүӨ (k)                  ,    О“2 > 1,
                                 О“2 2ОІ 1 + 1
                                                 (k)
                                                                                           О“0

                  (k)   (k)
which results in П•11 вүҘ Оұ 2   1вҲ’                              1
                                                             (k)   1вҲ’                    1
                                                                                         (k)        . The second constraint on Оұ(k) would be
                                                            О“0                        О“2

                                                                                (k)
                                                                            О“3                       (k)
                                                            Оұ(k) вүӨ             ,                    О“3 > 0,
                                                                            2ОІ
                     (k)         ОІ 2 d(k)                     (k)
which implies П•12 вүӨ 2m  max
                            (1 + О“3 )Оұ(k) . Using the previous two results and the upper bound
     (k)
for П•22 derived in Lemma G.5, we can continue as
                             !            !                         !
              Оұ(k)       1             1    1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)          1          (k) (k)
                     1 вҲ’ (k)     1 вҲ’ (k)               1вҲ’         2   > П•21 П•12
                2       О“            О“          2             (k)
                                                            (О“ )
                                           0                            2                                                1


                                                                                      39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                       !               !                       !
                    Оұ(k)           1               1  1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)           1
            вҮ’                1 вҲ’ (k)      1 вҲ’ (k)                1вҲ’
                     2          О“0              О“2        2              (k) 2
                                                                      (О“1 )
                                                                                             !

                                 1 + ПҒМғ(k)                2   ОІ 2 d(k)
                                               (k)   (k)     2       max (k)           (k)
                            > 16           mdmax Оұ         О¶               Оұ     1 + О“3
                                 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                          2m
                                 s
                                              1             1
                                     1 вҲ’ (k) 2       1 вҲ’ (k)
                                                                             q
                                                                                     1
                                           (О“1 )           О“2           (k)    1 вҲ’ (k)
                            (k)                                  1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ             О“0
                вҮ’          Оұ <            вҲҡ q                    p
                                        4 2 1 + О“3
                                                      (k)          1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ОІd(k)max


Finally, setting the following constraint
                       s
                                   1           1
                           1 вҲ’ (k)        1 вҲ’ (k)
                                                                q
                                                                       1
                                (О“1 )
                                     2
                                              О“2            (k)   1 вҲ’ (k)
           (k)      1                               1 вҲ’  ПҒМғ           О“0                        (k)
         Оұ вүӨ (k)               вҲҡ q                  p                     ,                   О“4 > 1,
                  О“4          4 2 1 + О“3
                                          (k)         1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ОІd(k)
                                                                     max

we obtain
                                                                                 пЈ«             пЈ¶
                                                           !                 !
                      (k) (k)
                 (k) П• П•        Оұ(k)                   1             1                    1
                П•11 вҲ’ 21 12   вүҘ               1вҲ’               1вҲ’                пЈӯ1 вҲ’         2 пЈё .
                                                                                 пЈ¬              пЈ·
                          (k)    2                  (k)              (k)
                     1 вҲ’ П•22                       О“0               О“2                   (k)
                                                                                        О“4

H.7    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.12

We are given that a constant learning rate Оұ(k) = Оұ is being used, and we have that ПҒМғ(k) вүӨ ПҒМғ with
                                                 (k)                                        (k)
ПҒМғ = max0вүӨkвүӨK ПҒМғ(k) for the spectral radius and di вүҘ dmin with dmin = min0вүӨkвүӨK,iвҲҲM di for
SGD probabilities. Thus, we can simplify the results of Proposition G.6 to get
           h            i                     K
                                              X
                                                                       2

                 (K+1)           (0)                              (r)
     EОһ(K) F (ОёМ„       ) вүӨ F ОёМ„        вҲ’ w1 Оұ    EОһ(rвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )
                                                   r=0
                                                                         2
                                           + Оұw2 Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)             + Оұw2 ПҲ2 K + ПҲ1 (K + 1).

Therefore, if the learning rate satisfies
                              (
                                 О“3 1       1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ     1     1вҲ’ 1
                     Оұ < min         ,      вҲҡ       ,          О“0   ,
                                 2ОІ О“1 4ОІ 1 + ПҒМғ 2О“2 ОІ 1 + 1
                                                                  О“0
                                       r                      q
                                          1 вҲ’ О“11    1 вҲ’ О“12    1 вҲ’ О“10 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ
                                                                                )
                                           вҲҡ     вҲҡ                     вҲҡ          ,
                                          4 2О“4 1 + О“3           О¶ОІ      1 + ПҒМғ
then we have
        K                                      "
   1 X                       2          1                                        2
                         (r)
           EОһ(rвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )      вүӨ               F ОёМ„(0) вҲ’ F вӢҶ + Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0) Оұw2
 K + 1 r=0                         Оұw1 (K + 1)
                                                                                                            #
                                                                                     + Оұw2 ПҲ2 K + ПҲ1 (K + 1) .
       "                                   2                                  #
  1        F ОёМ„(0) вҲ’ F вӢҶ   Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0) w2
вүӨ                        +                    + Оұ2 w2 w3 + (1 вҲ’ dmin )w4 + Оұw5 ,
  w1         Оұ(k + 1)            k+1
                                                            ОІ 2 dmax (1+О“3 )                   1+ПҒМғ 2
where w1 = 21 (1 вҲ’ О“10 )(1 вҲ’ О“12 )(1 вҲ’ О“12 ), w2 =                            , w3 = mdmax (16 1вҲ’         2
                                                                                                  ПҒМғ Оҙ + Пғ ),
                                             4              m(1вҲ’ПҒМғ) 1вҲ’ О“1
                                                                         1
                                       2
w4 = (1 + О“3 )Оҙ 2 and w5 = ОІdmax 2m
                                    Пғ
                                      . Also, the conditions on the constant scalars О“i with 0 вүӨ i вүӨ 4
are О“0 , О“1 , О“2 , О“4 > 1 and О“3 > 0.


                                                       40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   D IMINISHING L EARNING R ATE P OLICY FOR C ONVEX M ODELS
In this appendix, we do the convergence analysis of our methodology under a diminishing learning
rate policy, i.e., when Оұ(k+1) < Оұ(k) for all k вүҘ 0. We will show that convergence to the globally
                                                             (k)
optimal point is possible if the frequency of SGDs, i.e., di , is increasing over time. Thus, a
few preliminary lemmas are first required, to re-derive the counterpart of Proposition 4.10 for the
              (k)
increasing di strategy.

Proposition I.1 (Spectral radius with diminishing learning rate) (See Appendix J.1 for the
                                                                                            (k)
proof.) Let Assumptions 4.1, 4.3 and 4.4 hold. If the SGD probabilities are chosen as di =
      (k)                 (k)     1        (k)             (k)
1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(k) with 0 вүӨ О·i вүӨ Оұ(k)        and О·min = miniвҲҲM О·i , and the learning rate satisfies the
following condition for all k вүҘ 0
                     (
                         (k)
           (k)          О“1     1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)         1
          Оұ < min            , вҲҡ p            p          ,
                         Вө 2 3 1 + ПҒМғ     (k)   О¶ + 2ОІ 2
                                                 2

                              пЈ«                                   пЈ¶1/3
                                                                                    2/3 )
                                                                         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                                               Вө
                              пЈӯ                                   пЈё                       .
                                          (k) (k) 2
                                6 О¶ 2 + 2О· О“ ОІ         1+О“
                                                            (k)             2ОІ
                                               min 1        Вө         1

                    (k)

then we have ПҒ ОҰ    < 1 for all k вүҘ 0, in which ПҒ(В·) denotes the spectral radius of a given matrix,
and ОҰ is given in the linear system of inequalities of Eq. 7. ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) is given by
      (k)

                                                                      (k)                        2
ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) = 1 вҲ’ h(Оұ(k) ), where h(Оұ(k) ) = 1вҲ’4ПҒМғ                    + A(k) Оұ(k) вҲ’ B (k) (Оұ(k) ) вҲ’
  q
           (k)                           2  2               3            О·
                                                                           (k) (k)
                                                                              О“      (k)    вӢҶ(k)
1
2   ( 1вҲ’2ПҒМғ вҲ’ 2(A(k) Оұ(k) + B (k) (Оұ(k) ) )) + C (k) (Оұ(k) ) , and A(k) = minВө 1 (1+О“1 )(О“2 вҲ’
                                                                (k)
                      (k)
                   1+ПҒМғ                       (1+О“1 )ОІ 2 1+ПҒМғ(k)          (k) (k) 2
1)ОІ 2 , B (k) = 23 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                            (О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 ), and C (k) = 12
                                                  Вө      1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                 (О¶ 2 + 2О·min О“1 ОІВө ). The value
     вӢҶ(k)                                 (k)             (k)
for О“2 is given in Appendix J.1, and 0 < О“1 < 1/(1+2ОІ 2 О·min /Вө2 ) is an arbitrary scalar value.

Proposition I.1 implies that limkвҶ’вҲһ ОҰ(k:0) = 0 in Eq. 8. However, note that this is only the
asymptotic behaviour of ОҰ(k:0) , and the exact convergence rate will depend on the choice of
the learning rate Оұ(k) . Furthermore, noting that the first expression in Eq. 8 asymptotically ap-
proaches zero, Proposition I.1 also implies that the optimality gap is determined by the terms
Pk       (k:r) (rвҲ’1)
   r=1 ОҰ      ОЁ      + ОЁ(k) , and it can be made zero if the learning rate Оұ(k) satisfies certain con-
ditions, which we will discuss in Theorem I.5.
Proposition I.1 outlines the necessary constraint on the learning rate Оұ(k) at each iteration k вүҘ 0.
We next provide a corollary to Proposition I.1, in which we show that under certain conditions, the
above-mentioned constraint needs to be satisfied only on the initial value of the learning rate, i.e,
Оұ(0) .

Corollary I.2 (Constraint on diminishing learning rate initialization for convex models)
(Corollary to Proposition I.1) If the learning rate Оұ(k) is non-increasing, i.e., Оұ(k+1) вүӨ Оұ(k) , the
                                        (k)                              1
SGD probabilities are determined as di = 1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(k) with 0 вүӨ О·i вүӨ Оұ(0)     and О·min = miniвҲҲM О·i ,
                                                                            (k)
for all k вүҘ 0, and we have constant aggregations probabilities bij = bij , then the constraints in
Proposition I.1 simplify to
            (                              пЈ«                                 пЈ¶1/3
                                                                                              2/3 )
               О“ 1   1    1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ   1                        Вө                        1 вҲ’  ПҒМғ
Оұ(0) < min         , вҲҡ вҲҡ         p        ,пЈӯ                                 пЈё                     .
               Вө 2 3 1 + ПҒМғ О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2                           2
                                             6 О¶ 2 + 2О·min О“1 ОІ (1 + О“1 )              2ОІ
                                                                            Вө

This also results in time-invariant scalars A = A(k) , B = B (k) and C = C (k) , where these
quantities were defined in Proposition I.1.

In the above Corollary, we obtained the constraints on the initial value of the learning rate, i.e.,
Оұ(0) , that lead to the spectral radius of ОҰ(k) being less than 1, i.e., ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) < 1. Note that since


                                                       41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                     (0)
the learning rate is diminishing, i.e., limkвҶ’вҲһ Оұ(k) = 0, it follows that di = 1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(0) and
           (k)
limkвҶ’вҲһ di = 1, which means that all clients will basically do SGDs at every iteration for large
enough values of k.
Two final building blocks are necessary for the proof of Theorem I.5. We present these in the
following lemmas.

Lemma I.3 (Bound for product in summation form) (See Lemma 1 in Zehtabi et al. (2022) for
                     вҲһ
the proof.) Let {О¶r }r=0 be a scalar sequence where 0 < О¶r вүӨ 1, вҲҖr вүҘ 0. For any p вүҘ 1, we have
                                              k
                                              Y                p          1
                                                    (1 вҲ’ О¶r ) вүӨ          Pk        .
                                              r=s                    p    r=s О¶r


Next, we outline another crucial lemma for our analysis.

Lemma I.4 (Bounds for learning-rate-based
                                       p     quantities) (See Appendix J.2 for the proof.) Let a
diminishing learning rate Оұ(k) = Оұ(0) / 1 + k/Оі be used, which satisfies the properties
                                                    вҲһ
                                                    X                         вҲһ
                                                                              X                2
                            Оұ(k+1) < Оұ(k) ,               Оұ(k) = вҲһ,                    Оұ(k)        < вҲһ3 .             (21)
                                                    k=0                       k=0

                                                                                          (k)
Under the setup of Proposition I.1 for the SGD probabilities, i.e., di , if the aggregation proba-
                              (k)
bilities are constant, i.e., bij = bij for all i вҲҲ M and (i, j) вҲҲ E (k) , then the following bounds
hold
          Pk                      q         q
                   (q)       (0)        k          r
      (a)    q=r Оұ     вүҘ 2Оұ         1 + Оі вҲ’    1 + Оі ,


       (b) h(Оұ(k) ) вүҘ 2AОұ(k) ,
                                  2
             Pk         (Оұ(rвҲ’1) )
       (c)     r=1
                       Pk        (q) )
                        q=r h(Оұ
                       "                                                                            !       q     #
                                                                                                                k
                 (0)
                                                               q                                           2 1+ Оі
             вүӨ Оұ4A         q      1q
                                            + 2(Оі+1)
                                              q           ln       1 + Оіk + ln q    1
                                                                                                        + 1+ kвҲ’1 .
                                k
                             1+ Оі вҲ’ 1+ Оі1          k
                                                1+ Оі                             1+ 1  Оі+kвҲ’1 вҲ’1                Оі


where h(Оұ(k) ) and the constant A(k) were defined in Proposition I.1.

Using Corollary I.2 and Lemmas I.3 and I.4, our main theorem follows.

Theorem I.5 (Strongly-convex convergence result with a diminishing learning rate) (See Ap-
pendix J.3 for the proof.)
                        p Let Assumptions 4.1, 4.3 and 4.4 hold. If a diminishing learning rate
policy Оұ(k) = Оұ(0) / 1 + k/Оі with Оі > 0 satisfying the conditions outlined in Corollary I.2 is
                                                    (k)              (0)
employed, and the SGD probabilities are set to di = 1 вҲ’ ((1 вҲ’ di )/Оұ(0) )Оұ(k) for all i вҲҲ M,
                                                                   (k)
while aggregation probabilities are set to constant values, i.e., bij = bij for all i вҲҲ M and
(i, j) вҲҲ E (k) , then we can rewrite Eq. 8 as

    (K+1)             1
  ОҪ        вүӨO вҲҡ           ОҪ (0)
                      K
                                                                 пЈ®                              пЈ№
                         2     1                                2(1+ВөОұ(0) )(1вҲ’d(0)max ) 2    Пғ2
                                                ln K        1                          Оҙ   +
                + Оұ(0)        3O вҲҡ        +O вҲҡ          +O       пЈ°         ВөОұ(0)             mпЈ».
                                     K             K        k                1+ПҒМғ 2      2
                                                                         m 3     Оҙ +Пғ                   1вҲ’ПҒМғ
                                                                                                                      (22)
Letting K вҶ’ вҲһ, we get
                                                     lim ОҪ (K+1) = 0.                                                 (23)
                                                    KвҶ’вҲһ
   3
       Note that the last condition implies limkвҶ’вҲһ Оұ(k) = 0


                                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The bound in pEq. 22 of Theorem I.5 indicates that by using a diminishing learning rateвҲҡpolicy of
  (k)    (0)
Оұ     = Оұ / 1 + k/Оі, DSpodFL achieves a sub-linear convergence rate of O(ln K/ K), and
Eq. 23 shows that asymptotic zero optimality gap as k вҶ’ вҲһ can be achieved.
However, it is worth noting that choosing the SGD probabilities based on the learning rate, i.e.,
  (k)
di = 1 вҲ’ Оұ(k) /Оұ(0) for all i вҲҲ M and k вүҘ 0, is only of theoretical value in this paper. This
is because our motivation of introducing the notion of SGD probabilities was to capture compu-
tational capabilities of heterogeneous clients in real-world settings, therefore, it is an independent
uncontrollable parameter and cannot be chosen based on the learning rate.
                               (k)
Finally, note that setting di = 1 вҲ’ Оұ(k) /Оұ(0) is equivalent to having all clients in the decentralized
system to conduct SGD at each iteration as k вҶ’ вҲһ. This result is akin to Wang & NedicМҒ (2023),
in which an increasing similarity between the learning rates of clients is needed for convergence,
despite them being initially uncoordinated.

J     P ROOFS FOR D IMINISHING L EARNING R ATE P OLICY FOR C ONVEX
      M ODELS
J.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION I.1
                                (k)
Let the SGD probabilities di          be chosen as the following for all i вҲҲ M:
       (k)          (k)                    (k)        1                        (k)    (k)               (k)
      di     = 1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(k) ,          0 вүӨ О·i     вүӨ        ,         (k)
                                                                   О·max = max О·i ,   О·min = min О·i ,
                                                     Оұ(k)                iвҲҲM                      iвҲҲM


where Оұ(k) is the learning rate with a diminishing policy, i.e., limkвҶ’вҲһ Оұ(k) = 0. Based on this
relationship that we put between the SGD probabilities and the learning rate, we first rewrite the
bounds for matrices ОҰ(k) and ОЁ(k) which were given in Lemmas 4.7 and 4.8. We have
                                                          2   2О· (k) Оұ(k)  2
           (k)
          П•11 = 1 вҲ’ ВөОұ     (k)           (k)
                                  1 + ВөОұ вҲ’ ВөОұ        (k)
                                                                + min                   1 + ВөОұ(k) ОІ 2 ,
                                                                           Вө
                                                                           Оұ(k) ОІ 2
                               (k)
                             П•12 = 1 + ВөОұ(k) 1 вҲ’ О·max          (k)
                                                                    Оұ(k)             ,
                                                                              mВө
                  (k)      1 + ПҒМғ(k)            (k)   (k)

                                                                 (k)
                                                                      2
                                                                            2        2 (k) (k)

                П•21 = 3              m    1 вҲ’ О· max Оұ          Оұ          О¶   +   2ОІ   О· min Оұ
                           1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                                        (24)
                 (k)     1 + ПҒМғ(k)      1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                                                            (k)    (k)

                                                                             (k)
                                                                                   2
                                                                                        2       2

               П•22 =                +3              1 вҲ’   О·max   Оұ        Оұ           О¶   +  2ОІ     ,
                             2          1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                     "                                                         #
                                   2 2О· (k)                                                 2
                                                                                      (k) Пғ

                   (k)        (k)        min            (k)      2             (k)
                 ПҲ1 = Оұ                        1 + ВөОұ          Оҙ + 1 вҲ’ О·max Оұ                     ,
                                        Вө                                                    m
                                                              2   1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                       (k)               (k)   (k)       (k)                      2       2
                      ПҲ2 = m 1 вҲ’ О·max Оұ                Оұ            3            Оҙ +Пғ .
                                                                      1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
The important difference with the terms in Eq. 24 and the corresponding ones outlined in Lemmas
                                           2            (k)      (k)
4.7 and 4.8 is the fact that we get a Оұ(k) factor for ПҲ1 and ПҲ2 . This factor will help us show
in Theorem I.5 that zero optimality gap can be reached, which follows mainly from Eq. 21.
Next, we do an analysis similar to the proof of Proposition 4.10, which was given in Appendix F.3.
Step 1: Setting up the proof. We skip repeating the explanations for this step, as they are exactly
the same as step 1 in Appendix F.3.
                                                                                            (k)
Step 2: Simplifying the conditions. Recall that we have to ensure (i) 0 < П•11 вүӨ 1 and (ii)
     (k)          (k)
0 < П•22 вүӨ 1. For П•11 as defined in Eq. 24, we have
                                                               2         (k)
                      (k)                  1 + ВөОұ(k) вҲ’ ВөОұ(k)       2ОІ 2 О·min
                    П•11 вүӨ 1        вҮ’                             вүҘ      2
                                                                             .       (25)
                                               1 + ВөОұ(k) Оұ(k)         Вө

                                                              43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We then put the following constraint on Оұ(k) to get a tighter lower bound for Eq. 25. We have
                           (k)                               (k)
                         О“                             2ОІ 2 О·min (k)         (k)

                                                                                       (k)
                                                                                            2
   Constraint 1: Оұ(k) вүӨ 1 ,         вҮ’       ВөОұ(k) >              О“ 1   1 + О“ 1    +  О“ 1      вҲ’ 1,
                          Вө                               Вө2
         (k)
where О“1 > 0 is a scalar. In order to avoid a positive lower-bound on the learning rate Оұ(k) , we
find the conditions under which the right-hand side of the above inequality is negative. We have
                                   (k)
                             2ОІ 2 О·min (k)             (k)

                                                                  (k)
                                                                       2
                                       О“ 1      1 +  О“ 1     +  О“ 1      вҲ’1<0
                                Вө2
                                                 !
                                            (k)                        (k)
                                     2ОІ 2 О·min   (k)  2 2ОІ 2 О·min (k)
                    вҮ’          1+                    О“  1     +            О“1 вҲ’ 1 < 0,
                                        Вө2                          Вө2
                              !            !
                          (k)
                    2ОІ 2 О·min      (k)

                                                   (k)

                                                                                 (k)       1
      вҮ’        1+                О“ 1   вҲ’  1      О“ 1   +  1   < 0 вҮ’ вҲ’1 < О“1 <                       .
                       Вө2                                                              1+
                                                                                                (k)
                                                                                          2ОІ 2 О·min
                                                                                       Вө2
                            (k)
Next, in order to simplify П•11 further, we add another constraint using Eq. 25 to parameterize the
lower bound in Eq. 25. We have
                                                      2           (k)
                                 1 + ВөОұ(k) вҲ’ ВөОұ(k)         2ОІ 2 О·min (k)
                                                        вүҘ       2
                                                                      О“1 ,
                                       1 + ВөОұ(k)               Вө
                                                   2          (k)
                              1 + ВөОұ(k) вҲ’ ВөОұ(k)         2ОІ 2 О·min (k) (k)                  (k)
                Constraint 2:                        >             О“1 О“2 ,            О“2 > 1,
                                    1 + ВөОұ(k)              Вө2
               (k)
in which О“2 > 1 makes sure that the constraint in Eq. 25 is satisfied. Hence, we can update the
entries of matrices ОҰ(k) and ОЁ(k) as
                                          (k) (k)
                        (k)            2О· О“                   (k)

                                                                        (k)

                       П•11 вүӨ 1 вҲ’ min 1                 1 + О“1         О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2 Оұ(k) ,
                                             Вө

                       (k)     2
                  1 + О“1 ОІ                                1 + ПҒМғ(k)   (k)  2 2
                                                                                                         2

         (k)                       (k)           (k)                                         (k) (k) ОІ
        П•12 вүӨ                    Оұ ,           П•21 вүӨ 3               m Оұ             О¶ + 2О·min О“1
                      mВө                                  1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                                     Вө
                                           (k)              (k)          2
                           (k)     1 + ПҒМғ            1 + ПҒМғ
                                                                  Оұ(k)      О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 ,

                         П•22 вүӨ                 +3
                                        2            1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                     "                                   #
                   2 2О· (k)                           Пғ2                             2   1 + ПҒМғ(k)
     (k)      (k)        min            (k)     2                 (k)           (k)                   2      2
   ПҲ1 вүӨ Оұ                        1 + О“1 Оҙ +                 , ПҲ2 вүӨ m Оұ                   3           Оҙ +Пғ .
                         Вө                            m                                    1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
Note that matrix ОҰ(k) and vector ОЁ(k) in Eq. 7 were used as upper bounds, therefore we can always
                                                                                              (k)
replace their values with new upper bounds for them. Consequently, with this new value for П•11 ,
we continue as
                 (k)                                           Вө
                П•11 > 0      вҮ’       Оұ(k) <                                    .
                                                (k) (k)        (k)    (k)
                                             2О·min О“1 1 + О“1         О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2
                                                (k)                                  (k)
Finally, we check the next condition 0 < П•22 вүӨ 1. Noting that we have 3+4ПҒМғ                < 1, we can enforce
 (k)                (k)       (k)
П•22 вүӨ 1 by setting П•22 вүӨ 3+4ПҒМғ . We have
      1 + ПҒМғ(k)     (k)  3 + ПҒМғ(k)                                 1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)      1
                вүӨ П•22 вүӨ               вҮ’                 0 вүӨ Оұ(k) вүӨ вҲҡ p         p           .
            2                     4                               2 3 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2
                                                                               (k)                     (k)
Step 3: Determining the constraints. Having made sure that (i) 0 < П•11 вүӨ 1 and (ii) 0 < П•22 вүӨ 1
in the previous step, we can continue to solve Eq. 15. For the left-hand side of the inequality, we
have                               "                                          #
                                       (k) (k)

               (k)

                           (k)
                                     2О·min О“1         (k)

                                                             (k)

                                                                                        (k)

          1 вҲ’ П•11     1 вҲ’ П•22 =                 1 + О“1      О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2 Оұ(k) 1 вҲ’ П•22
                                         Вө
                                   "                                          #
                                       (k) (k)                                        (k)
                                     2О·min О“1                           2 (k) 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ

                                                      (k)    (k)
                                 вүҘ              1 + О“1      О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ Оұ
                                         Вө                                          4


                                                      44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, putting this back to Eq. 15, we get
                  "                                                   #
                        (k)     (k)
                      2О·min О“1                (k)

                                                       (k)
                                                                        1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)    (k) (k)
                                         1 + О“1       О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2 Оұ(k)             > П•12 П•21
                         Вө                                                 4

             пЈ®            (k)
                                             пЈ№
                  1 + О“1            ОІ2
                                                   1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                 2
                                                                                              2
                                                                       (k) (k) ОІ
    вҮ’        пЈ°                           Оұ(k) пЈ» 3m            О¶ 2
                                                                  + 2О·    О“
                                                                       min 1           Оұ (k)
                        mВө                         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                   Вө
                                                 "                                               #
                                                     (k) (k)                                           (k)
                                                   2О·min О“1                               2 (k) 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ

                                                                     (k)     (k)
                                               <                1 + О“1      О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ Оұ
                                                       Вө                                           4
                                                 v
                                                 u О·min О“1 О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) 2
                                                 u (k) (k) (k)
                          вҮ’              Оұ(k) < t                                      .
                                                 u
                                                                          (k) (k) 2
                                                   6 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2О·min О“1 ОІВө

                                                       (k) (k)         (k) (k)
Finally, we solve for Eq. 16, i.e., c = П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 > 0. Noting that by solving Eq. 15 we
                     (k)    (k)       (k) (k)   (k) (k)
made sure that 1 вҲ’ П•11 вҲ’ П•22 + П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 > 0, we can write

                                                                 (k)      (k)
                                 c > 0 вҮ’ П•11 + П•22 вҲ’ 1 > 0
                           (k) (k)
                         2О· О“              (k)

                                                  (k)
                                                                      1 + ПҒМғ(k)
             вҮ’        1 вҲ’ min 1      1 + О“1      О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2 Оұ(k) +              вҲ’1>0
                             Вө                                           2

                                                    Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                         вҮ’     Оұ(k) <                                     ,
                                          (k) (k)       (k)       (k)
                                        4О·min О“1 1 + О“1         О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2

                                                 (k)                                               (k)
in which we have used the value of П•11 itself, but the lower bound of П•22 .
Step 4: Putting all the constraints together. Reviewing all the constraints on Оұ(k) from the
beginning of this appendix, we can collect all of the constraints together and simplify them as
             (
                  (k)
                 О“1    1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)          1                         Вө
Оұ(k) < min           , вҲҡ p           p              ,                                 ,
                  Вө 2 3 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 2О· (k) О“(k) 1 + О“(k) О“(k) вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2
                                                       min 1          1       2
                                                             v
                                                             u   (k) (k)     (k)              2 )
                                                             u О·min  О“1 О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                                  Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                                                         ,t
                                                             u

                        (k) (k)        (k)      (k)                                  (k) (k) 2
                      4О·min О“1 1 + О“1          О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2      6 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2О·min О“1 ОІВө
       (
            (k)

          О“1       1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)       1                      Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
= min           , вҲҡ p            p            ,                                    ,
            Вө 2 3 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 4О· (k) О“(k) 1 + О“(k) О“(k) вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2
                                                  min 1         1         2
                 v
                 u (k) (k)   (k)
                 u О·min О“1 О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) 2 )

                                                        ,
                 u
                 t                       (k) (k) 2
                    6 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2О·min О“1 ОІВө
                                                                                               (26)
while satisfying
                                           пЈұ                                               пЈј
                                    (k)
                                           пЈІ                                    1          пЈҪ              1
                 max {вҲ’1, 0} = 0 < О“1 < min 1,                                       (k)
                                                                                               =              (k)
                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                               2ОІ 2 О·min                 2ОІ 2 О·min
                                                                        1+                         1+                    (27)
                                           пЈі                                               пЈҫ
                                                                                  Вө2                        Вө2
                                             (k)                         (k)         1
                                           О“2 > 1,               0 вүӨ О·min вүӨ              .
                                                                                    Оұ(k)

                                                                 45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                 (k)
Note that one of the terms in Eq. 26 was trivially removed since 1+2ПҒМғ      < 1. Consequently, we
obtain
             (                                               (
                 (k)

 (k)           О“1      1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)        1                                Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
Оұ < min              , вҲҡ p            p           , min                                            ,
         (k)
        О“1       Вө 2 3 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 О“(k)         (k)
                                                    2 ,О·min
                                                                 (k) (k)
                                                               4О·min О“1 1 + О“1
                                                                                 (k)      (k)
                                                                                        О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2
                      v
                      u (k) (k)   (k)
                      u О·min О“1 О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) 2 ))

                                                               ,
                      u
                      t                       (k) (k) 2

                        6 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2О·min О“1 ОІВө
                                                                                                  (28)
                                                                             (k)               (k)
First,
s      we  focus  on  minimizing  the inner  expression  in  Eq. 28 using  О“ 2   by  defining c1    =

                                                           (k)       (k)       (k)
        (k)    (k)
       О·min О“1 (1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k) )
                          2
                                      (k)            4О·min О“1               1+О“1     ОІ2
                                 and c           =                                        . We can see that one of the above
                     (k) (k) 2        2

  6(1+ПҒМғ(k) ) О¶ 2 +2О·min О“1 ОІВө                                   Вө(1+ПҒМғ(k) )

                                                     (k)
expressions is increasing with respect to О“2 , and the other one is decreasing. Thus, we have
                       пЈұ      q
                          (k)    (k)                              (k)
                       пЈІc1
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ        О“2 вҲ’ 1 вүӨ (k)   1(k)   ; 1 < О“2 вүӨ О“вӢҶ2 (k)
                                             c2  О“2 вҲ’1
                                               q
                                           (k)    (k)        (k)
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ       1
                       пЈі (k) (k)       вүӨ c1     О“2 вҲ’ 1; О“2 вүҘ О“вӢҶ2 (k) .
                              c2    О“2 вҲ’1

           (k)                                                                                             вӢҶ(k)
in which О“2 > 1 is due to Eq. 27. Hence, we find the optimal value for it, i.e., О“2 , as
                             3
                                     1                                     1
                q
                  О“вӢҶ2 (k) вҲ’ 1 = (k) (k)        вҮ’         О“вӢҶ2 (k) =              2/3 + 1
                                  c1 c2                                (k) (k)
                                                                      c1 c2
                пЈ«v                                                                    пЈ¶2/3
                 u
                 u 6 1 + ПҒМғ(k)   О¶ 2 + 2О· (k) О“(k) ОІ 2                     (k)

                                          min 1 Вө                 Вө 1 + ПҒМғ
    вҮ’ О“вӢҶ2 (k) = пЈ¬
                пЈ¬u                                                                    пЈ·
                                                                                     пЈ·пЈё +1
                 t                             2
                             (k) (k)                          (k)  (k)         (k)
                            О·min О“1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)            4О·min О“1 1 + О“1 ОІ 2
                пЈӯ

                         пЈ«                          пЈ¶1/3 пЈ«                       пЈ¶2/3
                               2      (k) (k) ОІ 2
                 1 + ПҒМғ    3
                          (k)О¶   + 2О·    О“
                                      min 1 Вө                        Вө
               = (k) (k) пЈӯ                          пЈё пЈӯ                          пЈё + 1.
                2О· О“ ОІ               ОІ                     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) 1 + О“
                                                                           (k)
                     min 1                                                                                1
           (k)  вӢҶ(k)
We choose О“2 = О“2 (see the explanation given in related step of Appendix F.3) to get
              пЈұ                               v
                                              u (k) (k)   (k)                  пЈј
              пЈҙ                            (k)u О·min О“1 О“2 вҲ’ 1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) 2 пЈҙ
              пЈІ          Вө 1 + ПҒМғ                                               пЈҪ
      min                                  ,t
                                              u

               (k) (k)       (k)     (k)                            (k) (k) 2
                                                6 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ 2 + 2О·min О“1 ОІВө пЈҙ
       (k)

      О“2 пЈҙ пЈі 4О·min О“1 1 + О“ 1      О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2                                   пЈҫ
                               (k) (k)  2/3   пЈ«         пЈ¶1/3
                  Вө 1 + ПҒМғ(k) c1 c2               (k) 2
                                                (c )
              вүҘ                             = пЈӯ 1(k) пЈё
                   (k) (k)        (k)
                4О·min О“1 1 + О“1 ОІ        2        c2
                пЈ«                                     пЈ¶1/3
                                                                        2/3
                                                             1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                                   Вө
              =пЈӯ                                      пЈё                     .
                             (k) (k) 2
                  6 О¶ 2 + 2О· О“ ОІ            1+О“
                                                (k)             2ОІ
                                   min 1    Вө                    1
                                                                            (k)                                         (k)
Note that in the process of minimizing Eq. 28 over О“2 , two out of the three dependencies on О·min ,
                                        (k)
and two out of four dependencies on О“1 were removed. Hence, we get
                     (
                          (k)
                        О“1      1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)         1
        Оұ(k) < min            , вҲҡ p            p         ,
                         Вө 2 3 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ + 2ОІ 2 2

                               пЈ«                                   пЈ¶1/3
                                                                                     2/3 )
                                                                          1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                                                 Вө
                               пЈӯ                                   пЈё                       .
                                            (k) (k) 2
                                 6 О¶ 2 + 2О· О“ ОІ         1+О“
                                                             (k)             2ОІ
                                                     min 1             Вө              1



                                                                 46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     (k)
Finally, we make a remark that we do not minimize over О·min here, as we take it as a given deter-
                                       (k)      (k)
ministic value based on the choice of di = 1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(k) .
Step 5: Obtaining ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ). We established ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) < 1 in the previous steps. The last step is to
determine what ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) is. We have
                                               r                  2
                   вҲҡ
           вҲ’b + b2 вҲ’ 4ac
                                    (k)   (k)
                                   П•11 + П•22 +
                                                     (k)
                                                    П•11 + П•22
                                                             (k)          (k) (k)    (k) (k)
                                                                    вҲ’ 4 П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21
  ПҒ ОҰ(k) =                      =
                   r2a                                          2
                                                              2
           (k)           (k)                  (k)       (k)             (k) (k)
          П•11 + П•22 +                       П•11 вҲ’ П•22             + 4П•12 П•21
   =
                                                2
                     (k)       (k)                                           (k)                 2 2
             2О·   О“                           (k)      (k)                        1+ПҒМғ(k)
                                                      О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2 Оұ(k) + 1+2ПҒМғ + 3 1вҲ’

          1 вҲ’ minВө 1                     1 + О“1                                      ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                           Оұ(k)    О¶ + 2ОІ 2
      =
                     "                                              2
                                       (k) (k)
                 1                   2О·min О“1              (k)

                                                                  (k)
                                                                                   1 + ПҒМғ(k)
            +              1вҲ’                         1 + О“1     О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2 Оұ(k) вҲ’
                 2                          Вө                                         2
                                                                                                                     !2
                                                                       1 + ПҒМғ(k)   (k)  2 2
                                                                                            О¶ + 2ОІ 2

                                                                   вҲ’3         (k)
                                                                                   Оұ
                                                                       1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ

                                   (k)                                                       #1/2
                              1 + О“1 ОІ 2             (k)         2                       2
                                          (k) 1 + ПҒМғ        (k)       2        (k) (k) ОІ
                         +4              Оұ 3            m Оұ          О¶ + 2О·min О“1
                                 mВө           1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                                Вө
                        (k) (k)
          3 + ПҒМғ(k)   О· О“                (k)

                                                  (k)
                                                                        3 1 + ПҒМғ(k)   (k)  2 2
                    вҲ’ min 1                      О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2 Оұ(k) +                             О¶ + 2ОІ 2

      =                             1 + О“1                                       (k)
                                                                                       Оұ
             4             Вө                                            2 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ
                        "
                                   (k)       (k) (k)
                      1     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ       2О· О“                 (k)

                                                                       (k)

                    +                  вҲ’ min 1         1 + О“1        О“2 вҲ’ 1 ОІ 2 Оұ(k)
                      2        2               Вө
                                                                                                        !2
                                                                        1 + ПҒМғ(k)   (k)  2 2        2

                                                                    вҲ’3               Оұ       О¶ + 2ОІ
                                                                        1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                                       (k)                                                    #1/2
                                1 + О“1 ОІ 2 1 + ПҒМғ(k)              3                       2
                                                             (k)       2       (k) (k) ОІ
                         + 12                              Оұ          О¶ + 2О·min О“1
                                       Вө        1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                                Вө

      3 + ПҒМғ(k)                           2
 =              вҲ’ A(k) Оұ(k) + B (k) Оұ(k)
         4                      s
                                     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                        2   2

                              1
                                                   (k) (k) (k)   (k)
                                                                                         3
                            +                  вҲ’2 A Оұ +B       Оұ            + C (k) Оұ(k) .
                              2         2

J.2       P ROOF OF L EMMA I.4
                                     (0)
(a) Since Оұ(k) = qОұ                     k
                                            , we have
                                     1+ Оі
                                                                                           s                 !
                 k                         k                      Z k
                                            Оұ(0)                        Оұ(0) dx
                                                                                                  r
                 X
                               (q)
                                           X                                                 k           r
                           Оұ         =     q        вүҘ                   q       вүҘ 2Оұ(0)    1+ вҲ’       1+         .
                 q=r                   q=r   1 + Оіq                r     1+ Оі x              Оі           Оі

(b) Based on the equation ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) = 1 вҲ’ h(Оұ(k) ) given in Proposition I.1, h(Оұ(k) ) was given as
                       1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ                    2
           h(Оұ(k) ) =         + AОұ(k) вҲ’ B Оұ(k)
                         4        s
                                                                     2   2

                                1     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ
                                                     (k)        (k)
                                                                                       3
                              вҲ’              вҲ’ 2 AОұ + B Оұ                  + C Оұ(k) .
                                2       2

                                                                           47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Further note that since we established 0 вүӨ ПҒ ОҰ(k) < 1 in Proposition I.1, it would mean 0 <
h(Оұ(k) ) вүӨ 1. Using triangle inequality, we have

                1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ                 2   1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ                2    вҲҡC         3/2
       (k)                 (k)    (k)                (k)    (k)
h(Оұ          )вүҘ        + AОұ вҲ’ B Оұ       вҲ’        вҲ’ AОұ + B Оұ          вҲ’     Оұ(k)
                  4                          4                         2
              вүҘ 2AОұ(k) .


(c)

                                                                                            !2
                                                                                  (0)
                                                                               qОұ
 kвҲ’1            2       k              2             k   1+ rвҲ’1
 X    (Оұ(rвҲ’1) )        X     (Оұ(rвҲ’1) )          1 X          Оі
     Pk              вүӨ      k
                                            =    (k)    k
                                              2A r=1
               (q) )
                           P       (k) Оұ(q)
                                                       P       (q)
 r=1  q=r h(Оұ          r=1  q=r 2A                      q=r Оұ
                                                               2
                                                        (Оұ(0) )
                                       k
                                 1     X                1+ rвҲ’1
                                                            Оі
                           вүӨ                    q
                               2A(k) r=1 2Оұ(0)
                                                        q
                                                  1+ k вҲ’ 1+ r
                                                           Оі                   Оі

                                 (0) kвҲ’1
                                Оұ    X                1
                           =                        q
                               4A(k) r=1 1 + rвҲ’1
                                                           q
                                                    Оі1+ k вҲ’ 1+ r       Оі                Оі

                                Оұ(0) kвҲ’1
                                     X                    1 + Оі1
                           вүӨ                      q
                               4A(k) r=1 1 + r
                                                          q
                                                Оі   1+ k вҲ’ 1+ r    Оі                Оі
                                       пЈ®                                                                    пЈ№
                                Оұ(0)
                                              1
                                                                       Z kвҲ’1                 1 + Оі1 dx
                           вүӨ                         +                                                      пЈ» .
                                      пЈҜ                                                                     пЈә
                                  (k) пЈ°q        q                                            q
                               4A
                                                                                                      q
                                         1+ k вҲ’ 1+ 1
                                            Оі                  Оі
                                                                           1            x
                                                                                     1+ Оі          k     x
                                                                                               1+ Оі вҲ’ 1+ Оі

                                                               q
Focusing only on the integral and defining u(x) =               1 + Оіx , we have


             Z kвҲ’1               1 + Оі1 dx               Z kвҲ’1 2Оі 1 + 1 du(x)
                                                                           Оі
                                q                    =
                                                                u(x)  (u(k)  вҲ’ u(x))
                                            q
                           x            k         x
              1        1+ Оі        1+ Оі вҲ’ 1+ Оі             1

                        Z kвҲ’1
                               2 (Оі + 1)     1           1
                     =                           +                 du(x)
                         1        u(k)      u(x) u(k) вҲ’ u(x)

                        2 (Оі + 1)       u(k вҲ’ 1)        u(k) вҲ’ u(1)
                     =               ln          + ln
                           u(k)           u(1)        u(k) вҲ’ u(k вҲ’ 1)
                                                                    пЈ«                       пЈ¶
                        2 (Оі + 1)       u(k вҲ’ 1)u(k)      2 (Оі + 1) пЈӯ                  1
                     =             ln                  =               ln u(k) + ln u(k)    пЈё
                           u(k)       u(k) вҲ’ u(k вҲ’ 1)        u(k)                        вҲ’1      u(kвҲ’1)


                                           пЈ« s                          пЈ¶
                                 2 (Оі + 1) пЈӯ       k           1
                               = q           ln 1 + + ln q              пЈё.
                                    1+ Оіk          Оі             1
                                                          1 + Оі+kвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1


Putting everything back together concludes the proof.


                                                          48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM I.5

First, using the fact that ОҰ(k) вҲҘ В· вҲҘ вүӨ ПҒ(ОҰ(k) )вҲҘ В· вҲҘ for each iteration k вүҘ 0, we can rewrite Eq. 8 to
get
   пЈ®            h                2
                                   i     пЈ№                    !"                           #
          EОһ(k) ОёМ„(k+1) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ                   Yk
                                                        (q)

                                                                       ОёМ„ (0)
                                                                              вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ 2
   пЈ°       h                          2
                                        iпЈ» вүӨ       ПҒ ОҰ                                   2
     EОһ(k) Оҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1)                q=0                  Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)
                                                         пЈ®       (0)                    2 Пғ2 пЈ№
                                                       2 2(1вҲ’d(0)max )
                        k    k
                                           !
                                                                                  (0)
                       X    Y                                             1 +  ВөОұ       Оҙ + m
                   +             ПҒ ОҰ(q)       Оұ(rвҲ’1) пЈ° ВөОұ   1+ПҒМғ 2                     2
                                                                                              пЈ» + ОЁ(k) ,
                       r=1 q=r                                    m 3 1вҲ’ПҒМғ Оҙ + Пғ
                                                                                                     (29)
where the ОЁ(k) matrix was written using Eq. 24.
Next, in order to obtain Eq. 22 when k вҶ’ вҲһ, we need to simplify each of the three terms in Eq. 29.
                                                                                             (k)    (k)
The easiest one to show is the last term, i.e., ОЁ(k) . Based on Eq. 24, both of its entries ПҲ1 and ПҲ2
                     2
have a factor (Оұ(k) ) multiplied by a value that can be upper-bounded by a constant. Thus, we have
                                            пЈ® 2(1+ВөОұ(0) )(1вҲ’d(0)
                                       (0) 2                       max ) 2    Пғ2
                                                                                 пЈ№
                                     Оұ                    (0)           Оҙ   +
                          ОЁ(k) вүӨ             пЈ°          ВөОұ                    mпЈ».
                                     1 + Оіk        m 3 1вҲ’  1+ПҒМғ 2
                                                              ПҒМғ Оҙ  +   Пғ 2


                                                                       Qk                              Pk           Q                                 2
                                                                               (q)
                                                                                                                        k      (q)

Regarding the first and the second term, i.e.,                          q=0 ПҒ ОҰ                and         r=1          q=r ПҒ ОҰ                Оұ(rвҲ’1) ,
respectively, we have
                              k          k
                              Y         Y                                                                      1
                                ПҒ ОҰ(q) =     1 вҲ’ h(Оұ(q) ) вүӨ Pk                                                              ,
                                                                                                                   (q) )
                              q=0                           q=0                                        q=0 h(Оұ
 k       k
                   !           k                                   k
                                                                                                    !                           k                 2
 X       Y                   2 X                                   Y                                                    2       X      Оұ(rвҲ’1)
           ПҒ ОҰ(q)     Оұ(rвҲ’1) =                                              1 вҲ’ h(Оұ      (q)
                                                                                               )           Оұ   (rвҲ’1)
                                                                                                                            вүӨ         Pk                  ,
                                                                                                                                                  (q) )
 r=1     q=r                                           r=1        q=r                                                           r=1    q=r h(Оұ

in both of which Lemma I.3 was used, since 0 вүӨ h(Оұ(k) ) < 1. Next, we employ Lemma I.4 on the
                                                             1
above expressions. The proof easily follows. Note that ln q    1
                                                                     вүӨ O(ln k).
                                                                                               1+ Оі+kвҲ’1 вҲ’1



K      D IMINISHING L EARNING R ATE P OLICY FOR N ON -C ONVEX M ODELS
In this appendix, we do the convergence analysis of our methodology under a diminishing learning
rate policy, i.e., when Оұ(k+1) < Оұ(k) for all k вүҘ 0. We will show that convergence to a stationary
                                                                              (k)
point with zero optimality error is possible if the frequency of SGDs, i.e., di , is increasing over
time.
                                                      (k)              (k)
First, we rewrite the coefficients П•ij and ПҲi                                with 1 вүӨ i, j вүӨ 2, using the fact that the SGD
                                    (k)                (k)
probability is chosen as di               = 1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(k) .

Corollary K.1 (Average model performance and consensus error simplifications) (Corollary
to Lemmas G.3 and G.4) Let Assumptions 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 hold. If the SGD probabilities are chosen
    (k)         (k)               (k)      1         (k)               (k)
as di = 1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(k) with 0 вүӨ О·i вүӨ Оұ(k)         and О·min = miniвҲҲM О·i , then the quantities in
Lemma G.3 simplify to
 (k)                          (k)                            (k)                   (k)             2
                                                              ОІ
П•11 = Оұ(k) [ 21 вҲ’ (О¶ 2 О·min + ОІ(1 + 2О¶ 2 О·min ))Оұ(k) ], П•12 = 2m Оұ(k) (1 + 2ОІОұ(k) ) and
 (k)        (k)                                   2                2
ПҲ1     = [О·min (1 + 2ОІОұ(k) )Оҙ 2 + ОІПғ
                                  2m ](Оұ
                                         (k)
                                             ) .
Similarly, the quantities in Lemma G.4 also simplify to
 (k)     1+ПҒМғ     (k)                 2     (k)               (k)                 (k)                  2
П•21 = 16 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                  mО¶ 2 (Оұ(k) ) , П•22 = 1+2ПҒМғ                               1+ПҒМғ
                                                                       + 8 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                    ОІ 2 (Оұ(k) ) and
 (k)          1+ПҒМғ      (k)                       2
ПҲ2     = m(16 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                       Оҙ 2 + Пғ 2 )(Оұ(k) ) .


                                                                             49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, using the simplified results derived in Corollary K.1 we further simplify the results of Propo-
sition G.6 to arrive at the following Proposition.

Proposition K.2 (Stationary point for non-convex models with a diminishing learning rate)
(See Appendix L.1 for the proof.) Let Assumptions 4.2 and 4.3 hold. If the SGD probabilities are
            (k)         (k)
chosen as di = 1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(k) and a non-increasing learning rate is used, i.e., Оұ(k+1) вүӨ Оұ(k) , then
the constraints on the learning rate given in Proposition G.6 are simplified to
                          (
                              (k)                                        1
               (k)          О“3      1    1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)      1
             Оұ < min              , (k) p           , (k)               2            ,
                             2ОІ О“ 4ОІ 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О“ О¶ 2 О· (k) + ОІ 1 + 2О¶ 2 О· (k)
                                    1                   2      min              min
                                   s
                                                             1                 1
                                                     1вҲ’     (k) 2
                                                                         1вҲ’    (k)
                                                                                                  )
                                                                              О“2
                                                          (О“1 )                       1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                      вҲҡ (k) q                           p           ,
                                                                  (k)                О¶ОІ 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                                                     4 2О“4   1 + О“3
           (k)                       (k)
where О·min = miniвҲҲM О·i . Consequently, for each iteration k вүҘ 0, we get the following bound on
the expected average model performance:
                                                   Pk       (r) (r)                     2
EОһ(k) [F (ОёМ„(k+1) )]      вүӨ        F (ОёМ„(0) ) вҲ’       r=0 Оұ    w1 EОһ(rвҲ’1) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(r) )вҲҘ ]  +
  (0) (0)     (0)     (0) 2     kвҲ’1 (r) (r) (r)     k     (r)
                             P                   P
Оұ w2 вҲҘОҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„ вҲҘ + r=0 Оұ w2 ПҲ2 + r=0 ПҲ1 ,
                                                                                     (k)
                 (k)                                       (k)     ОІ 2 (1+О“ )                           (k)
in which w1            = 21 (1 вҲ’      1
                                      (k) )(1 вҲ’
                                                   1
                                                  (k)  ), w2 = m(1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k) )(1вҲ’3 1 ) , and the values of ПҲ1 and
                                     О“2         (О“4 )2                         (k) 2
                                                                                      (О“1        )
 (k)
ПҲ2 were given in Corollary K.1.

Note that the conditions laid out for the learning rate in Proposition K.2 have to be satisfied for all
iterations k вүҘ 0. As one last step, we outline the sufficient conditions under which we can derive a
single constraint on the initial value of the learning rate.

Corollary K.3 (Constraint on diminishing learning rate initialization for non-convex models)
(Corollary to Proposition K.2) If the learning rate Оұ(k) is non-increasing, i.e., Оұ(k+1) вүӨ Оұ(k) , the
                                       (k)                              1
SGD probabilities are determined as di = 1 вҲ’ О·i Оұ(k) with 0 вүӨ О·i вүӨ Оұ(0)     and О·min = miniвҲҲM О·i ,
                                                                                           (k)
for all k вүҘ 0, and we have constant aggregations probabilities bij = bij , then the constraints in
Proposition K.2 simplify to
                                                                          s
                                                                               1вҲ’ 12    1вҲ’ О“1
                  (                                                                                      )
                                                           1                     О“1          2
                       О“3 1      1вҲ’
                                 вҲҡ ПҒМғ    1                                                          1вҲ’
                                                                                                  1 вҲҡ ПҒМғ
Оұ(0) < min             2ОІ , О“1 4ОІ 1+ПҒМғ , О“2 О¶ 2 О·min +ОІ(1+2О¶ 2 О·min ) ,
                                                           2                   вҲҡ     вҲҡ
                                                                              4 2О“4 1+О“3         О¶ОІ 1+ПҒМғ ,


This also results in time-invariant scalars A = A(k) , B = B (k) and C = C (k) , where these
quantities were defined in Proposition K.2.

With Corollary K.3, we have most of the ingredients required to prove the main Theorem. We will
just need two extra upper bounds on summations involving the learning rate, as presented in the next
Lemma.

Lemma K.4 (Bounds for powers of learning p       rate sums) (See Appendix L.2 for the proof.) Let a
diminishing learning rate Оұ(k) = Оұ(0) / 1 + k/Оі be used, which satisfies the properties in Eq. 21.
                                                                     (k)
Under the setup of Proposition K.2 for the SGD probabilities, i.e., di , if the aggregation proba-
                              (k)
bilities are constant, i.e., bij = bij for all i вҲҲ M and (i, j) вҲҲ E (k) , then the following bounds
hold
                   (q) 2
          Pk                       2
      (a)    q=r Оұ        вүӨ Оұ(0) (1 + Оі ln (1 + k/Оі)),
            Pk                   3             3
     (b)         q=r     Оұ(q)        вүӨ Оұ(0)        (1 + 2Оі).


                                                                    50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem K.5 (Non-convex convergence result with a diminishing learning rate) (See                            Ap-
pendix L.3 for the proof.)
                         p       Let  Assumptions     4.2,  4.3 and  4.4 hold.   If a diminishing  learning rate
policy Оұ(k) = Оұ(0) / 1 + k/Оі with Оі > 0 satisfying the conditions outlined in Corollary K.3 is
                                                            (k)                  (0)
employed, and the SGD probabilities are set to di = 1 вҲ’ ((1 вҲ’ di )/Оұ(0) )Оұ(k) for all i вҲҲ M,
                                                                               (k)
while aggregation probabilities are set to constant values, i.e., bij = bij for all i вҲҲ M and
(i, j) вҲҲ E (k) , then we have
                      K
                                                                    "
                                                                 1 F (ОёМ„(0) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ

            1        X                                  2                                   1
                           (r)                    (r)
      PK                 Оұ     E Оһ (rвҲ’1)   вҲҮF (ОёМ„     )      вүӨ                        O   вҲҡ
         r=0 Оұ
                 (r)
                     r=0
                                                                2w1        Оұ(0)             K

                                               2        1                       2                 1
                     + w2 Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0) O вҲҡ                   + w2 w3 Оұ(0) (1 + 2Оі) O вҲҡ                   (30)
                                                         K                                        K
                                                       #
                             (0)             ln K
                     + w4 Оұ         1 + ОіO вҲҡ                .
                                                K

in which F вӢҶ = minОёвҲҲRn F (Оё), and the values of scalars wi with 1 вүӨ i вүӨ 5 are given in Ap-
pendix H.7. On letting K вҶ’ вҲһ, we obtain
                                                  K
                                      1           X                 h             2
                                                                                    i
                          lim PK                        Оұ(r) EОһ(rвҲ’1) вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(r) )вҲҘ = 0.                                 (31)
                         KвҶ’вҲһ                (r)
                                   r=0 Оұ          r=0


Eq. 30 in Theorem K.5 illustrates the convergence rate that can be achieved when a diminishing
                                                                                          вҲҡ
learning rate policy is used to train non-convex models. We recover the well-known O(ln K/ K)
rate for DGD methods here. Furthermore, letting K вҶ’ вҲһ in Eq. 30, we observe in Eq. 31 that the
stationarity gap becomes zero.

L     P ROOFS FOR D IMINISHING L EARNING R ATE P OLICY FOR N ON -C ONVEX
      M ODELS

L.1     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION K.2

Considering the fact that the learning rate is diminishing, we can simplify the learning rate con-
straints in Proposition G.6. Using the updated coefficients derived in Corollary K.1, we rewrite the
constraints from Appendix G.5 and Step 3 in Appendix H.6 to get

      (i)
                                      (k)                                       1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                     П•22 < 1              вҮ’             Оұ(k) < p
                                                                              4 1 + ПҒМғ(k) ОІ
                                                          1         1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                      (k)
                                 вҮ’          Оұ(k) вүӨ        (k)
                                                                   p             ,              О“1 > 1
                                                         О“1 4        1 + ПҒМғ(k) ОІ
                                                                                                       !
                                                                            (k)
                                                     (k)  1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ                               1
                                  вҮ’             1 вҲ’ П•22 вүҘ                          1вҲ’                      .
                                                                        2                      (k) 2
                                                                                         (О“1 )
      (ii)
                                                                                                   1
                           (k)
                          П•11 > 0            вҮ’           0 < Оұ(k) <                (k)
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                               (k)
                                                                              О¶ 2 О·min + ОІ(1 + 2О¶ 2 О·min )
                                                                    1
                                            1                                                                   (k)
                     вҮ’        Оұ(k) вүӨ       (k)    (k)
                                                                    2
                                                                    (k)
                                                                                                       вҮ’       О“2 > 1
                                          О“2 О¶ 2 О·min + ОІ(1 + 2О¶ 2 О·min )
                                                                                         !
                                                         (k)  1                    1
                                          вҮ’             П•11 вүҘ            1вҲ’        (k)
                                                                                             Оұ(k) .
                                                                   2              О“2

                                                              51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (iii)
                                                                                      (k)
                                                                                     О“3                  (k)
                                                                     Оұ(k) вүӨ             ,      О“3 > 0
                                                                                     2ОІ
                                           ОІ2                                                                    ОІПғ 2   (k)  2

                                   (k)              (k)                                    (k)   (k)      (k) 2
               вҮ’               П•12 вүӨ          (1 + О“3 )Оұ(k) ,                             ПҲ1 вүӨ О·min (1 + О“3 )Оҙ +       Оұ       .
                                           2m                                                                    2m
      (iv)
                                                                                            (k) (k)
                                                                               (k)        П•21 П•12
                                                                          П•11 вҲ’                   (k)
                                                                                                            >0
                                                                                          1 вҲ’ П•22
                                                                                                                           3
                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                             (k)
                                           1                 1                        16(1 + ПҒМғ(k) )О¶ 2 (Оұ(k) ) ОІ 2 (1 + О“3 )
                              вҮ’                   1вҲ’         (k)
                                                                         Оұ(k) вҲ’                                               >0
                                           2               О“2                                          2            1
                                                                                          (1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) ) 1 вҲ’ (k)         2
                                                                                                                               (О“1 )
                                                                         s
                                                                                    1                             1
                                                                                1 вҲ’ (k)   1вҲ’                     (k) 2
                                                                                                                        (1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) )
                                                                                       О“2                      (О“1 )
                                          вҮ’            Оұ(k) <        вҲҡ p           q
                                                                             (k)             (k)
                                                                   4 2 1 + ПҒМғ О¶ОІ 1 + О“3
                                                             s
                                                                   1          1
                                                               1 вҲ’ (k)   1 вҲ’ (k) 2   (1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) )
                                                                               О“2                   (О“1 )
                                                       1                                                                                           (k)
                         вҮ’               Оұ(k) вүӨ        (k)   вҲҡ p            q              ,     О“4 > 1
                                                      О“4                          (k)
                                                            4 2 1 + ПҒМғ(k) О¶ОІ 1 + О“3
                                                                             !                !
                                                        (k) (k)
                                                  (k)  П•21 П•12    1        1             1
                                   вҮ’             П•11 вҲ’          вүҘ   1 вҲ’ (k)      1вҲ’             Оұ(k) .
                                                       1вҲ’П•
                                                            (k)   2       О“             (k) 2
                                                                          22          (О“ )              2                       4

Putting together all of these constraints concludes the proof.

L.2      P ROOF OF L EMMA K.4

(a)
          k                                               Z k                                                    Z k             2
          X
                        (r)
                               2
                                           (0)
                                                  2
                                                                         (x)
                                                                                2
                                                                                                  (0)
                                                                                                         2                 Оұ(0)
                    Оұ              вүӨ Оұ                +              Оұ              dx = Оұ                   +                     dx
          r=0                                              0                                                      0       1 + x/Оі
                                                  2          2                     2
                                   = Оұ(0)             + Оұ(0) Оі ln (1 + k/Оі) = Оұ(0) (1 + Оі ln (1 + k/Оі)) .

(b)
              k              3 Z k                  3 Z k                                                                                3
              X       3                   3                                                                                      Оұ(0)
                 Оұ(r) вүӨ Оұ(0) +       Оұ(x) dx = Оұ(0) +                                                                        3/2
                                                                                                                                 dx
              r=0                                                0                                                  (1 + x/Оі)
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                 !
                                            3        3                                                  1                 3
                                     = Оұ(0) + 2 Оұ(0) Оі                                1вҲ’ p                         вүӨ Оұ(0) (1 + 2Оі) .
                                                                                                  1 + k/Оі

L.3      P ROOF OF T HEOREM K.5
                                                                                                                                              (k)
For each iteration k вүҘ 0, (i) the learning rate being diminishing, (ii) the fact that di = 1 вҲ’ ((1 вҲ’
 (0)                       (k)
di )/Оұ(0) )Оұ(k) and (iii) bij = bij which results in ПҒМғ(k) = ПҒМғ, results in Proposition K.2 implying
      h           i                   X k
                                                                      2

                                                                                                     2
EОһ(k) F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вүӨ F (ОёМ„(0) ) вҲ’ w1      Оұ(r) EОһ(rвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(r) )        + Оұ(0) w2 Оҳ(0) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(0)
                                                             r=0
                                                             kвҲ’1                           k
                                                                                (r)                 (r)
                                                             X                             X
                                                  + w2               Оұ(r) ПҲ2 +                    ПҲ1 .
                                                             r=0                            r=0


                                                                                     52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        (k)                (k)
Substituting the values of ПҲ1 and ПҲ2 from Corollary K.1, then rearranging the inequality and
               Pk
dividing it by r=0 Оұ(r) , we get
                       k                                              "
              1       X                         2           1
                            (r)           (r)
        Pk                Оұ EОһ(rвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„ )        вүӨ    Pk             F (ОёМ„(0) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
                  (r)                                             (r)
            r=0 Оұ     r=0                             w1 r=0 Оұ
                                                        kвҲ’1                    k
                                                                                             #
                                              2         X           3         X            2
                          (0)    (0)    (0)                    (r)                    (r)
                      + Оұ w2 Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„          + w2 w3      Оұ        + w4          Оұ         .
                                                                                    r=0                           r=0

                                                                                2
                                                   ОІ (1+О“3 )                                                   1+ПҒМғ 2
in which w1 = 21 (1 вҲ’ О“12 )(1 вҲ’ (О“14 )2 ), w2 = m(1вҲ’ ПҒМғ)(1вҲ’ 1                                  )
                                                                                                   , w3 = m(16 1вҲ’         2
                                                                                                                  ПҒМғ Оҙ + Пғ ) and
                                                                                        (О“1 )2
       1вҲ’d(0)                   2
w4 =      max
        Оұ(0)
              (1 + О“3 )Оҙ 2 + ОІПғ
                             2m .
Finally, using Lemmas I.4-(a) and K.4, we conclude that
                 k                                                            "
        1       X                            2                   1
   Pk               Оұ(r) EОһ(rвҲ’1) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(r) )     вүӨ             p               F (ОёМ„(0) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
          Оұ (r)                                           (0)
     r=0        r=0                                2w 1 Оұ        1 + k/Оі вҲ’ 1
                                                                                                                                  #
                                            2                           3                                  2
         (0)          (0)             (0)                        (0)                                (0)
    +Оұ         w2 Оҳ         вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„             + w2 w3 Оұ                   (1 + 2Оі) + w4 Оұ                    (1 + Оі ln (1 + k/Оі)) .


M      N ON -C ONVEX A NALYSIS UNDER THE PL C ONDITION
In this appendix, we make the convergence analysis of our developed framework when non-convex
ML models satisfying the PL condition are employed. Our approach will be quite similar to Sec. 4,
with the key difference that we will use the milder Polyak-Lojasiewicz (PL) condition (Xin et al.,
2021) (Assumption M.1) instead of strong convexity (Assumption 4.1-(b)) to make this generaliza-
tion.
                                                                                                                                   2
Assumption M.1 (PL inequality) The global loss function F meets the PL condition вҲҘвҲҮF (Оё)вҲҘ вүҘ
2Вө (F (Оё) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ) with some Вө > 0, where F вӢҶ is the optimal value of F .

Under this assumption, we further know that F satisfies the quadratic growth condition (QG-
                    2
condition) вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ (2/Вө)(F (Оё) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ), where ОёвӢҶ is the nearest point to the optimal solution of
the minimization problem under consideration. This will also be useful in our analysis.
                                                                                                                            2
We will still characterize the expected consensus error as EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ], but con-
trary to what was done in Sec. 4, the distance of the average model from the optimal solution will
be captured via EОһ(k) [F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ]. As an alternative to Lemma 4.7, we first provide an upper
bound on the expected error in the average model at each iteration for the non-convex case, i.e.,
EОһ(k) [F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ], in Lemma M.3. Then, as an alternative to Lemma 4.8, we also calculate an
                                                                                                  2
upper bound on the consensus error for non-convex models, i.e., EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ], in
Corollary M.4.
We first need a preliminary Lemma which will be useful in the proof of Lemma M.3.

Lemma M.2 (Gradient bounds under the PL condition) (See Appendix N.1 for the proof.) Let
Assumptions 4.1-(a), 4.1-(c) and M.1 hold. The following upper bounds related to the gradient of
the global loss function can be obtained in terms of the optimality error EОһ(kвҲ’1) [F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ] and
                                                2
the consensus error EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ].
                                                (k) 2    4ОІ 2                                      (k)
     (a) EОһ(k) [вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮv                     вҲҘ ] Вө (1 вҲ’  вүӨ                            dmin )EОһ(kвҲ’1) [F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ]        +
           ОІ 2 d(k)                            2            (k)
               m
                max
                    EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] + 2(1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 .
                                                (k)                                 2              (k)
     (b) вҲ’EОһ(k) [вҹЁвҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮv                     вҹ©]    вүӨ     вҲ’Вө(1 вҲ’ 2ОІ
                                                                          Вө2 (1 вҲ’ dmin ))EОһ(kвҲ’1) [F (ОёМ„
                                                                                                        (k)
                                                                                                            ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ] +
           ОІ 2 d(k)          (k)             2          (k)
              2m EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ
                max
                                 вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] + (1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 .


                                                                        53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               (k) 2                                     2ОІ 2                        (k)
       (c) 12 EОһ(k) [вҲҘвҲҮv             вҲҘ ]                 вүӨ                Вө (3         вҲ’         2dmin )EОһ(kвҲ’1) [F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ]             +
           ОІ 2 d(k)                            2           (k)
               m
                max
                    EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] + 2(1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 .
Now can continue with the key lemma and corollary.
Lemma M.3 (Average error for non-convex models satisfying the PL condition) (See             Ap-
pendix N.2 for the proof.) Let Assumptions 4.1-(a), 4.1-(c), 4.3 and M.1 hold. For each iteration
k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound on the expected average model error
                                           (k)                                             (k)                                    2         (k)
EОһ(k) [F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ] вүӨ П•11 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ] + П•12 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] + ПҲ1 ,
          (k)                  3                   (k)         2                           2           (k)           (k)   ОІ 2 d(k)
where П•11 = 1 + 2ОІВө (3 вҲ’ 2dmin )(Оұ(k) ) вҲ’ ВөОұ(k) (1 вҲ’ 2ОІ    Вө2 (1 вҲ’ dmin )), П•12 =                                             2m Оұ
                                                                                                                                max (k)
                                                                                                                                        (1 +
     (k)
2ОІОұ ), and
 (k)            (k)                  2        (k)             Пғ2
ПҲ1 = Оұ(k) (1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 + ОІ2 (Оұ(k) ) [4(1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 + dmax
                                                           m     ].
                                                                                                                                          (k)
Similar to our discussion around Lemma 4.7, note again how the coefficients simplify when dmin =
1, which is essentially equivalent to the conventional DFL setup where clients perform SGDs at
                        (k)
every iteration, i.e., vi = 1 for all i вҲҲ M.
                                                                                                                                      2
We next bound the consensus error at each iteration, i.e., EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ], which
measures the deviation of ML model parameters of clients from the average non-convex ML model.
Corollary M.4 (Consensus error for non-convex models satisfying the PL condition)
(Corollary to Lemma 4.8) Let Assumptions 4.1-(a), 4.1-(c), 4.3, 4.4 and M.1 hold. For each
iteration k вүҘ 0, we have the following bound on the expected consensus error
                                               2         (k)                                         (k)                                    2
EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ] вүӨ П•21 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ] + П•22 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] +
 (k)
ПҲ2 ,
          (k)  1+ПҒМғ          (k)         (k)             2                       (k)
where П•21 = Вө6 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                        mdmax (Оұ(k) ) (О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 (1 вҲ’ dmin )),
 (k)            (k)                (k)   (k)             2                         (k)                       2 (k)         (k)
П•22 = 1+2ПҒМғ               1+ПҒМғ
                      + 3 1вҲ’      d
                             ПҒМғ(k) max
                                       (Оұ(k) ) (О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 ), and ПҲ2                                          1+ПҒМғ
                                                                                           = m(Оұ(k) ) dmax (3 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                                                       Оҙ 2 + Пғ 2 ).
                                                                                                 2           (k)                           2
Proof. Lemma 4.8 states that EОһ(k) [вҲҘОҳ(k+1) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k+1) вҲҘ ] вүӨ П•21 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ ] +
  (k)                             2      (k)
П•22 EОһ(kвҲ’1) [вҲҘОҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k) вҲҘ ] + ПҲ2 . Now, using the PL condition (Assumption M.1), we know
                  2                                         (k)      (k)
that вҲҘОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ Вө2 (F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ ). Hence, we get П•21 вҶҗ Вө2 П•21 .
                                                                                                                            (k)
Corollary M.4 is almost the same as Lemma 4.8, with the only difference being in П•21 . Note again
       (k)                                                            (k)                (k)
that П•21 = 0 in the conventional DFL setup, where (a) О¶ = 0 and (b) dmin = 1, resulting di = 1
for all i вҲҲ M.
                                                                          (k)
Let us denote the error vector at iteration k with ОҪnc , defined as
                                       "                 (k)
                                                                   вӢҶ
                                                                       #
                               (k)
                                           E Оһ(kвҲ’1) F ОёМ„       вҲ’ F
                              ОҪnc   =           h                     2
                                                                        i .                                                                 (32)
                                         EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)
With this definition, putting the results of Lemmas 4.7 and 4.8 together form the following linear
system of inequalities:
Putting the results of Lemma M.3 and Corollary M.4 together form the following linear system of
inequalities:
                                   (k+1)
                                  ОҪnc    вүӨ ОҰ(k) ОҪnc
                                                 (k)
                                                     + ОЁ(k) ,                              (33)
                       (k)                                         (k)     (k)
with ОҰ(k) = [П•ij ]1вүӨi,jвүӨ2 and ОЁ(k) = [ПҲ1           ПҲ2 ]T . Recursively expanding the inequalities in
Eq. 33 gives us an explicit relationship between the expected model error and consensus error at
each iteration and their initial values:
                                                   k
                                                   X
                           (k+1)
                          ОҪnc      вүӨ ОҰ(k:0) ОҪnc
                                             (k)
                                                 +   ОҰ(k:r) ОЁ(rвҲ’1) + ОЁ(k) ,                     (34)
                                                                         r=1


                                                                         54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we have defined ОҰ(k:s) = ОҰ(k) ОҰ(kвҲ’1) В· В· В· ОҰ(s) for k > s, and ОҰ(k:k) = ОҰ(k) .
In order for us formalize the convergence bound of DSpodFL, we have to show that the spectral
radius of matrix ОҰ(k) given in Eq. 33 is less than one, i.e., ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) < 1. This part was outlined in
Proposition M.5 in the main text.

Proposition M.5 (Spectral radius under the PL condition) (See Appendix N.3 for the proof.) Let
Assumptions 4.1-(a), 4.1-(c), 4.3, 4.4 and M.1 hold. If the learning rate satisfies the following
condition for all k вүҘ 0
                           2

                                    (k)
                    1 вҲ’ 2ОІ       вҲ’
                 (
                               1   d

     (k)                 Вө2         min Вө2          5 1 + ПҒМғ(k)
   Оұ < min                                   ,                           ,
                      10 3 вҲ’ 2dmin
                                  (k)     ОІ 3 8Вө 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ22 1 вҲ’ d(k)
                                                      Вө           min
                                                                       v
                                                                       u   2ОІ 2       (k) )
                                                 1      Вө 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) u 1 вҲ’ Вө2 1 вҲ’ dmin
                                                                       u
                                               q         2
                                                           p           t                    ,
                                                   (k) ОІ     1 + ПҒМғ(k) 1 + 2ОІ22 1 вҲ’ d(k)
                                              6 2dmax                       О¶         min


then we have ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) < 1 for all k вүҘ 0, in which ПҒ(В·) denotes the spectral radius of a
given matrix, and ОҰ(k) is the linear system of inequalities of governing the dynamics of optimal-
                                                                  (k)                          2
ity and consensus errors. ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) follows as ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) = 3+4ПҒМғ вҲ’ A(k) Оұ(k) + B (k) (Оұ(k) ) +
  q
           (k)                           2 2                3                       2ОІ 2     (k)
1
2   ( 1вҲ’2ПҒМғ вҲ’ 2(A(k) Оұ(k) + B (k) (Оұ(k) ) )) + C (k) (Оұ(k) ) , where A(k) = 2Вө
                                                                             5 (1 вҲ’ Вө2 (1 вҲ’ dmin )),
              (k)                             2    (k)   (k)   2                (k)
           1+ПҒМғ
B (k) = 32 1вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                    (О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 ) and C (k) = 72ОІ 1+ПҒМғ              2    2
                                               5Вө 1вҲ’ПҒМғ(k) (dmax ) (О¶ + 2ОІ (1 вҲ’ dmin )).


Proposition M.5 enables us to guarantee convergence of DSpodFL when non-convex models are
used. The argument follows along the lines of the things we discussed in Sec. 4.4. Proposition M.5
implies that limkвҶ’вҲһ ОҰ(k:0) = 0 in Eq. 34. However, this is only the asymptotic behavior of ОҰ(k:0) ,
and the exact convergence rate will depend on the choice of the learning rate Оұ(k) . Furthermore,
since the first expression in Eq. 34 asymptotically approaches zero, Proposition M.5 also implies
                                                                Pk
that the non-negative optimality gap is determined by the terms r=1 ОҰ(k:r) ОЁ(rвҲ’1) + ОЁ(k) , and it
can be either zero or a positive value depending on the choice of Оұ(k) .
Proposition M.5 outlines the necessary constraint on the learning rate Оұ(k) at each iteration k вүҘ 0.
We next provide a corollary to Proposition M.5, in which we show that under certain conditions, the
above-mentioned constraint needs to be satisfied only on the initial value of the learning rate, i.e,
Оұ(0) .

Corollary M.6 (Constraint on learning rate initialization under the PL condition) (Corollary
                                                                                                  (k)
to Proposition M.5) If the learning rate Оұ(k) is non-increasing and the probabilities of SGDs di
                   (k)                                      (k)      (k)
and aggregations bij are constant, i.e., Оұ(k+1) вүӨ Оұ(k) , di = di , bij = bij , for all k вүҘ 0, and we
have then the constraints in Proposition M.5 simplify to
                            2
                     1 вҲ’ 2ОІ
                  (
                          Вө2 (1 вҲ’ dmin ) Вө
                                           2
       (0)                                                 5
      Оұ < min                              3
                                             ,                         ,
                       10 (3 вҲ’ 2dmin ) ОІ 8Вө 1 вҲ’ 2 (1 вҲ’ d )
                                                       2ОІ 2
                                                        Вө        min
                                                                   s                        )
                                                 1        О¶ 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ    Вө2 вҲ’ 2ОІ 2 (1 вҲ’ dmin )
                                               вҲҡ             вҲҡ                                .
                                              6 2dmax ОІ 2 1 + ПҒМғ О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2 (1 вҲ’ dmin )

Theorem M.7 (Non-convex result under the PL condition) (Proof is similar to the proof of The-
orem 4.11 given in Appendix F.4.) Let Assumptions 4.1-(a), 4.1-(c) and 4.3, 4.4 and M.1 hold. Let
a constant learning rate Оұ(k) = Оұ with Оұ > 0 satisfying the conditions of Proposition M.5 be
                                                                                     (k)
employed, and the probabilities of SGDs and aggregations be time-invariant, i.e., di = di and
 (k)
bij = bij , for all k вүҘ 0. Then, the convergence rate is geometric, specifically ПҒ(ОҰ)K+1 , with an
optimality gap


                                                  55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               пЈ®                                               пЈ№
                                             2   ОұОІ                    2   Пғ2
                      (k+1)  1  (1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ   +  2   4 (1 вҲ’ d min ) Оҙ   + m
                 lim ОҪnc    вүӨ пЈ°                                                пЈ»,                                       (35)
                KвҶ’вҲһ          A              mОұ 3 1+ПҒМғ Оҙ 2 + Пғ 2          1вҲ’ПҒМғ


                                                                     (k)
for ОҰ given in Lemma M.3 and Corollary M.4, and ОҪnc defined in Eq. 32. Proposition M.5 ensures
ПҒ(ОҰ) < 1.

We see that the optimality gap in Eq. 35 can be decreased by choosing a smaller learning rate Оұ and
a larger minimum SGD probability dmin , similar to the argument made for Theorem 4.11.



N     P ROOFS FOR N ON -C ONVEX A NALYSIS UNDER THE PL C ONDITION

N.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA M.2

(a) For this deviation term, we have

                                                       m                                               2
                                   (k) 2        1 X
                    (k)                                                    (k) (k)
           вҲҮF (ОёМ„         ) вҲ’ вҲҮv              =       вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi
                                                m i=1
                                   m                             2
                              1 X                        (k) (k)
                          вүӨ         вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оёi )vi
                              m i=1
                                 m                                              2          m                        2
                              1 X                                        (k)            1 X
                          =                    вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮFi (Оёi )             +                вҲҮFi (ОёМ„(k) )
                              m i=1                                                     m i=1
                                   (k)                                                    (k)
                                  vi     =1                                              vi     =0
                                   m                             2             m
                                                                                                    2

                              1    X                       (k)           2     X
                          вүӨ                   ОІi2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ Оёi         +                ОІi2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ + Оҙi2
                              m     i=1
                                                                         m     i=1
                                   (k)                                        (k)
                                  vi =1                                      vi =0


                m                         m
                                       2 X 2ОІi2

             1 X 2 (k)          2
                            (k)    (k)                 (k)   вӢҶ   2         (k)
           =       ОІi ОёМ„ вҲ’ Оёi     vi +            F (ОёМ„ ) вҲ’ F + Оҙi    1 вҲ’ vi ,
             m i=1                     m i=1  Вө


where in the last two lines, (i) Smoothness (Assumption 4.1-(a)) and Lemma D.1-(b) and (ii) PL con-
dition (Assumption M.1) was used, respectively. Taking the expected value of the above inequality
concludes the proof.
(b) Second, for this inner product term, we have

           D                (k)
                                E    D               (k)
                                                                                 E
          вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮv       = вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮv вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) )
                                                  2   D                           (k)
                                                                                      E
                                  = вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮv
                                                  вҲ’1            2  1                  (k) 2
                                              вүӨ      вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) +   вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮv       .
                                                  2                2

                                                               56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, taking the expected value of this inequality and using part (a) of this lemma alongside the PL
condition (Assumption M.1), we get
        hD               (k)
                             Ei                 h                 i
 вҲ’EОһ(k) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮv         вүӨ вҲ’ВөEОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
                                               (k)
                                          ОІ 2 dmax

                                                                                  2
                                                                   (k)        (k)
                                      +             EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
                                             2m
                                          2ОІ 2           (k)
                                                                       h              i
                                      +           1 вҲ’ dmin EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
                                           Вө

                                                   (k)
                                      + 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2

             2ОІ 2                        h                   i ОІ 2 d(k)
                                                                                                2

                        (k)                     (k)        вӢҶ         max              (k)   (k)
 вүӨ вҲ’Вө 1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin            EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„ ) вҲ’ F +                    EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
              Вө                                                     2m

                                                                        (k)
                                                               + 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2 .

(c) Finally, for the norm term, we have
 1     (k) 2     1      (k)                             2                2                   (k) 2
    вҲҮv         =    вҲҮv вҲ’ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вүӨ вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ вҲҮv                .
 2               2
Taking the expected value of this inequality and utilizing part (a) of this lemma alongside the PL
condition (Assumption M.1)

   1

                 (k) 2

                            2ОІ 2         h               i ОІ 2 d(k)
                                                                                               2

                                                                  max
     EОһ(k) вҲҮv            вүӨ       EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ +           EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)
   2                         Вө                                  m
                                       2
                                    4ОІ          (k)
                                                              h              i
                                                                                       (k)

                                 +         1 вҲ’ dmin EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ + 2 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2
                                     Вө
      2ОІ 2                        h               i ОІ 2 d(k)
                                                                                       2

                   (k)                 (k)      вӢҶ          max             (k)     (k)
   вүӨ         3 вҲ’ 2dmin EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„ ) вҲ’ F +                   EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„
       Вө                                                  m

                                                               (k)
                                                    + 2 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2 .

N.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA M.3

Using Lemma D.1-(b) on ОёМ„(k) , the average model parameters at iteration k, and then employing
Assumption M.1, we get
                               2                 2   2ОІ 2
                  вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ) вүӨ ОІ 2 ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёвӢҶ вүӨ            F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ .
                                                      Вө

Now, we can write
                                         D                             E ОІ                     2
      F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ вүӨ F (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), ОёМ„(k+1) вҲ’ ОёМ„(k) +       ОёМ„(k) вҲ’ ОёМ„(k+1) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
                                                                          2
                                         D                           E ОІ                2
                         = F (ОёМ„(k) ) + вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲ’Оұ(k) gv (k) +        Оұ(k) gv (k) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
                                                                        2
                                           D                (k)
                                                                E        D                   E
               = F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), вҲҮv          вҲ’ Оұ(k) вҲҮF (ОёМ„(k) ), Пөv (k)
                                      ОІ   (k)  2      (k) 2     ОІ   (k)  2         2
                                  +      Оұ         вҲҮv        +       Оұ      Пөv (k)
                                      2                         2
                                                2 D (k)          E
                                           (k)               (k)
                                  +ОІ Оұ             вҲҮv , Пөv         ,
in which the relationship in each of the three lines follow from (i) Smoothness (Assumption 4.1-(a)),
                   (k)    (k)     (k)
(ii) Eq. 5, (iii) gi = вҲҮi + Пөi for all i вҲҲ M. Next, we take the expected value of the above
inequality and use Assumption 4.3, and Lemmas D.2 and M.2 to get


                                                  57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      h                      i             h                 i
 EОһ(k) F (ОёМ„(k+1) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ вүӨ EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
                          2ОІ 2
                                                         h                  i
               (k)                     (k)
       вҲ’ ВөОұ          1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin            EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
                           Вө
                (k)
           ОІ 2 dmax (k)

                                                          2
                                                                               (k)
       +             Оұ EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)                + Оұ(k) 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2
              2m
           2ОІ 3            (k)
                                        2          h                  i
       +           3 вҲ’ 2dmin Оұ(k) EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
            Вө
                (k)
           ОІ 3 dmax   (k)  2

                                                                2                               2
                                             (k)         (k)                      (k)
       +               Оұ       EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„                    + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2 Оұ(k)
               m
           ОІ   (k)  2 (k) Пғ 2
       +        Оұ      dmax
           2                   m
          2ОІ 3                                               2ОІ 2
                                       2                                                   h                 i
                          (k)                                              (k)
 вүӨ 1+             3 вҲ’ 2dmin Оұ(k) вҲ’ ВөОұ(k) 1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin                             EОһ(kвҲ’1) F (ОёМ„(k) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ
           Вө                                                  Вө
        2 (k)

      ОІ dmax (k)                                                        2
                                                                                          (k)
   +             Оұ      1 + 2ОІОұ(k) EОһ(kвҲ’1) Оҳ(k) вҲ’ 1m ОёМ„(k)                  + Оұ(k) 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2
         2m
                                            dmax Пғ 2

      ОІ   (k)  2               (k)

   +      Оұ          4 1 вҲ’ dmin Оҙ 2 +                  .
      2                                        m

N.3   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION M.5

We will do an analysis similar to the proof of Propositions 4.10 and I.1, which were given in Ap-
pendices F.3 and J.1, respectively.
Step 1: Setting up the proof. We skip repeating the explanations for this step, as they are exactly
the same as step 1 in Appendix F.3.
                                                                                             (k)
Step 2: Simplifying the conditions. Recall that we have to ensure (i) 0 < П•11 вүӨ 1 and (ii)
     (k)          (k)
0 < П•22 вүӨ 1. For П•11 as defined in Lemma M.3, we have
                                            2

                                                      (k)
                                  Вө2 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ
                                          Вө2    1 вҲ’ d min                         Вө2
      (k)                                                               (k)
    П•11 вүӨ 1       вҮ’      Оұ(k) вүӨ                                вҮ’       dmin > 1 вҲ’ 2 .
                                                  (k)
                                     2ОІ 3 3 вҲ’ 2dmin                              2ОІ

                                                   (k)
We can see that we got a requirement for dmin here, and it should be lower bounded. Therefore,
                                                                    (k)
contrary to when strongly convex models were being used that di could have had any value for all
                                                                                         (k)
i вҲҲ M and k вүҘ 0, when using a non-convex model this is no longer the case, and di have to be
                              2                                                     2
                             Вө                                                     Вө     1
larger than a threshold 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ 2 . To put this into better context, note that 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ 2 > 2 , and thus at
                                             (k)
the best possible scenario we can allow di         > 12 .
                                                                                       (k)
We then put the following constraint on Оұ(k) to get a more compact form for П•11 , defined in Lemma
M.3. We have
                                                    2

                                                             (k)
                                        Вө2 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ Вө2   1 вҲ’ d min
                                    (k)                                       (k)
             Constraint 1: Оұ(k) вүӨ О“1                                ,   0 < О“1 вүӨ 1,
                                                         (k)
                                            2ОІ 3 3 вҲ’ 2dmin

Note that although the above constraint has to be satisfied for Оұ(k) , we also obtain an upper bound
for the condition for theoretical analysis purposes. We have
                                                         2     (k)
                                                    (k) Вө     О“1
                                        Оұ(k) вүӨ О“1           вүӨ      .
                                                       2ОІ 3   2ОІ

                                                         58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (k)          (k)
Hence, we can update П•11 and П•12 as defined in Lemma M.3 as the follows
                                                                                                   (k)
   (k)

                        (k)
                                      2ОІ 2    (k)

                                                                                      (k)    ОІ 2 dmax        (k)

  П•11 вүӨ 1 вҲ’        1 вҲ’ О“1          1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin    ВөОұ(k) ,                        П•12 вүӨ               1 + О“1 Оұ(k) .
                                       Вө                                                        2m

Note that other entries of matrices ОҰ(k) and ОЁ(k) remain the same as initially given in Lemma M.3
and Corollary M.4. Moreover, since matrix ОҰ(k) and vector ОЁ(k) in Eq. 33 were used as upper
bounds, therefore we can always replace their values with new upper bounds for them. Conse-
                                  (k)
quently, with this new value for П•11 , we continue as
                   (k)                                                             1
                П•11 > 0             вҮ’         Оұ(k) <                                                    .
                                                                         (k)            2        (k)
                                                            Вө       1 вҲ’ О“1       1 вҲ’ 2ОІ
                                                                                      Вө2   1 вҲ’ d min

                                                      (k)                                          (k)
Finally, we check the next condition 0 < П•22 вүӨ 1. Noting that we have 3+4ПҒМғ                              < 1, we can enforce
 (k)                (k)              (k)
П•22 вүӨ 1 by setting П•22 вүӨ 3+4ПҒМғ             . We have

     1 + ПҒМғ(k)    (k)  3 + ПҒМғ(k)                                           1     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)         1
               вүӨ П•22 вүӨ                          вҮ’             0 вүӨ Оұ(k) вүӨ q       p            p           .
        2                 4                                                  (k)   1 + ПҒМғ (k)  О¶ 2 + 2ОІ 2
                                                                        2 3dmax

                                                                                            (k)                      (k)
Step 3: Determining the constraints. Having made sure that (i) 0 < П•11 вүӨ 1 and (ii) 0 < П•22 вүӨ 1
in the previous step, we can continue to solve Eq. 15. For the left-hand side of the inequality, we
have
                                                     2ОІ 2

               (k)        (k)             (k)                    (k)        (k)          (k)
          1 вҲ’ П•11    1 вҲ’ П•22 = 1 вҲ’ О“1           1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin          ВөОұ         1 вҲ’ П•22
                                                      Вө
                                                     2ОІ 2                              (k)

                                          (k)                    (k)        (k) 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ
                               вүҘ 1 вҲ’ О“1         1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin          ВөОұ
                                                      Вө                              4
Now, putting this back to Eq. 15, we get

                                        2ОІ 2                          1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)

                           (k)                      (k)                                (k) (k)
                     1 вҲ’ О“1        1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin            ВөОұ(k)               > П•12 П•21
                                         Вө                                4
          "                               #
                 (k)
            ОІ 2 dmax           (k)

                                      (k)    6 1 + ПҒМғ(k)     (k)

                                                                     (k)
                                                                          2
                                                                              2         2

                                                                                                 (k)

 вҮ’                       1 + О“1 Оұ                        mdmax Оұ             О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin
               2m                            Вө 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                     2ОІ 2                                 (k)

                                                        (k)                        (k)         (k) 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ
                                            < 1 вҲ’ О“1           1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin               ВөОұ
                                                                      Вө                                4
                                          v                             v
                                                                        u       2ОІ 2         (k)
                                          u 1 вҲ’ О“(k) 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) Вө u      u 1 вҲ’ Вө2 1 вҲ’ dmin
                                          u
                       (k)         1              1
          вҮ’          Оұ < вҲҡ (k)            t
                                                  (k)
                                                      p                 t                         .
                              2 3dmax 1 + О“1              1 + ПҒМғ(k) ОІО¶ 1 + 2ОІ22 1 вҲ’ d(k)     min
                                                                                 О¶

                                                    (k) (k)           (k) (k)
Finally, we solve for Eq. 16, i.e., c = П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 > 0. Noting that by solving Eq. 15 we
                     (k)    (k)       (k) (k)   (k) (k)
made sure that 1 вҲ’ П•11 вҲ’ П•22 + П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21 > 0, we can write
                                                                (k)      (k)
                                c > 0 вҮ’ П•11 + П•22 вҲ’ 1 > 0

                              (k)
                                        2ОІ 2    (k)
                                                               1 + ПҒМғ(k)
              вҮ’      1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ О“1      1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin    ВөОұ(k) +           вҲ’1>0
                                         Вө                        2
                                                           1 + ПҒМғ(k)
                         вҮ’          Оұ(k) <                                           ,
                                                      (k)            2        (k)
                                              2Вө 1 вҲ’ О“1      1 вҲ’ 2ОІ
                                                                  Вө2     1 вҲ’ dmin

                                              (k)                                            (k)
in which we have used the value of П•11 itself, but the lower bound of П•22 .


                                                                59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 4: Putting all the constraints together. Reviewing all the constraints on Оұ(k) from the
beginning of this appendix, we can collect all of the constraints together and simplify them as
                                   2

                                             (k)
                         Вө2 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ     1 вҲ’ dmin
                 (
                     (k)         Вө2                                     1
    Оұ(k) < min О“1                                   ,                                        ,
                                         (k)                   (k)           2        (k)
                            2ОІ 3 3 вҲ’ 2dmin           Вө 1 вҲ’ О“1        1 вҲ’ 2ОІВө2    1 вҲ’ dmin
                      1      1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)       1
                    q       p           p            ,
                   2 3dmax 1 + ПҒМғ
                        (k)         (k)   О¶ + 2ОІ 2
                                           2

                            v                           v
                                                        u 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ22 1 вҲ’ d(k)
                                                        u
                                    (k)
                            u
                                               (k)
                      1     u 1 вҲ’ О“1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ          Вөu        Вө        min
                    вҲҡ (k) t         (k)
                                        p               t                    ,
                   2 3dmax 1 + О“          1 + ПҒМғ (k) ОІО¶       2ОІ 2
                                                          1+ 2 1вҲ’d
                                                                        (k)
                                          1                           О¶               min
                                                               )
                              1 + ПҒМғ(k)

                         (k)
                                        2

                                                  (k)
                                                                                                          (36)
               2Вө 1 вҲ’ О“1        1 вҲ’ 2ОІВө2    1 вҲ’ d min

                2      2ОІ 2        (k)
               Вө 1 вҲ’ Вө2 1 вҲ’ dmin
         (
           (k)                                               1 + ПҒМғ(k)
    = min О“1                               ,                                           ,
                               (k)                      (k)            2        (k)
                   2ОІ 3 3 вҲ’ 2dmin            2Вө 1 вҲ’ О“1         1 вҲ’ 2ОІ
                                                                    Вө2     1 вҲ’ dmin
                 1      1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)       1
               q       p           p            ,
              2 3dmax 1 + ПҒМғ
                   (k)         (k)   О¶ + 2ОІ 2
                                      2

                       v                           v                    )
                                                   u 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ22 1 вҲ’ d(k)
                                                   u
                               (k)
                       u
                                          (k)
                 1     u 1 вҲ’ О“1 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ          Вөu        Вө        min
               вҲҡ (k) t         (k)
                                   p               t
              2 3dmax 1 + О“          1 + ПҒМғ (k) ОІО¶       2ОІ 2
                                                     1+ 2 1вҲ’d
                                                                   (k)
                                    1                           О¶             min


while satisfying
                                                    (k)
                                              0 < О“1 вүӨ 1.
                                                                             (k)
Note that one of the terms in Eq. 36 was trivially removed since 1+2ПҒМғ               < 1. Furthermore, for the
last two terms, we have

           1      1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)        1              1       1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)   1
     (a) q       p            p             > q         p            вҲҡ ,
                         (k)     2
                                О¶ + 2ОІ    2                      (k)  6ОІ
        2 3dmax 1 + ПҒМғ                        2 3dmax 1 + ПҒМғ
             (k)                                    (k)

                 v                            v
                                              u 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ22 1 вҲ’ d(k)
                                              u
                          (k)
                 u
                 u1 вҲ’ О“               (k)
           1              1    1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ       Вө u      Вө          min
     (b) вҲҡ (k) t          (k)
                              p               t
        2 3dmax 1 + О“           1 + ПҒМғ(k) ОІО¶ 1 + 2ОІ22 1 вҲ’ d(k)
                                1                                     min
                                                          О¶
                                                                                 v
                                                                                 u 1 вҲ’ О“(k)
                                                                                 u
                                                                           (k)
                                                     1     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ          1             1
                                                 < q       p             q       t
                                                                                         (k)
                                                                                             .
                                                       (k)   1 + ПҒМғ (k)      (k)   1 + О“
                                                  2 3d        max       О¶ d              1
                                                                                        max


We found a lower bound for (a), and an upper bound for (b). Since the constraint on Оұ(k) includes
the minimum of these two terms, showing that the upper bound for (b) is less than the lower bound
for (a), will constitute the fact that the (b) вүӨ (a). We have

                          (k)           (k)                               О¶ 2 d(k)
                   1 вҲ’ О“1    О¶ 2 dmax                      (k)
                                                                    1вҲ’         max
                                                                             6ОІ 2
                           вүӨ                    вҮ’         О“1 вүҘ                       = О“вӢҶ1 .
                   1+О“
                       (k)      6ОІ 2                                     2d
                                                                    1 + О¶ 6ОІ
                                                                             (k)
                                                                           max
                          1                                                  2


                       (k)
Therefore, choosing О“1 = О“вӢҶ1 will give us tightest possible bounds. However, in order to get
simpler expressions for the first two terms in Eq. 36 which would give us better intuition, we choose


                                                    60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (k)
the infimum of О“1 for them, i.e., 1/5, to obtain
               ( 2         2

                                      (k)

                 Вө 1 вҲ’ 2ОІВө2    1 вҲ’ dmin        5         1 + ПҒМғ(k)
   Оұ(k) < min                                ,                               ,
                   10ОІ 3 3 вҲ’ 2dmin
                                   (k)         4 2Вө 1 вҲ’ 2ОІ22 1 вҲ’ d(k)
                                                          Вө           min
                                                                          v
                                                                          u      2ОІ 2          (k) )
                                                                   (k) u 1 вҲ’ Вө2          1 вҲ’ d
                                                   1     Вө 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ         u                    min
                                                q          2
                                                             p            t
                                                     (k) ОІ                                     (k)
                                                                      (k)        2ОІ  2
                                               6 2dmax         1 + ПҒМғ       1  +    2    1 вҲ’ d min
                                                                                  О¶


Step 5: Obtaining ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ). We established ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) < 1 in the previous steps. The last step is to
determine what ПҒ(ОҰ(k) ) is. We have
                                                              r                     2
          вҲ’b + b2 вҲ’ 4acвҲҡ                    (k)
                                          П•11 + П•22 +
                                                       (k)            (k)
                                                                    П•11 + П•22
                                                                               (k)                (k) (k)
                                                                                        вҲ’ 4 П•11 П•22 вҲ’ П•12 П•21
                                                                                                               (k) (k)

 ПҒ ОҰ(k) =                             =
                       r2a                  2
                                                                                  2
      (k)      (k)            (k)      (k)             (k) (k)
    П•11 + П•22 +             П•11 вҲ’ П•22          + 4П•12 П•21
  =
                                2
                   (k)              2           (k)                       (k)
                                                                                     1+ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                                      2 2
                           1 вҲ’ 2ОІ       1 вҲ’ dmin ВөОұ(k) + 1+2ПҒМғ + 3 1вҲ’

     1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ О“1                   Вө2                                                    ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                                Оұ(k)       О¶ + 2ОІ 2
  =
            "                                               2
                                                  2
          1
                               (k)
                                              2ОІ             (k)
                                                                                    1 + ПҒМғ(k)
       +        1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ О“1              1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin ВөОұ(k) вҲ’
          2                                    Вө                                         2
                                                                                                                    !2
                                                                             1 + ПҒМғ(k)   (k)  2 2               2

                                                                        вҲ’3                  Оұ           О¶ + 2ОІ
                                                                             1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                                                        1/2
                                                                                                                        #
                         (k)
                   ОІ 2 dmax             (k)

                                                 (k) 6 1 + ПҒМғ
                                                               (k)
                                                                        (k)

                                                                                 (k)
                                                                                       2
                                                                                              2        2

                                                                                                                (k)
              +4                1 + О“1 Оұ                            mdmax Оұ                 О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin
                      2m                             Вө 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
      3 + ПҒМғ(k)      1           (k)
                                                2ОІ 2            (k)
                                                                                      3 1 + ПҒМғ(k)   (k)  2 2
                                                                         ВөОұ(k) +                                О¶ + 2ОІ 2

   =             вҲ’        1 вҲ’ О“1         1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin                                          (k)
                                                                                                       Оұ
          4          2                           Вө                                    2 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ
                       "
                            1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                               2ОІ 2

                    1
                                                     (k)

                                                                                    (k)
                 +                     вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ О“1              1 вҲ’ 2 1 вҲ’ dmin                   ВөОұ(k)
                    2           2                                    Вө
                                                                                                          !2
                                                                 1 + ПҒМғ(k)   (k)  2 2                 2

                                                           вҲ’3                 Оұ            О¶ + 2ОІ
                                                                 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)
                                                                                                                       1/2
                                                                                                                       #
                            12ОІ 2            (k) 1 + ПҒМғ
                                                           (k)
                                                                   (k)
                                                                         2
                                                                                (k)
                                                                                     3
                                                                                            2        2

                                                                                                               (k)
                        +            1 + О“1                      d            Оұ            О¶ + 2ОІ 1 вҲ’ dmin
                              Вө                     1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k) max
     3 + ПҒМғ(k)                                     2
  =             вҲ’ A(k) Оұ(k) + B (k) Оұ(k)
         4            s
                            1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ(k)                                          2   2

                    1                                                                                      3
                +                      вҲ’ 2 A(k) Оұ(k) + B (k) Оұ(k)                       + C (k) Оұ(k) .
                    2           2

O     F URTHER E XPERIMENTS
O.1     ACCURACY VS . D ELAY WITH U NIFORM D ISTRIBUTION

In the experiments we provided in Fig. 2, the SGD and aggregation probabilities were sampled from
                            (k) (k)
a Beta distribution, e.g., di , bij вҲј Beta(Оұ, ОІ). In this section, we investigate sampling these
probabilities from the uniform distribution, denoted as U(0, 1].


                                                           61
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                             0.8

                    0.6
                                                                                                             0.6
        accuracy


                                                                                                  accuracy
                    0.4                                                                                      0.4


                                                                                                             0.2
                    0.2

                                                                                                             0.0
                           0             5000            10000                                                     0                                  10000             20000
                                        overall delay                                                                                           overall delay
                                 (a) FMNIST, Non-IID.                                                                    (b) CIFAR10, Non-IID.

   Figure 5: Accuracy vs. latency plots obtained in different setups where the SGD and aggregation
   probabilities are sampled from the uniform distribution U(0, 1]. DSpodFL achieves the target accu-
   racy much faster with less delay, emphasizing the benefit of sporadicity in DFL for SGD iterations
   and model aggregations simultaneously.
acc. after = 500


                                                         acc. after = 500


                                                                                                                             acc. after = 500
                                                                                                                                                0.5
                   0.6                                                      0.5

                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                            0.4
                   0.4                                                                                                                          0.3
                                                                            0.3
                                                                                                                                                0.2
                   0.2                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                0.1
                           2    4      6        8   10                            0.2   0.4       0.6     0.8          1.0                            10   20     30        40   50
                               number of labels                                           radius of the RGG                                                 number of clients

   (a) Varying number of labels per (b) Varying the radius of the ran- (c) Varying the number of clients m
   client.                          dom geometric network graph.       in the network.

   Figure 6: Effects of system parameters on FMNIST, where client and link capabilities di and bij
   are sampled from a Beta distribution Beta(0.5, 0.5). The overall results confirm the advantage of
   DSpodFL in various settings.


   We have provided experimental results for only the non-IID cases in Fig. 5, under exactly the same
   setup outlined in Sec. 5. It can be observed that the findings discussed in Sec. 5 also hold here.
   In other words, our DSpodFL method outperforms the baselines in terms of accuracy per overall
   delay.
   We will explain the intuitive reason of why DSpodFL is outperforming other baselines in both
   Figs. 2 and 5. Let G = (M, E) be given a network graph, and assume there exits two paths between
   nodes i and j. Let one of these paths have a communication cost k times more than the other path,
   where k вү« 1. In our DSpodFL method, the path with lower cost will be utilized roughly k times
   more than the other path, thus resulting in lower communication overhead while still preserving
   information flow between nodes i and j. Meanwhile, other methods, especially DGD and DFedAvg
   methods, do not take this into account.


    O.2                   E FFECTS OF S YSTEM PARAMETERS WITH B ETA D ISTRIBUTION

   In the experiments we provided in Fig. 3, specifically Figs. 3a, 3b and 3c, the SGD and aggregation
                                                                     (k) (k)
   probabilities were sampled from a uniform distribution, e.g., di , bij вҲј U(0, 1]. In this section,
   we investigate sampling these probabilities from the Beta distribution, denoted as Beta(0.5, 0.5).


                                                                                             62
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6


                                                                                 acc. after = 5000


                                                                                                                                                                    acc. after = 5000
                   0.6
acc. after = 500                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                     0.5
                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                     0.4

                   0.2                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                                                     0.3

                            2         4      6        8                    10                              0.2           0.4      0.6      0.8               1.0                              4                     6            8           10
                                     number of labels                                                                      graph connectivity                                                                      number of clients

   (a) Varying number of labels per (b) Varying the radius of the ran- (c) Varying the number of clients m
   client.                          dom geometric network graph.       in the network.

   Figure 7: Effects of system parameters on CIFAR10. In all figures, client and link capabilities di and
   bij are sampled from a Beta distribution Beta(0.8, 0.8). The overall results confirm the advantage
   of DSpodFL in various settings.


                 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                     0.6                                                                     0.6
                 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                  accuracy
                                                          accuracy
      accuracy


                                                                                                                                  accuracy
                                                                     0.4                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4
                 0.4
                                                                     0.2                                                                     0.2                                                             0.2
                 0.2
                                                                                                                                             0.0                                                             0.0
                       0           5000         10000                      0    10000                 20000      30000    40000                    0     5000       10000                                          0     50000    100000   150000
                                overall delay                                          overall delay                                                    overall delay                                                     overall delay

                       (a) FMNIST, IID.                              (b) FMNIST, Non-IID.                                                          (c) CIFAR10, IID.                                    (d) CIFAR10, Non-IID.

   Figure 8: Accuracy vs. latency plots when SGD and aggregation probabilities are time-varying.
   DSpodFL achieves the target accuracy much faster with less delay, emphasizing the benefit of
   sporadicity in DFL for SGD iterations and model aggregations simultaneously.


   We have provided experimental results for only the non-IID cases in Fig. 6, under exactly the same
   setup outlined in 5. It can be observed that the findings discussed in Sec. 5 also hold here. In other
   words, the performance gain of our DSpodFL method compared to the baselines is robust regardless
   of the variation in system parameters, i.e, (i) data heterogeneity level, (ii) level of graph connectivity
   level and (iii) number of clients in the system.

    O.3                    E FFECTS OF S YSTEM PARAMETERS ON CIFAR10

   In both Sections 5 and O.2, we analyzed the effects of system parameters on the FMNIST dataset.
   Here, we will provide similar experimental results for the CIFAR10 dataset. Note that while an
   SVM model was trained on the FMNIST dataset, for CIFAR10 we use the VGG11 model. We
                                                                                   (k)
   sample the SGD and aggregation probabilities from the Beta distribution, i.e., di вҲј Beta(0.8, 0.8)
        (k)
   and bij вҲј Beta(0.8, 0.8), respectively.
   The results in Fig. 7 are carried out in the non-IID regime as well, under the setup described in
   Sec. 5. Again, the findings discussed in Sec. 5 and O.2 can be validated here, showing that DSpodFL
   outperforms the state-of-the-art in various settings. This demonstrates that our results hold regardless
   of the dataset in question and the ML model being used, adding yet another dimension of robustness
   to our methodology.

    O.4                    DYNAMIC SGD AND AGGREGATION P ROBABILITIES

   In the experiments done in Sec. 5, the SGD and aggregations probabilities where set to constant
                                  (k)         (k)
   values for all clients, i.e., di = di and bij = bij , for all k вүҘ 0. In this section, we conduct exper-
   iments by letting these probabilities to be time-varying. This setup corresponds to situations where
   the computation/communication resources of clients vary over time. To be specific, we change prob-
              (k)      (k)
   abilities di and bij every 1000 iterations of model training. However, note that we still randomly


                                                                                                                              63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        IID                                      Non-IID
      Algorithm
                      Iter. 1000    Iter. 2500    Iter. 3500     Iter. 5000    Iter. 10000    Iter. 15000
     DGD                 0.80          0.81          0.82           0.72           0.73           0.75
   DFedAvg               0.79          0.81          0.81           0.39           0.41           0.41
      RG                 0.80          0.82          0.82           0.60           0.65           0.64
 Sporadic SGDs           0.77          0.80          0.80           0.70           0.74           0.74
   DSpodFL               0.77          0.80          0.80           0.63           0.67           0.70

  Table 2: Accuracy vs. iteration results for experiments in Fig. 2 done for the FMNIST dataset.

                                         IID                                     Non-IID
       Algorithm
                       Iter. 1500    Iter. 3000    Iter. 4500     Iter. 3000    Iter. 6000    Iter. 9500
       DGD                0.73          0.73          0.74           0.77          0.80          0.81
     DFedAvg              0.73          0.74          0.75           0.56          0.70          0.76
        RG                0.72          0.74          0.74           0.73          0.80          0.80
   Sporadic SGDs          0.74          0.74          0.75           0.71          0.76          0.79
     DSpodFL              0.72          0.73          0.73           0.65          0.72          0.76

  Table 3: Accuracy vs. iteration results for experiments in Fig. 2 done for the CIFAR10 dataset.


sample them from the same distribution, i.e., Beta(0.5, 0.5) for FMNIST and Beta(0.8, 0.8) for
CIFAR10.
It can be observed that the findings discussed in Sec. 5 also hold here. In other words, our DSpodFL
method outperforms the baselines in terms of accuracy per overall delay regardless of the time-
variation in SGD and aggregation probabilities.

O.5     ACCURACY VS . I TERATION

We have provided the accuracy vs. iteration results for the experiments done in Fig. 2. In Tables 2
and 3, we give the results for several sampled iterations.
We observe that given enough time, i.e., after sufficient epochs, the achievable accuracy for
DSpodFL matches the achievable accuracy for the other baselines. The accuracy for DSpodFL
being slightly lower than DGD at some iterations is due to the fact that gradient and consensus op-
erations occur at every iteration for all devices in DGD, without taking resource availability into
account. In DSpodFL, on the other hand, at each iteration some devices do not compute gradients
and/or some of the links are not utilized for communications. Thus, it is not unexpected for the
accuracy of DSpodFL to be lower than DGD across the iterations, since it is actually designed to
achieve faster convergence in terms of the actual physical delay incurred as seen in Fig. 2. Regard-
less, the final achievable accuracy is the same for all baselines, as they all fit within the DSpodFL
framework, and we theoretically prove in the paper that all of these algorithms will converge to the
same global ML model.

O.6     D ECOMPOSING ACCURACY VS . D ELAY R ESULTS

In Tables 4 and 5, we have decomposed the results from Fig. 2 into their processing and transmis-
sion delay components. We have reported how long it takes for different algorithms to achieve a
specific accuracy in terms of 1) processing delay, 2) transmission delay and 3) overall delay. We
can see that to reach a certain accuracy, DSpodFL strikes the best balance between transmission
and processing delays, leading to a better overall delay. Specifically, it obtains a similar processing
delay to the Sporadic SGDs algorithm and transmission delay to RG, which are the best baselines in
those respective categories. Note that the reported delays below are in units of time.

O.7     R ESULTS WITH A T RUNCATED G AUSSIAN D ISTRIBUTION

In Fig. 9 we have further explored the performance of DSpodFL under a truncated Gaussian distri-
bution NМӮ[0,1] (Вө, Пғ 2 ) to generate probabilities di and bij , which for small values of variance Пғ 2 gives


                                                    64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          IID, with accuracy = 0.75            Non-IID, with accuracy = 0.40
        Algorithm
                       Process. Transm.       Overall        Process.    Transm.      Overall
          DGD          4605.26 1915.95 6521.22               2470.37     1027.76     3498.14
        DFedAvg        5947.19      88.82     6036.01       221418.66 3070.60 224489.26
           RG          6130.19     331.40     6461.58        9180.18     451.15      9631.18
      Sporadic SGDs     591.84    7614.84 8206.68             127.38     1270.18     1397.56
        DSpodFL         593.69     893.32 1487.00             257.68     430.96      688.65

Table 4: Decomposition of accuracy vs. delay results in Fig. 2 for the FMNIST dataset into their
processing an transmission delay components.

                            IID, with accuracy = 0.65          Non-IID, with accuracy = 0.30
         Algorithm
                         Process. Transm.       Overall      Process. Transm.        Overall
           DGD           3462.06 2571.64 6033.70             2250.12    8807.37 11057.49
         DFedAvg         2784.81     482.01     3266.83      9627.35    2065.34 11692.70
            RG           3462.06     614.68     4076.74      2250.12     161.15      2411.27
       Sporadic SGDs      440.73    2888.25 3328.98           160.13    13081.37 13241.50
         DSpodFL          628.97     990.24 1619.21           327.27     647.24      974.51

Table 5: Decomposition of accuracy vs. delay results in Fig. 2 for the CIFAR10 dataset into their
processing an transmission delay components.


the setting of relatively homogeneous and static clients. Fig. 9a demonstrates accuracy vs. latency
when using this distribution with a mean and standard deviation of 0.5, and Fig. 9b shows the result
for different Пғ 2 . We see a wider margin of improvement with a relatively larger Пғ 2 . This confirms
that DSpodFL is most advantageous relative to the baselines under extreme levels of heterogeneity
and dynamics, similar to how the improvements under the inverted bell-shaped beta distribution are
more pronounced than those under the uniform distribution as seen in Fig. 3d. We have also ex-
perimented with fixing the variance of the truncated Gaussian distribution and varying its mean in
Fig. 9c.

O.8    F URTHER G ENERALIZATION AND S CALABILITY V ERIFICATION

In Fig. 10, we present further experimental results under different settings than the setup given in
the main text. In Fig. 10a, we analyze the effect of graph connectivity on the overall performance
when a total of m = 50 clients are present in the network. We observe that the improvement
gap between DSpodFL and other baselines becomes even more significant compared to Fig. 3b.
In Figs. 10b and 10c, we isolate the effect of varying bij and di separately, in contrast to Fig. 3d
where both the SGD probabilities di (i.e., computation capabilities) and aggregation probabilities
bij (i.e., communication capabilities) were varied together. The results are show that DSpodFL is
more robust to variations in bij or di compared to the baselines, respectively. In Figs. 10b (and
10c), while the heterogeneity in computational (communication) resources is preserved across the
whole experiment, moving from Оұ = ОІ = 0.5 to Оұ = ОІ = 1 brings us from a heterogeneous
regime to a homogeneous one in terms of communication (computational) resources. Thus, the
Sporadic SGDs (Sporadic Aggregations) component of DSpodFL, i.e., green curve (red curve),
becomes key to improvement over other baselines when communication (computational) resources
are homogeneous.

O.9    E FFECT OF L EARNING R ATE

We vary the learning rate in the range Оұ вҲҲ {0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1} in our experiments. In Fig. 11,
we present the test accuracy results for our DSpodFL algorithm and other baselines, when they reach
a total delay of П„ = 500 for FMNIST and П„ = 5000 for CIFAR10. For FMNIST, we observe that
even the best performance of the baselines is lower than our DSpodFL algorithm with learning rates
Оұ = 0.01 or Оұ = 0.1. For CIFAR10, we make a similar observation where the best performance of
the baselines is lower than DSpodFL with learning rates Оұ = 0.001 and Оұ = 0.01.


                                                 65
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     0.50
                   0.6                                                                                                                                  0.5


                                                                  acc. after = 500


                                                                                                                                     acc. after = 500
                                                                                     0.45
      accuracy

                   0.4                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                     0.40


                   0.2                                                               0.35
                                                                                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                     0.30
                         0           5000     10000      15000                              0.2     0.3        0.4       0.5   0.6                            0.0    0.2    0.4         0.6   0.8
                                     overall delay
                         (a) NМғ[0,1] (0.5, (0.5)2 ).                                          (b) NМғ[0,1] (0.5, Пғ 2 ).                                         (c) NМғ[0,1] (Вө, (0.5)2 ).

   Figure 9: We investigate the FMNIST, Non-IID setup from Figs. 2 and 3 using a Truncated Gaussian
   Distribution to sample SGD and aggregation probabilities di and bij , respectively. We denote this
   distribution as NМғ[0,1] (Вө, Пғ 2 ), which only has values in the interval [0, 1].


                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                  acc. after = 500


                                                                                                                                     acc. after = 500
                                                                                     0.4
acc. after = 500


                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                        0.3
                   0.4
                                                                                     0.3
                   0.3
                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                     0.2
                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                   0.1                                                               0.1
                         0.2     0.4       0.6     0.8     1.0                                    0.6              0.8         1.0                                  0.6           0.8         1.0
                                   radius of the RGG                                                           =                                                             =
   (a) Varying the radius of RGG (b) Varying Оұ = ОІ for bij while (c) Varying Оұ = ОІ for di while
   where m = 50.                 fixing Оұ = ОІ = 0.5 for di in fixing Оұ = ОІ = 0.5 for bij in
                                 Beta(Оұ, ОІ).                     Beta(Оұ, ОІ).

                               Figure 10: Further investigation of DSpodFLвҖҷs generalization to various setups.


    P                    R EMARKS
    P.1                   E FFECT OF C OMMUNICATION S PORADICITY ON A NALYTICAL B OUNDS

   We will make a remark about this in two parts:
   1. Effect of bij on the spectral radius ПҒМғ(k) : As mentioned in Sec. 4.4вҖҷs вҖңDiscussion on conver-
   genceвҖқ, the probabilities bij affect the bounds through the spectral radius of the expected mixing
   matrix, i.e., ПҒМғ(k) = ПҒ(RМғ(k) вҲ’ (1/m)1m 1Tm ) from Definition 4.5. We can refer to the elements of
   matrix RМғ(k) in Appendix E.4-(b), given as
                                         пЈұh                       i
                                      2 пЈІ вҲ’2b(k) ij   1 вҲ’ b
                                                            (k)
                                                            ij
                                                                   2
                                                                 rij            i Мё= j
                        (k)      (k)                                   1вүӨi,jвүӨm
                      RМғ вүң RМ„          +    h
                                               m     (k)

                                                                 (k)
                                                                          i
                                                                        2
                                             P
                                         пЈі
                                               l=1 2bil    1 вҲ’ bil ril          i=j
                                                                                                                                          1вүӨiвүӨm
                               (k)
   where RМ„                          is defined in Lemma D.4-(a) as
                                                           пЈұh (k) i
                                                           пЈІ bij rij                                                                    i Мё= j
                                                    RМ„(k) = h         1вүӨi,jвүӨm i
                                                           пЈі 1 вҲ’ m b(k) rij
                                                                  P
                                                                     j=1 ij                                                             i=j
                                                                                                                         1вүӨi,jвүӨm
                                                                 (k)
   As we can see, the values of bij directly affect RМғ(k) , and hence the communication sporadicity
                                      (k)
   parameters bij affect all the convergence bounds and learning rate constraints through ПҒМғ(k) , the
   spectral radius of RМғ(k) вҲ’ (1/m)1m 1Tm .
                                                                                                                                                                            (k)
   From the definition of RМғ(k) , we can draw some intuitions on the relation between bij and ПҒМғ(k) : If
          (k)
   bij вҶ’ 0 for all (i, j) вҲҲ E, we will have a diagonal RМғ(k) , meaning that ПҒМғ(k) = 1. On the other


                                                                                                          66
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                          0.4                                                                                                              0.6
                   0.6                                                                                                           0.6


                                                                                                             acc. after = 5000


                                                                                                                                                                       acc. after = 5000
acc. after = 500


                                                       acc. after = 500
                                                                          0.3                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                 0.4
                   0.4
                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                 0.2                                                       0.2
                   0.2
                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                 0.0                                                       0.0
                     10 4     10 3       10 2   10 1                        10 4    10 3       10 2   10 1                         10 4     10 3       10 2     10 1                         10 4      10 3       10 2         10 1
                              learning rate                                         learning rate                                           learning rate                                              learning rate

                         (a) FMNIST, IID.                             (b) FMNIST, Non-IID.                                             (c) CIFAR10, IID.                             (d) CIFAR10, Non-IID.

                                                                                Figure 11: Effect of the learning rate Оұ.


                                    (k)
   extreme, if bij вҶ’ 1 for all (i, j) вҲҲ E, we will have the main diagonal of RМғ(k) = R2 , meaning
   that ПҒМғ(k) = ПҒ2r . This would be the lowest achievable spectral radius ПҒМғ(k) , as it is utilizing all the
                                                                       (k)
   communication links as frequently as possible. All other cases of bij result in ПҒМғ(k) between these
   two extremes, with higher connectivity decreasing ПҒМғ(k) .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (k)
   2. Effect of ПҒМғ(k) on the analytical bounds: Based on the relationship between bij and ПҒМғ(k) , we can
                                                                                     (k)
   establish the connection between bij and the convergence bound. We can see in Propositions 4.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (k)
   and G.6 (convex and non-convex cases) that if ПҒМғ = 1 (one possible scenario being that all bij =
   0, as explained in the previous paragraph) the constraint on the learning rate becomes Оұ(k) < 0.
   Intuitively, no learning rate can make DSpodFL converge if none of the communication links are
                                                 (k)
   ever utilized. On the other hand, having all bij = 1 results in the minimum achievable ПҒМғ, allowing
   a larger learning rate to be chosen based on the constraints given in Propositions 4.10 and G.6. In
                                                                 (k)
   other words, as the connectivity of the graph induced by bij increases, larger step sizes can be
   tolerated while still guaranteeing convergence in Theorems 4.11 and 4.12.


    P.2                     P ERFORMANCE S UPERIORITY OF DS P O D FL

   Our performance improvements over the baselines come from sporadic operations of both local
   SGDs and aggregations. In decentralized FL, resource availability is often heterogeneous and dy-
   namic, as discussed in Sec. 1: there are (i) variations in computation capabilities at clients, causing
   bottlenecks in assuming consistent participation in SGD computations, and (ii) variations in link
   bandwidth, causing bottlenecks during model aggregation. Referring to Algorithm 1 in Appendix B,
   DSpodFL overcomes these limitations as follows:

                                                                                                                                           (k)
                            вҖў Client i conducts an SGD in iteration k only if vi = 1 (line 7), which has a probability
                              di proportional to its processing availability. Consider that multiple clients may possess
                              overlapping data distributions. In such scenarios, the system can benefit from more fre-
                              quent SGD updates from the clients with the highest resource availability, as they provide
                              information representative of multiple clients and finish iterations faster.
                                                                                                                                                              (k)
                            вҖў Link (i, j) is used for model sharing in iteration k only if vij = 1 (line 12), which has a
                              probability bij proportional to its bandwidth availability. DSpodFL takes advantage of the
                              fact that model information can propagate through the system rapidly over the fastest links
                              in the graph. For example, if link (i, j) has low bandwidth, our method will make client iвҖҷs
                              relevant local update information reach client j more rapidly through a series of other high
                              bandwidth links.

   Unlike DSpodFL, the baselines evaluated in Sec. 5 work under (a) fixed SGDs and/or (b) fixed
   aggregations. DGD assumes local SGDs and aggregations at every iteration, RG employs constant
   SGDs (but sporadic aggregations), Sporadic SGDs assumes constant aggregations, and DFedAvg is
   DGD with decreased communication frequencies.

                                                                                                         67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P.3   C OMPARISON M ETRICS FOR E XPERIMENTS
                                                      (k)
As outlined in Sec. 5, the average total delay П„total at iteration k is defined as the sum of aver-
                       (k)                                     (k)
age processing delay П„proc and average transmission delay П„trans up to iteration k. At each iter-
                                                                         (k)
ation, depending on whether a client i computed SGDs or not, i.e., vi вҲҲ {0, 1}, there will be
                                                                             (k)
a processing delay incurred to finish the computation proportional to 1/di . Similarly, depend-
         (k)
ing on vМӮij вҲҲ {0, 1}, some of the links (i, j) in the network graph will be utilized for commu-
                                                                   (k)
nications, incurring a transmission delay proportional to 1/bij for that link. In order to obtain
comparable result regardless of the size, connectivity and the topology of the underlying graph,
                                                                                 (k)    (k)
we normalize (i.e., average) both processing and transmission delay to obtain П„proc , П„trans . For-
                             (k)      P  m            P    (k)       P m             P
mally, these are defined as П„trans = [ i=1 (1/|Ni |) j vМӮij /bij ]/[ i=1 (1/|Ni |) j 1/bij ] and
 (k)     Pm (k)           Pm                              (k)     (k)      (k)
П„proc = [ i=1 vi /di ]/[ i=1 1/di ]. Finally, we define П„total = П„trans + П„proc as the average total
delay as a metric to compare DSpodFL with the baselines.
                                                (k)         (k)      (k)
Having explained the average total delay П„total = П„trans + П„proc above, we can now see what
happens to different baselines under our proposed heterogeneity framework, and how di and bij
translate to the speed of a client and a link, respectively. In DGD, we have that computations and
                                                  (k)    (k)
communications occur at every iteration, i.e., vi = vМӮij = 1 for all i вҲҲ M, (i, j) вҲҲ E and k вүҘ 0.
                            (k)       P m             P           Pm               P
Thus, we will have that П„trans = [ i=1 (1/|Ni |) j 1/bij ]/[ i=1 (1/|Ni |) j 1/bij ] = 1 and
  (k)      Pm           Pm
П„proc = [ i=1 1/di ]/[ i=1 1/di ] = 1, and thus each iteration of training will incur a total average
            (k)                                                           (k)
delay of П„total = 2 for this baseline. For DFedAvg, we still have П„proc = 1 as SGDs occur at
every iteration. But since aggregations occur every D iterations, i.e., clients conduct D consecutive
                                                                        (k)
iterations of local SGD steps before communications, we will have П„trans = 0 for D iterations and
       (k)
then П„trans = 1 for the next iteration. This deterministic cycle will then continue for DFedAvg.
In RG and the Sporadic SGDs baselines, we only have one of these operations occurring at every
iteration, i.e., computations and communications, respectively. This means that in RG, we have
  (k)                            (k)
vi = 1 is deterministic but vМӮij is stochastic, and for Sporadic SGDs, we have deterministic
                              (k)                                  (k)        (k)
vМӮij (k) = 1 but stochastic vi . Thus, for RG we will have П„total = П„trans + 1 < 2 implied by
  (k)                                                (k)          (k)                  (k)
П„proc = 1, and for Sporadic SGDs, we will have that П„total = 1 + П„proc < 2 implied by П„trans = 1.
However, note that in DSpodFL, both computation and communication operations are carried out
in a stochastic way, and thus each iteration of training requires less delay incurred on the whole
decentralized system to start the next round of training. Note however, that less computation and
communication might come at the cost of losing performance at each iteration, but our motivation in
DSpodFL was to prove that in fact if we evaluate these algorithms based on their total delay, it can
outperform existing baselines. The intuition is that due to the data distribution of clients available in
the network, their processing capabilities, the graph topology and the link bandwidth capabilities, it
is not necessary to over utilize all of these resources at every iteration for fast convergence. In fact, a
resource-aware approach like DSpodFL, takes a step at optimally utilizing the resources to achieve
the same final solutions in a shorter amount of time.


P.4   C ONVERGENCE R ATE C OMPARISON WITH R ELATED W ORK

Convergence rate in Big O notation. First, we note that as outlined in Table 1 of Sec. 1, we pro-
vide convergence for last iterates of model parameters when dealing with strongly-convex models
in our paper, in contrast to the majority of existing literature which only provide convergence for
average iterates (Koloskova et al., 2020). Therefore when dealing with strongly-convex models, we
can compare our theoretical results only for the DGD baseline because the DGD-like algorithms
given in Mishchenko et al. (2022); Maranjyan et al. (2022) are among the few to show convergence
for the last iterates of model parameters as well. According to Theorems 3.6, 5.5, 5.7 and D.1
in Mishchenko et al. (2022) and Theorems 3.5, 4.5 and B.2 in Maranjyan et al. (2022), the conver-
gence rate of the algorithms ProxSkip, Decentralized Scaffnew, SplitSkip (Mishchenko et al., 2022),
GradSkip, GradSkip+ and VR-GradSkip+ (Maranjyan et al., 2022) are all geometric, i.e., O(ПҒK )

                                                      68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with 0 < ПҒ < 1 (note that most of these algorithms are FL algorithms, and not decentralized FL
algorithms). This rate agrees with the rate we provide in Eq. 9 of Theorem 4.11.
When dealing with non-convex models, we can compare our rate with all the baselines, i.e., Nedic &
Ozdaglar (2009) for DGD, Koloskova et al. (2020) for RG and Sun et al. (2022) for DFedAvg. Since
DGD is a special case of RG with no sporadicity in aggregations, i.e., bij = 1 for all (i, j) вҲҲ E,
we will compare our work with the more recent paper Koloskova et al. (2020). For DGD and RG,
Lemma 17 of Koloskova et al. (2020) shows the convergence upper bound before tuning the constant
learning rate Оұ, which is
                               E[F (ОёМ„(0) )] вҲ’ F вӢҶ

                          O                          + O(Оұ) + O(Оұ2 ).
                                  Оұ(K + 1)
For DFedAvg, Theorem 1 in Sun et al. (2022) with a zero momentum (Оё = 0) obtains the bound
                        E[F (ОёМ„(0) )] вҲ’ F вӢҶ

                    O                         + O(Оұ) + O(Оұ2 ) + O(Оұ3 ).
                            Оұ(K + 1)
We observe that by setting dmin = 1 in Theorem 4.12 of our paper, these convergence rates are
recovered. Recall that as discussed in Fig. 1 of our paper, all of these baseline algorithms fit within
the general framework of DSpodFL with di = 1 for all clients i вҲҲ M. That is why we can
substitute dmin = 1 in Theorem 4.12 to compare our analytical results with the ones provided in
Nedic & Ozdaglar (2009); Koloskova et al. (2020); Sun et al. (2022).
Comparison of convergence bound for non-convex models with Koloskova et al. (2020). Let us
examine the bound derived in the proof of Lemma 16 in Koloskova et al. (2020) before tuning the
learning rate, i.e.,
       1     XT
                              2   Ef (xМ„(0) ) вҲ’ f вӢҶ   LПғМӮ 2        L2 [2ПғМӮ 2 + 2( 6П„        2
                                                                                   p + M )О¶МӮ ]П„ 2
                 вҲҘвҲҮf (xМ„(t) )вҲҘ2 вүӨ                   +       О· + 64                             О· .
    2(T + 1) t=0                    (T + 1)О·           n                         p
Translating these parameters to the setup of our paper, we have
   T вҶ’ K, t вҶ’ r, f вҶ’ F, x вҶ’ Оё, О· вҶ’ Оұ, L вҶ’ ОІ, ПғМӮ вҶ’ Пғ, n вҶ’ m, П„ вҶ’ 1, p вҶ’ 1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ, M вҶ’ 0.
As a consequence, the bound in Koloskova et al. (2020) using the notation and setup of our paper
becomes
                 K                                                                 6
           1    X                 2  EF (ОёМ„(0) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ   ОІПғ 2         ОІ 2 [Пғ 2 + 1вҲ’      2
                                                                                     ПҒМғ Оҙ ] 2
                     вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(r) )вҲҘ вүӨ                   +      Оұ + 128                      Оұ .
       2(K + 1) r=0                    (K + 1)Оұ           m                  1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ
Now, we compare this with the non-asymptotic bound we obtain for non-convex models in Theo-
rem 4.12, which is
        K                                                                          2
  w1 X                  2  F (ОёМ„(0) ) вҲ’ F вӢҶ   1 + О“3    ОІ2      вҲҘОҳ(0) вҲ’ 1 mОёМ„(0) вҲҘ
           вҲҘвҲҮF (ОёМ„(r) )вҲҘ вүӨ                  +
 K + 1 r=0                   Оұ(K + 1)         1 вҲ’ О“11 m(1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ)       K +1
                                            2    1+ПҒМғ 2    2
                                    1 + О“3 ОІ (16 1вҲ’ПҒМғ Оҙ + Пғ ) 2                            ОІПғ 2
                                +        1                   Оұ + (1 + О“3 )(1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 +      Оұ.
                                    1 вҲ’ О“1       1 вҲ’ ПҒМғ                                    2m
where we used the fact that dmax вүӨ 1.
We can see how our bound compares with the one derived in Koloskova et al. (2020). The exact
value of w1 in our paper depends on the arbitrarily chosen scalars О“0 , ..., О“4 , but we have in general
that w1 вүӨ 12 . For common terms that our analysis has with Koloskova et al. (2020), we see how
their coefficients are also very similar. For example, for the term proportional to Оұ2 , we observe that
                                                                                ОІ2           2    q   2
both our bound and the one in Koloskova et al. (2020) are proportional to (1вҲ’      ПҒМғ) and (Пғ + 1вҲ’ПҒМғ Оҙ ),
with slight differences in the value of q. Furthermore, for the term proportional to Оұ, both our bound
                                                    2
and Koloskova et al. (2020) are proportional to ОІПғ2m .
However, we can observe that our bound consists of two extra terms compared to Koloskova et al.
                                          (0)                  2
                       1+О“3   ОІ     2
                                    вҲҘОҳ          вҲ’1 mОёМ„ (0) вҲҘ
(2020). The first one, 1вҲ’ 1 m(1вҲ’ПҒМғ)             K+1                , is capturing the effect of different model ini-
                           О“1

tializations for the clients. The second one, (1 + О“3 )(1 вҲ’ dmin )Оҙ 2 is capturing the effect of sporadic


                                                        69
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SGDs in our DSpodFL framework. We observe that if all clients conduct SGDs at every iteration,
       (k)
i.e., di = 1 for all i вҲҲ M and k вүҘ 0, this term becomes equal to zero, giving us the bound for
non-sporadic methods outlined in Koloskova et al. (2020). Therefore, as we have claimed in Sec. 4.5
of our paper, our convergence bounds recover well-known results in the literature in the degenerate
case of dmin = 1.


                                                70
