Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P OLICY D ESIGN IN L ONG - RUN W ELFARE DYNAMICS

             Jiduan Wu1,2 , Rediet Abebe1,3,* , Moritz Hardt1,* , and Ana-Andreea Stoica1,*
                1
                    Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center
                                  2
                                    Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
                                              3
                                                ELLIS Institute, Tübingen



                                                   A BSTRACT

          Improving social welfare is a complex challenge requiring policymakers to op-
          timize objectives across multiple time horizons. Evaluating the impact of such
          policies presents a fundamental challenge, as those that appear suboptimal in the
          short run may yield significant long-term benefits. We tackle this challenge by
          analyzing the long-term dynamics of two prominent policy frameworks: Rawl-
          sian policies, which prioritize those with the greatest need, and utilitarian poli-
          cies, which maximize immediate welfare gains. Conventional wisdom suggests
          these policies are at odds, as Rawlsian policies are assumed to come at the cost of
          reducing the average social welfare, which their utilitarian counterparts directly
          optimize. We challenge this assumption by analyzing these policies in a sequen-
          tial decision-making framework where individuals’ welfare levels stochastically
          decay over time, and policymakers can intervene to prevent this decay. Under rea-
          sonable assumptions, we prove that interventions following Rawlsian policies can
          outperform utilitarian policies in the long run, even when the latter dominate in
          the short run. We characterize the exact conditions under which Rawlsian policies
          can outperform utilitarian policies. We further illustrate our theoretical findings
          using simulations, which highlight the risks of evaluating policies based solely
          on their short-term effects. Our results underscore the necessity of considering
          long-term horizons in designing and evaluating welfare policies; the true efficacy
          of even well-established policies may only emerge over time.


1    I NTRODUCTION
An important application of sequential decision making is the problem of promoting long-run social
welfare through a sequence of targeted interventions in a population. Policies for this problem face
a two-fold challenge. On the one hand, they must be effective at optimizing the long-term objective.
On the other hand, they must appeal to the political and normative expectations of policy makers. In
particular, simple policies supported by established moral and political arguments are desirable. Two
families of policies have been particularly influential in the context of Western welfare programs.
One targets individuals of largest immediate welfare gain. The other targets those most seriously in
need. While the former derives from utilitarian moral principles, the latter is associated with Rawl’s
theory of justice. Many scholars, however, have criticized Rawlsian policy for its presumed failure
to maximize social welfare.
Indeed, there is no obvious reason why allocating resources to those of lowest welfare should also
maximize average welfare in the long run. In this work, we study a stochastic dynamic model
of long-term welfare in a population. Surprisingly, under reasonable assumptions on the welfare
dynamics, Rawlsian policy turns out to outperform an idealized utilitarian policy that chooses the
individual of largest treatment effect at each step. This is the case even though the Rawlsian policy
is suboptimal on a short-term horizon.
Although our motivation is social welfare, our results hold a broader lesson for sequential decision
making. Simple policies can be highly effective, but their long-run efficiency may not be apparent
on a short time horizon.
    * Alphabetical order.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.1   O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

We propose a multi-agent stochastic dynamical model to describe long-run welfare in a population
of individuals. Our model draws from classical economic theory of industrial project management,
extending so-called attention allocation policies (Radner & Rothschild, 1975) into social policies.
In our model, each individual i has a welfare level Ui (t) at each timestep t. At each timestep, a social
planner allocates an intervention to one or more of N agents using some policy π. The welfare values
evolve according to a stochastic dynamical system. Absent an intervention, an individual’s welfare
decays in expectation according to a function gi (Ui (t)) > 0. When the social planner allocates an
intervention to an individual, however, the individual’s welfare increases in expectation according to
a function fi (Ui (t)) > 0. We are interested in comparing Rawlsian and utilitarian policies based on
the long-term social welfare they achieve, i.e. the asymptotic individual welfare increase, defined as
 lim (Ui (t) − Ui (0))/t, averaged over all individuals.
t→∞

We make two substantive assumptions about welfare dynamics. The well-known Matthew ef-
fect (Merton, 1968; Rigney, 2010), or “rich-get-richer” while “poor-get-poorer” dynamic, suggests
that inequality amplifies over time. We capture this effect by assuming that the return function fi (·)
is increasing with welfare, while the decay function gi (·) decreases with welfare. The other as-
sumption is a uniform boundedness assumption: the bounds of the return on intervention and decay
functions are the same for all individuals. In other words, no individual can achieve a highest/lowest
possible level of return or decay that is much higher or much lower than anyone else.
Under these assumptions, we find a sufficient condition for comparing policies. This condition states
that a policy can, in principle, avoid the decay of any individual’s welfare below 0. We call this a
survival condition and note that it rests on the functional form and bounds of the return and decay
functions. Informally, our main result shows:

         Under the survival condition, Matthew effect, and uniform boundedness, a Rawl-
         sian policy will achieve better long-term social welfare than a utilitarian policy
         almost surely.

We complement this result by characterizing a condition in which the reverse is true: under a so-
called “ruin condition” (when a policy cannot prevent an individual’s unbounded welfare decay), a
utilitarian policy will achieve better long-term social welfare than a Rawlsian policy almost surely.
To prove our results, we present a series of theoretical results that characterize in closed form the rate
of growth of individual welfare under Rawlsian and utilitarian policies (Sections 3 and 4). Our proof
extends the elegant argument of Radner & Rothschild (1975), who studied a fully homogeneous case
in which the return and decay functions are constant terms. This generalization in turn requires a
non-trivial departure from the original proof including a variant of Lundberg’s classical inequality
for submartingale processes. The proof may be of independent interest for similar problems arising
in sequential decision making and reinforcement learning.
We illustrate our theoretical results by simulating our model with initial conditions drawn from real
data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) of the U.S. Census Bureau in
Section 5. We see a delayed effect of a Rawlsian policy, noting that it obtains lower social welfare
in the short-term, yet quickly converges to a higher social welfare value than the utilitarian policy.
We highlight limitations of our work and directions for future study in Section 6. Finally, we discuss
potential extensions of our work (e.g., when the functions fi , gi violate the uniform boundedness
assumption) in the appendix.

1.2   R ELATED WORK

Welfare-based social policies have a long history in economics research (Sen, 1979; Kaplow &
Shavell, 2000; Adler, 2011). Although Rawlsian principles are based on distributive justice and
egalitarian goals (Harsanyi, 1975; Blau & Abramovitz, 2010), debates remain regarding their effi-
ciency as compared to utilitarian policies (Arrow, 1973; Sen, 1976). The direct comparison between
Rawlsian and utilitarian policies generally remains an open area of research, with some empirical
and model-based comparisons made in the context of optimal taxation policies (Atkinson, 1995) and
income inequality (Mongin & Pivato, 2021).


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We build on the model proposed by Radner & Rothschild (1975) in the context of industrial
project management, which analyzes the behavior of the system under different attention allocation
mechanisms. We generalize and re-purpose their model by equipping it with various functional
forms of the return and decay functions that capture societal behaviors and analyzing several
additional policies. Our modeling choices include the Matthew effect (Merton, 1968): individuals
with higher level of welfare may benefit the most from interventions (“rich-get-richer”), whereas
individuals with low wealth experience more severe income shocks absent any interventions from
the social planner (“poor-get-poorer”). Such effects have been documented in the context of
economic inequality (Rigney, 2010; Stiglitz, 2012) and optimal taxation policy for reducing societal
inequality (Atkinson, 2015).
Closely related to our work are recent modeling frameworks for wealth fluctuations and policy de-
sign. Two recent papers develop algorithms for selecting the optimal candidates for intervening,
subject to different objectives: Abebe et al. (2020) analyze two policy objectives in a population
that undergoes income shocks and proposes algorithms for allocating subsidies optimally; their ob-
jectives aim to minimize the probability of ruin for any given individual. Arunachaleswaran et al.
(2022) analyze the theoretical complexity and give approximation algorithms for the optimal selec-
tion of candidates under a social welfare and a Rawlsian objective, considering a transition matrix
of welfare states. In addition, Heidari & Kleinberg (2021) study the optimal policy for allocating
interventions in a population with two welfare states (advantaged and disadvantaged), over a finite
time horizon. Acharya et al. (2023) study the effect interventions in a welfare-based dynamic sys-
tem with feedback loops in societal inequality. Their interventions include allocating subsidies to
those among most in need, without a comparison between different types of policies on the social
welfare. In contrast, we study the effect of different policies in the long-run, formulating a sufficient
condition for a Rawlsian policy to achieve better welfare than a utilitarian policy.
A related line of work focuses on reinforcement learning algorithms for deriving optimal policies. In
particular, Zheng et al. (2020) propose a framework for a integrating AI into two-level optimization
problem in the context of optimal taxation policy, with subsequent work improving the generality of
the model (Curry et al., 2023). Offline and online algorithms have been proposed for finding optimal
policies with fairness considerations (Zimmer et al., 2021; Zhou, 2024) as well as in contexts with
strategic agents Liu et al. (2022). The problem of optimal policy selection can be tackled using
a continuous-state MDP under the average-reward criteria, with early works considering bounded
reward rates (Doshi, 1976) and subsequent extensions that do not require boundedness (Guo &
Rieder, 2006). These works find theoretical guarantees for the existence of optimal policies,
convergence rates, as well as optimality gaps. Often, such works do not find tractable, closed-form
solutions for the optimal policy, but rather build heuristics with theoretical guarantees that can
closely approximate an optimal policy.
Finally, the problem of allocating resources through objectives such as a maximin rule includes
lines of work in fair division (Procaccia & Wang, 2014) as well as machine learning, often as a
constraint in a larger optimization problem (Binns, 2018; Heidari et al., 2019). Other works have
studied Rawlsian principles under a finite time horizon (Dwork et al., 2012; Zafar et al., 2017; Diana
et al., 2021) or as a static optimization problem (Chen & Hooker, 2020; Stark et al., 2014). Some
works have studied the long-term effect of fair algorithms in the context of hiring (Hu & Chen,
2018) and resource-allocation (Liu et al., 2018). Kube et al. (2019) and Azizi et al. (2018) offer
data-driven approaches for optimal assigning subsidies to individuals who experience homelessness;
their approach uses a prioritization scheme that aims to minimize the probability of an individual to
re-enter homelessness, based on an automated prediction.


2   A MODEL OF WELFARE DYNAMICS AND SOCIAL POLICIES

Preliminaries. Consider N individuals indexed by i = 1, . . . , N . Each individual i has a welfare
value of Ui (t) at each timestep t ≥ 0. The initial welfare values Ui (0) are drawn from a distribution
(e.g. a capped normal distribution; different choices of the initial distribution do not change our
results). Here, welfare may represent the household income level, expenditure, monthly income, or
other variables that define individual welfare.
An intervention at time t is defined through a vector a (t) := (ai (t))i , where an amount of ai (t)
budget is allocated to individual i by the social planner. The exact decision of who receives an


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


amount of budget and how much they receive is decided by the social planner through a social
policy. The social planner has a budget M for allocating interventions at every timestep t ≥ 0:
P
  i ai (t) = M , for M ∈ N, 1 ≤ M ≤ N, and 0 ≤ ai (t) ≤ 1. In this first analysis, we consider the
case when the social planner can only allocate an integer unit to each individual, so ai (t) ∈ {0, 1}.

2.1   A DYNAMIC MODEL OF WELFARE FLUCTUATIONS .

Absent any intervention, we assume that the welfare of individuals fluctuates at every timestep
according to a function gi : R → R+ , defined as a function of the welfare value for each individual
i. We denote the function gi (·) as the decay function, capturing the welfare decrease in natural
conditions (e.g., income shocks due to accidents, economic conditions, natural disasters).
In contrast, we model the impact of interventions on individuals’ welfare at each timestep through
a function fi : R → R+ , defined for all individuals i. We refer to fi (·) as the intervention return
function, capturing the effect of intervening on an individual (e.g., a new job through an employment
program, social benefits, cash transfers). Let Ft be a σ−algebra denoting the space of events up to
time step t. We model the rate of change of individual welfare between different timesteps under
interventions as:
               E[Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t) | Ft ] = ai (t) · fi (Ui (t)) − (1 − ai (t)) · gi (Ui (t))      (1)
Treatment (ai (t) = 1) in our model has two effects. On the one hand, the treated individual realizes
the return fi (Ui (t)). On the other hand, the treated individual avoids the decay −gi (Ui (t)). The
individual treatment effect of allocating an intervention to individual i at time t therefore corresponds
to the expression
                                        fi (Ui (t)) + gi (Ui (t)) .
Note that this quantity varies both in time and by individual. Conceptually, targeted individuals have
a positive return, whereas non-targeted individuals suffer a decay in their welfare.

2.2   S OCIAL POLICIES

A policy π selects an individual for treatment at each step. This corresponds to setting the co-
efficients {ai (t)} at each timestep t. We restrict our attention to policies that allocate M units
of resources to M individuals with each individual receiving exactly one unit at each time step.
Let Tops (S) denote the set of s largest elements of set S.
A natural utilitarian policy is the one that chooses the individual of largest treatment effect. We call
this the max-fg policy:
                             (
                                                                           N
                               1, i ∈ TopM {fk (Uk (t)) + gk (Uk (t))}k=1 ,
                    ai (t) =                                                                   (max-fg)
                               0, otherwise.

Note that this policy requires full information about individual treatment effects at each time step.
This may be an unrealistic requirement in many applications. We call this the max-U policy:
                                     (
                                                               N
                                       1, i ∈ TopM {Uk (t)}k=1 ,
                            ai (t) =                                                         (max-U)
                                       0, otherwise.

The max-U policy is welfare-based and requires only welfare measurements for its implementation.
This utilitarian welfare-based policy directly contrasts with the Rawlsian policy that chooses the
individual of minimum welfare at each step. We call this the min-U policy:
                                     (
                                                               N
                                       1, i ∈ TopM {Uk (t)}k=1 ,
                            ai (t) =                                                      (min-U)
                                       0, otherwise.

Radner & Rothschild (1975) studied these policies under the names “putting out fires” for min-U
and “staying with a winner” for max-U with M = 1.

                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We explore a variation of the utilitarian policy that only uses knowledge of the intervention return
functions fi (·), i.e. the policy will allocate a unit of effort to the individual with the highest inter-
vention return:
                                     (
                                                                      N
                                       1, i ∈ TopM {fk (Uk (t))}k=1 ,
                            ai (t) =                                                             (max-f)
                                       0, otherwise.
We call this max-f. In contrast to max-fg, the max-f policy requires only partial information about
the interventions, only measured through the return on interventions which may be less costly to
measure. By analogy, we consider a variant of the Rawlsian policy here that only use knowledge of
the decay functions gi (·). That is, the max-g policy will allocate a unit of effort to the individual
with the highest decay:
                                   (
                                                                 N
                                     1, i ∈ TopM {gk (Uk (t))}k=1 ,
                          ai (t) =                                                            (max-g)
                                     0, otherwise.

Tie-breaking rule: Among individuals with the same welfare, we favor the one with the lowest
index i ∈ [N ]. This applies to all policies. For the policies that use the treatment effect information,
max-f and max-fg, we break the tie in favor of the individual with the lowest index. For the max-g
policy, among individuals with the same gi value, we break the tie in favor of the individual with the
lowest welfare value, arguing that this best captures a Rawlsian principle. When max-g prioritizes
the lowest index individual, results do not qualitatively change (see Appendix E, Figure 4).

Policy goal. The goal of a policy is to promote long-term social welfare. Our main results focus on
the long-term social welfare comparison of Rawlsian and utilitarian policies. We capture long-term
social welfare as the average asymptotic welfare gain among individuals, defined as follows.
Definition 1 (Long-term social welfare). The long-term average social welfare induced by policy π
on a population of N individuals is defined as
                                        N
                                     1 X                       Ui (t) − Ui (0)
                            R̄π :=         Ri ,    Ri := lim                   .                           (2)
                                     N i=1                 t→∞        t

where Ri defines the rate of growth of individual i, asymptotically.

Note the welfare level Ui (t) depends on the policy π, as π determines a (t) at every timestep, and
therefore the subsequent Ui (t + 1) through the model described in Equation 1.

2.3   M ODELING CHOICES

The comparison between Rawlsian and utilitarian policies depends on an important condition,
called a ‘survival’ condition. Survival means that no individual in a population will obtain negative
welfare. The survival condition is necessary and sufficient to obtain a positive probability of
survival for all individuals under some policy, as noted by Radner & Rothschild (1975). Such a
policy only exists under the survival condition, and in fact, Rawlsian policies are examples as we
will show later in Section 3. This is a sufficient condition for comparing policies in the long run.
Formally, the survival condition can be stated in terms of a weighted sum of the fi (·) and gi (·)
function bounds (assuming those exist):
Assumption 1 (Survival condition). We assume ζ̄((f1− , . . . , fN      −
                                                                         ), (g1+ , . . . , gN
                                                                                            +
                                                                                              )) > 0 where ζ̄ :
  2N
R → R is defined as
                                                                        ! N                    −1
                                                               N
                                                              X     yi        X            1
            ζ̄((x1 , . . . , xN ), (y1 , . . . , yN )) := M −                                   ,         (3)
                                                                 x + yi
                                                              i=1 i           j=1 j
                                                                                     x + yj

and fi+ := sup fi (x) > 0 , fi− := inf fi (x) > 0 , gi+ := sup gi (x) > 0 , gi− := inf gi (x) > 0 .

Next, we formally state the modeling conditions that capture a Matthew effect, as motivated in the
introduction, as well as a uniform boundedness condition.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 2 (Modeling conditions).       (a). (Rich-get-richer) For i = 1, . . . , N , we assume
      that the function fi (x) is non-decreasing.
    (b). (Poor-get-poorer) For i = 1, . . . , N , we assume that the function gi (x) is non-increasing.

    (c). (Uniform boundedness) For i = 1, . . . , N , we assume fi− ≡ f − , fi+ ≡ f + , gi− ≡
         g − , gi+ ≡ g + for constants f − , f + , g − , g + .

We note that this assumption does not require that the functions fi , gi be the exact same for all
individuals, but rather just their limits.
Finally, in addition to the two assumptions described above, our results require some standard regu-
larity conditions, formalized below. Denote the welfare variation between two consecutive timesteps
by Zi (t + 1) := Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t), ∀i ∈ [N ]. We note that Ui (t) and Zi (t) are random variables
with respect to a stochastic process of welfare fluctuations over time (e.g., income shocks).
Assumption 3 (Regularity conditions). Consider a probability space (Ω, F, P), where Ω is the
space of possible outcomes of welfare levels, F is a σ−algebra denoting the space of events, and
P : F → [0, 1] is a probability measure function. We assume the following properties:

    (a). The welfare random variable Ui (t) is Ft -measurable for ∀i ∈ [I] , t ∈ N∗ , for F0 ⊂ F1 ⊂
         · · · an increasing sub σ-field of F .
    (b). The variation random variable Zi (t + 1) is integer-valued, mutually independent (given
         a (t)), and uniformly bounded, i.e. |Zi (t + 1)| ≤ b, ∀i ∈ [I], t ∈ N for some constant
         b > 0.
    (c). There exist constants z ∗ , l > 0 with 0 < l < 1 s.t. P(Zi (t + 1) ≥ z ∗ | Ft ) ≥ l,
         P(Zi (t + 1) ≤ −z ∗ | Ft ) ≥ l for any i ∈ [N ], any Ft , ∀t ≥ 0.

3   P OLICY COMPARISONS IN TERMS OF LONG - TERM SOCIAL WELFARE
Our main result compares the long-term social welfare of Rawlsian and utilitarian policies, under
the natural behavioral model of welfare fluctuations described in Section 2.1.
Theorem 1 (Main result). For a population of N individuals whose welfare (Ui (t))i fluctuates
according to the model in equation 1, under regularity, modeling, and survival conditions (Assump-
tions 1, 2, 3), a Rawlsian policy will achieve better long-term social welfare than a utilitarian policy:
                                    R̄Rawlsian ≥ R̄utilitarian   a.s.
where the Rawlsian and utilitarian policies are defined in the same informational contexts, i.e.
(min-U, max-U), (max-g, max-f), (max-g, max-fg).

Proof sketch. The proof of Theorem 1 includes a series of results on the individual rates of growth
for different policies. First, we compute the individual rate of growth under the Rawlsian pol-
icy to be equal for all individuals (Theorem 3). The survival condition implies the existence of
a policy that prevents any individual’s welfare from decaying below 0. In fact, it implies some-
thing even stronger: under survival, a Rawlsian policy can ‘lift’ everyone’s welfare unboundedly:
limt→∞ mini Ui (t) = ∞ almost surely. This helps us show that the welfare gap between any two
individuals vanishes asymptotically, obtaining the same individual rates of growth for all individu-
als. In contrast, a utilitarian policy tends to fixate on a single individual and repeatedly allocate an
intervention to him, while ignoring the rest of the population. We show this formally in Theorem 4:
we leverage a generalization of Lundberg’s inequality for submartingale processes to lowerbound
the probability that a utilitarian policy repeatedly allocates interventions to the same high-welfare
individuals. Finally, the individual rates of growth and uniform boundedness allow us to compute
and compare the long-term social welfare under different policies, see Corollaries 1, 2. Essentially,
a Rawlsian policy obtains better social welfare in the long-run than utilitarian policies as long as
limx→+∞ gi (x) ≤ limx→−∞ gi (x), which is true by our “poor-get-poorer” modeling condition. It
is noteworthy that the result holds regardless of the variation of our policies: whether the social
planner has knowledge of (fi )i , (gi )i or not, the policy comparison remains the same under our
modeling conditions. Detailed proofs for all results can be found in Appendix A.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In cases where the survival condition does not hold, we find a natural complement for our theory: we
define a “ruin condition” as a state of the model in which no policy can prevent all individuals from
decaying below 0. Our theory under survival naturally extends for this ruin condition, showing that a
utilitarian policy will achieve better long-term social welfare (see Appendix B for the formal theory).
Theorem 2 (Policy comparison under a ruin condition). For a population of N individuals whose
welfare (Ui (t))i fluctuates according to the model in equation 1, under regularity, modeling, and
ruin conditions (Assumptions 2, 3, 4), a utilitarian policy will achieve better long-term social
welfare than a Rawlsian policy:
                                        R̄Rawlsian ≤ R̄utilitarian       a.s.
where the Rawlsian and utilitarian policies are defined in the same informational contexts, i.e.
(min-U, max-U), (max-g, max-f), (max-g, max-fg).

4     I NDIVIDUAL WELFARE RATE OF GROWTH UNDER DIFFERENT POLICIES
In this section, we characterize in closed form the rate of growth of welfare under different policies
for all individuals, that is, proving that Ri = limt→∞ (Ui (t) − Ui (0))/t converges to closed-form
solutions for all i ∈ [N ]. We then compute the long-term average social welfare achieved by all
policies and compare them against a baseline defined by a random allocation policy.

4.1   I NDIVIDUAL WELFARE UNDER THE R AWLSIAN POLICY

Theorem 3. Under regularity (Assumption 3), modeling conditions (Assumption 2.(a),(b)), and the
survival condition (Assumption 1), a Rawlsian policy π ∈ {min-U, max-g} leads to the following
closed-form solution of the individual rates of growth:
                   Ri = ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN
                                           +
                                             ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                −
                                                                  )),   i = 1, . . . , N ,   a.s.
Corollary 1. With the addition of the uniform boundedness condition from Assumption 2.(c), we
can simplify the individual rates of growth, obtaining the long-term social welfare value for the
Rawlsian policy:
                                                       M + N −M −
                            R̄min-U = R̄max-g =          f −   g                    a.s.
                                                       N     N


Proof sketch. Under the survival condition, we prove that the minimum welfare level will be lifted
unboundedly over time. We model the welfare gap between the treated and untreated individuals
and show that this gap vanishes almost surely by applying the law of large numbers. We conclude by
adapting a convergence argument first introduced by Radner & Rothschild (1975), obtaining that a
Rawlsian policy achieves the same long-run welfare of everyone under our modeling conditions.

4.2   I NDIVIDUAL WELFARE UNDER THE UTILITARIAN POLICIES

Theorem 4. Under regularity (Assumption 3) and modeling conditions (Assumption 2.(a),(b))
and as long as fi (·) + gi (·) is increasing for all i ∈ [N ],* a utilitarian policy π ∈
{max-U, max-fg, max-f} leads to the following closed-form solution of the individual rates of
growth:
                                        +
                                        fi , i ∈ J ,
                                 Ri =                  a.s.
                                        −gi+ , i ∈
                                                 /J,
where J is a set of M random variables with values in [N ] whose exact value depends on
U (0), (fi (·))i , and (gi (·))i . In other words, exactly M individuals achieve an asymptotic rate of
growth equal to fi+ , whereas all others achieve −gi+ .
   * This assumption states that the return from an intervention should, in principle, be higher than the shock

experienced by an individual absent intervention. It is only needed for the max-fg policy, since it is the only
one using knowledge of both the return and decay functions.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Corollary 2. With the addition of the uniform boundedness condition from Assumption 2.(c), we
can simplify the individual rates of growth, obtaining the social welfare value
                                                     M + N −M +
                    R̄max-U = R̄max-f = R̄max-fg =       f −            g     a.s.
                                                      N           N

Proof sketch. For the individuals chosen by the utilitarian policy at a time t0 , we upperbound
the probability of an individual obtaining negative welfare at a finite point in time (a variable
that we model as a submartingale), for any Ft and individual i. We make use of a generalized
Lundberg’s inequality (Lundberg, 1903; Cramér, 1959; Moriconi, 1986) for submartingales, for
which we provide an adapted version for our model and a new proof. We then use it to show that
the probability that it will be chosen again afterwards (ai (t) ≡ 1, t ≥ t0 ) is lower-bounded by some
positive constant. Asymptotically, the probability of M individuals being targeted by a utilitarian
policy approaches 1, and hence we obtain the asymptotic convergence of the individual rates of
growth under our modeling conditions.

Random policy. Finally, we compare our policies with a baseline policy that randomly chooses
M individuals to allocate an intervention at every timestep.
Theorem 5. Under regularity, modeling, and survival conditions (Assumptions 1, 2, 3), the random
policy leads to the following closed-form solution of the individual rates of growth and long-term
social welfare:
                                    M + N −M −
                  R̄random = Ri =      f −            g , i = 1, . . . , N , a.s.
                                    N            N

Proof sketch: Under the assumption of uniform boundedness, we may lowerbound the rate of wel-
                                                                                          −
fare increase at every timestep by a positive quantity, E[Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t) | Ft ] ≥ M
                                                                                       N fi − (1 −
M    +
 N )gi > 0 under the random policy. This allows us to show that, in the limit, the welfare value
of every individual will increase unboundedly. At the same time, since individuals are chosen ran-
domly at each time, the welfare gap between individuals converges to 0, just like in the proof of
Theorem 3. We follow a similar proof structure henceforth, detailed in Appendix A.

Policy comparison: Our results show that Rawlsian and random policies will achieve better
long-term social welfare than utilitarian policies under the aforementioned conditions. This
concludes our argument for the main result in Theorem 1. Furthermore, our subsequent results show
that the comparison holds no matter the informational context (whether the social planner uses only
welfare information in defining policies, or also has access to the treatment effect through fi , gi ).
Furthermore, when the survival condition is not satisfied, we find a complementary condition under
which a policy reversal occurs. We provide a formal theory for this result in Appendix B. We extend
our results to include different functional forms for the treatment effect function (Appendix D)
and allocate proportional interventions at each timestep (Appendix F). We explore different
combinations of monotonicities of return/decay functions through simulations in Appendix G.

5     I LLUSTRATION OF THEORETICAL RESULTS AND MODELING CHOICES
We illustrate our theoretical results through simulations using a real-world dataset. We compare the
average social welfare under a finite time horizon for all proposed policies.

5.1    S IMULATIONS OF POLICIES ON REAL DATA UNDER FINITE TIME HORIZON

We use data collected from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) (Bureau, 2023),
which is a longitudinal survey of households in the U.S. containing variables related to economic
well-being such as income, employment, etc. Among numerous indices, we use the income variable
as a proxy for the initial individual welfare level, (Ui (0))i . We group the whole population 39, 720
into 13 bins and treat every 200 samples as one individual, and every $1, 000 as one welfare unit
in our model. In the end, we obtain a population of 206 individuals. We simulate an instance of the
general model from equation 1 with Gaussian noise, specified as:
    Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t) = ai (t) · fi (Ui (t)) − (1 − ai (t)) · gi (Ui (t)) + ξi (t),   ∀t ≥ 0, i ∈ [N ].   (4)


                                                        8
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   where {ξi (t)}i,t ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and capped within uniform bounds, for some noise parameter σ. We
   generate homogeneous bounds f − , f + , g − , g + , and then generate the functions fi (·), gi (·) as
   segment linear functions. Our results are averaged over 100 draws, reporting standard deviation in
   the error bands. See Appendix C for further experimental details.
   We measure social welfare at timestep t as the individual growth rate up to time t averaged over all
   individuals (equation 2 up to time t).
   The average social welfare (solid lines) converges to the theoretical expected welfare (dashed lines)
   for all policies (Figure 1). Furthermore, Rawlsian policies (min-U and max-g) have a lower short-
   term social welfare than utilitarian policies (max-U, max-f, max-fg). After a few hundreds timesteps,
   this trend is reversed, showing convergence to the theoretical social welfare value. Rawlsian policies
   achieve better welfare than utilitarian policies in the long-run, which is implied by Theorem 1. The
   random policy behaves similarly to the Rawlsian policy (as Theorem 5 would suggest), yet with
   a slower convergence rate. This disadvantage vanishes as the budget M increases, as indicated
   by Figure 1b. Figure 2 in Appendix B illustrates the finite time horizon under the ruin condition,
   showcasing a reversal of the Theorem 1 result (for a formal statement, see Theorem 2). We also
   showcase the complexity of evaluating policies in heterogeneous cases (i.e., where the bounds of the
   return and decay functions fi , gi are non-uniform) in Appendix H.

                                                                                              max-g (Rawlsian)
                                                                                             2740                                                        max-g (Rawlsian)
                 260                                                                          min-U (Rawlsian)                                           min-U (Rawlsian)
                                                                                              max-fg (utilitarian)                                       max-fg (utilitarian)
                                                                                              max-f (utilitarian)
                                                                                             2730                                                        max-f (utilitarian)
Social welfare


                 250                                                                          max-U (utilitarian)
                                                                            Social welfare



                                                                                                                                                         max-U (utilitarian)
                                                                                              Random
                                                                                             2720
                                                                                                                                                         Random
                 240                                                                          Rmin U (Rawlsian)                                          Rmin U (Rawlsian)
                                                                                              Rmax U (utilitarian)                                       Rmax U (utilitarian)
                                                                                             2710
                 230
                                                                                             2700
                 220
                                                                                             2690
                 210
                        0   1000   2000         3000   4000   5000   6000                            0       1000    2000   3000    4000   5000   6000
                                    Time step t                                                                       Time step t
                                          (a)                                                                                      (b)

   Figure 1: Social welfare as the finite-time growth rate averaged over all individuals, for all policies
   (solid lines), as well as theoretical expected growth rate, asymptotically (dashed lines) for budget
   M = 1 (a) and M = 10 (b).

   All simulations are ran on commodity hardware, using Python 3.8. All code and data used in our
   simulations is available in this repository.

   6                   D ISCUSSION
   The problem of optimal policy design remains highly relevant, as several countries continue to
   implement changes in their social benefits allocation schemes. A prominent example is Austria,
   which has shifted from a welfare state approach that targeted those most in need to an “inactivity
   trap” approach that targets those most likely to (re)enter the labor market (Allhutter et al., 2020;
   Christl & De Poli, 2021; International). In 2019, Austria introduced the New Social Assistance
   policy that reduced benefits to individuals with low language skills or larger number of dependents.
   In 2020, it introduced algorithmic profiling by first predicting individuals’ probability of re-entering
   the labor market, and second by offering most support to those with intermediate chances. Both such
   policies have the purpose of shifting support from the most in need to those with the highest chance
   of benefiting from such support, measured through their integration in the labor market in the near
   future. In essence, such policies have shifted from a Rawlsian approach to social welfare (Bufacchi
   & Garmise, 1995) to a more utilitarian view of social benefits (Christl & De Poli, 2021).
   Our work demonstrates that choosing the right policy framework is subtle. In particular, our results
   motivate the necessity of long-run welfare comparisons of policies that a short-term analysis will
   necessarily miss. Whereas on the short-term horizon a utilitarian policy prevails, it can result in
   lower social welfare than a Rawlsian approach in the long-run, under reasonable conditions. We


                                                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


characterize such conditions in closed-form, allowing a long-term policy comparison. In particular,
the survival condition is a sufficient condition for a Rawlsian policy to achieve better social welfare
in the long-run when the population of individuals satisfies homogeneous bounds on the intervention
return or welfare decay.
To apply our model, the social planner does not need to know the exact form of fi , gi for each
individual. Rather, they can estimate general trends and effects of income shocks and interven-
tions through small pilot experiments or through acquiring domain knowledge, e.g., through poverty
trackers or longitudinal studies of intervention effects on income (Garfinkel, 2021). Experimenta-
tion through small pilot experiments is often considered a necessary precursor of policy deploy-
ment (Office, 2003; Huitema et al., 2018), rapidly increasing as a method for policy design and
evaluation (Banerjee et al., 2016; 2017; Webber & Prouse, 2018). Then, the estimates for the return
and decay functions can be used as plug-in estimates in the survival or the ruin condition. Future
work could combine effective estimation methods for the return and decay functions with long-term
policy assessments.
Our analysis rests on several modeling conditions, which could be explored in future work. We
analyze several variations in the Appendix: we provide a complementary theory for the case when
the survival condition is not satisfied (Appendix B), and we explore variations of our modeling
assumptions: non-monotonic treatment effect function fi +gi (Appendix D), a different tie-breaking
rule (Appendix E), proportional interventions at each timestep (Appendix F), different combinations
of monotonicities of return/decay functions (Appendix G), and the case of heterogenous limits of
the intervention and return functions fi , gi (Appendix H).
Overall, our theoretical framework provides versatile tools for exploring different modeling con-
ditions as well as policy variations. These contributions open new directions for future work in
the context of sequential decision-making and optimal policy design, with applications in social
programs evaluation.

7   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Florian E. Dorner, Jessie Finocchiaro, Max Kasy, Jon Kleinberg, Ali Shirali, Serena Wang,
and anonymous reviewers for their generous feedback and detailed discussions. Rediet Abebe was
partially supported by the Andrew Carnegie Fellowship Program. Jiduan Wu would like to thank
the financial support from Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems (CLS).

R EFERENCES
Rediet Abebe, Jon Kleinberg, and S Matthew Weinberg. Subsidy allocations in the presence of
  income shocks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp.
  7032–7039, 2020.
Krishna Acharya, Eshwar Ram Arunachaleswaran, Sampath Kannan, Aaron Roth, and Juba Ziani.
  Wealth dynamics over generations: Analysis and interventions. In 2023 IEEE Conference on
  Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML), pp. 42–57. IEEE, 2023.
Matthew Adler. Well-being and fair distribution: beyond cost-benefit analysis. Oxford University
 Press, 2011.
Doris Allhutter, Florian Cech, Fabian Fischer, Gabriel Grill, and Astrid Mager. Algorithmic profiling
  of job seekers in austria: How austerity politics are made effective. Frontiers in big data, 3:
  502780, 2020.
Kenneth J Arrow. Some ordinalist-utilitarian notes on Rawls’s theory of justice, 1973.
Eshwar Ram Arunachaleswaran, Sampath Kannan, Aaron Roth, and Juba Ziani. Pipeline interven-
  tions. Mathematics of Operations Research, 47(4):3207–3238, 2022.
Anthony B Atkinson. Inequality: What can be done?, 2015.
Anthony Barnes Atkinson. Public economics in action: the basic income/flat tax proposal. Claren-
  don Press, 1995.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mohammad Javad Azizi, Phebe Vayanos, Bryan Wilder, Eric Rice, and Milind Tambe. Designing
 fair, efficient, and interpretable policies for prioritizing homeless youth for housing resources. In
 Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research: 15th
 International Conference, CPAIOR 2018, Delft, The Netherlands, June 26–29, 2018, Proceedings
 15, pp. 35–51. Springer, 2018.
Abhijit Banerjee, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry, Esther Duflo, Harini Kannan, Shobhini Mukerji,
  Marc Shotland, and Michael Walton. From proof of concept to scalable policies: Challenges and
  solutions, with an application. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(4):73–102, 2017.
Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee, Esther Duflo, and Michael Kremer. The influence of randomized con-
  trolled trials on development economics research and on development policy. The state of Eco-
  nomics, the state of the world, pp. 482–488, 2016.
Roland Benabou. Unequal societies: Income distribution and the social contract. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 91(1):96–129, 2000.
Reuben Binns. Fairness in machine learning: Lessons from political philosophy. In Conference on
  Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, pp. 149–159. PMLR, 2018.
Joel Blau and Mimi Abramovitz. The dynamics of social welfare policy. Oxford University Press,
  USA, 2010.
Vittorio Bufacchi and Shari Garmise. Social justice in europe: an evaluation of european regional
  policy. Government and Opposition, 30(2):179–197, 1995.
U.S. Census Bureau. Survey of income and program participation (SIPP) 2014 panel. https://
  www.census.gov/programs-surveys/sipp/data/datasets/2014-panel/,
  2023. Accessed: 2024-09-25.
Violet Chen and John N Hooker. A just approach balancing rawlsian leximax fairness and utilitar-
  ianism. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 221–227,
  2020.
Michael Christl and Silvia De Poli. Trapped in inactivity? Social assistance and labour supply in
 Austria. Empirica, 48(3):661–696, 2021.
Harald Cramér. On the mathematical theory of risk. Centraltryckeriet, 1959.
Michael Curry, Alexander Trott, Soham Phade, Yu Bai, and Stephan Zheng. Learning solutions in
 large economic networks using deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 2760–2762,
 2023.
Emily Diana, Wesley Gill, Michael Kearns, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, and Aaron Roth. Minimax
  group fairness: Algorithms and experiments. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference
  on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 66–76, 2021.
Bharat T Doshi. Continuous time control of markov processes on an arbitrary state space: average
  return criterion. Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 4(1):55–77, 1976.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Con-
  ference, pp. 214–226, 2012.
David Freedman. Another note on the Borel–Cantelli lemma and the strong law, with the Poisson
  approximation as a by-product. The Annals of Probability, 1(6):910–925, 1973. ISSN 00911798.
  URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2959079.
Irwin Garfinkel. New york city longitudinal survey of well-being (poverty tracker), 2015-2018.
  2021.
Xianping Guo and Ulrich Rieder. Average optimality for continuous-time markov decision processes
  in polish spaces. 2006.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John C Harsanyi. Can the maximin principle serve as a basis for morality? A critique of John
  Rawls’s theory. American political science review, 69(2):594–606, 1975.

Hoda Heidari and Jon Kleinberg. Allocating opportunities in a dynamic model of intergenerational
  mobility. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
  parency, pp. 15–25, 2021.

Hoda Heidari, Michele Loi, Krishna P Gummadi, and Andreas Krause. A moral framework for
  understanding fair ml through economic models of equality of opportunity. In Proceedings of the
  Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 181–190, 2019.

Lily Hu and Yiling Chen. A short-term intervention for long-term fairness in the labor market. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, pp. 1389–1398, 2018.

Dave Huitema, Andrew Jordan, Stefania Munaretto, and Mikael Hildén. Policy experimentation:
  core concepts, political dynamics, governance and impacts. Policy Sciences, 51:143–159, 2018.

Amnesty International. Barriers in access to social assistance in Austria. Amnesty International
 Austria. URL https://www.amnesty.org/en/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/
 EUR1382232024ENGLISH.pdf.

Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell. Fairness versus welfare. Harv. L. Rev., 114:961, 2000.

Amanda Kube, Sanmay Das, and Patrick J Fowler. Allocating interventions based on predicted
 outcomes: A case study on homelessness services. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 622–629, 2019.

Lydia T Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. Delayed impact of fair
  machine learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3150–3158. PMLR,
  2018.

Zhihan Liu, Miao Lu, Zhaoran Wang, Michael Jordan, and Zhuoran Yang. Welfare maximization in
  competitive equilibrium: Reinforcement learning for markov exchange economy. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 13870–13911. PMLR, 2022.

Filip Oskar Ernst Lundberg. Approximerad framställning af sannolikhetsfunkionen: Återförsäkring
   af kollektivrisker. 1903.

N Gregory Mankiw, Matthew Weinzierl, and Danny Yagan. Optimal taxation in theory and practice.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(4):147–174, 2009.

Robert K Merton. The matthew effect in science: The reward and communication systems of science
  are considered. Science, 159(3810):56–63, 1968.

Philippe Mongin and Marcus Pivato. Rawls’s difference principle and maximin rule of allocation: a
  new analysis. Economic Theory, 71(4):1499–1525, 2021.

Franco Moriconi. Ruin theory under the submartingale assumption. In Insurance and Risk Theory,
  pp. 177–188. Springer, 1986.

Cabinet Office. Trying it out: The role of ‘pilots’ in policy making, 2003.

Ariel D Procaccia and Junxing Wang. Fair enough: Guaranteeing approximate maximin shares. In
  Proceedings of the fifteenth ACM conference on Economics and computation, pp. 675–692, 2014.

Roy Radner and Michael Rothschild. On the allocation of effort. Journal of Economic The-
  ory, 10(3):358–376, 1975. ISSN 0022-0531. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0531(75)
  90006-X.      URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  002205317590006X.

Daniel Rigney. The Matthew effect: How advantage begets further advantage. Columbia University
  Press, 2010.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael Rothschild. Further notes on the allocation of effort. In Richard H. Day and Theodore
 Groves (eds.), Adaptive Economic Models, pp. 195–220. Academic Press, 1975a. ISBN 978-
 0-12-207350-2. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-207350-2.50010-5. URL https://
 www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780122073502500105.
Michael Rothschild. Further notes on the allocation of effort. In Adaptive economic models, pp.
 195–220. Elsevier, 1975b.
Amartya Sen. Welfare inequalities and rawlsian axiomatics. Theory and decision, 7(4):243–262,
 1976.
Amartya Sen. Personal utilities and public judgements: or what’s wrong with welfare economics.
 The economic journal, 89(355):537–558, 1979.
Oded Stark, Marcin Jakubek, and Fryderyk Falniowski. Reconciling the rawlsian and the utilitarian
  approaches to the maximization of social welfare. Economics Letters, 122(3):439–444, 2014.
Joseph E Stiglitz. The price of inequality: How today’s divided society endangers our future. WW
  Norton & Company, 2012.
Yiu-Kuen Tse. Nonlife Actuarial Models: Theory, Methods and Evaluation. International Series on
  Actuarial Science. Cambridge University Press, 2 edition, 2023.
Sophie Webber and Carolyn Prouse. The new gold standard: The rise of randomized control trials
  and experimental development. Economic Geography, 94(2):166–187, 2018.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Rodriguez, Krishna Gummadi, and Adrian Weller.
 From parity to preference-based notions of fairness in classification. Advances in neural informa-
 tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Stephan Zheng, Alexander Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, Nikhil Naik, Melvin Gruesbeck, David C Parkes,
  and Richard Socher. The AI Economist: Improving equality and productivity with AI-driven tax
  policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13332, 2020.
Angela Zhou. Optimal and fair encouragement policy evaluation and learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Matthieu Zimmer, Claire Glanois, Umer Siddique, and Paul Weng. Learning fair policies in decen-
 tralized cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 12967–12978. PMLR, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    C OMPLETE P ROOFS
This section contains complete proofs to all results stated in the main paper. First of all, we introduce
two bounds that will be repeatedly used in the following proofs:
First, consider a weighted sum of utilities:
                                                                                                −1
                                                                                    N
                           X                                        1               X      1
               Ū (t) :=        wi · Ui (t) ,       wi :=                                            .        (5)
                           i
                                                                fi− + gi+              f
                                                                                    j=1 j
                                                                                         −
                                                                                           + gj+

The increment in the weighted utility can be computed in expectation as:
                                     X
         E Ū (t + 1) − Ū (t) | Ft =     E[Z̄(t + 1) | Ft ]
                                                i
                                             X
                                         =          wi · (ai (t) · fi (Ui (t)) − (1 − ai (t)) · gi (Ui (t)))
                                                i
                                             X
                                                    wi · ai (t) · fi− − (1 − ai (t))gi+

                                         ≥                                                                      (6)
                                                i
                   P
where Z̄(t + 1) :=  i wi · Zi (t + 1). We note that the last term of equation 6 is solely a function
of fi− i and gi+ i . Thus, we obtain


                  E Ū (t + 1) − Ū (t) | Ft ≥ ζ̄ (f1− , . . . , fN
                                                                  −
                                                                    ), (g1+ , . . . , gN
                                                                                       +

                                                                                         ) .     (7)
Similarly, we define a weighted sum of utilities using slightly different weights:
                                                                                −1
                                                                 X  N
                          X                             1                  1
                Ũ (t) :=   w̃i · Ui (t), w̃i :=      +      −
                                                                
                                                                         +     −
                                                                                                               (8)
                          i
                                                    f i +  gi      j=1
                                                                       f j + gj


Similarly, we obtain the following upper bound for Ũ (t):
          h                        i XN
         E Ũ (t + 1) − Ũ (t) | Ft =   w̃i · (ai (t) · fi (Ui (t)) − (1 − ai (t)) · gi (Ui (t)))
                                             i=1
                                             N
                                             X
                                                    w̃i · ai (t) · fi+ − (1 − ai (t))gi− .

                                         ≤                                                                      (9)
                                             i=1

We observe that the last term of equation 9 can be written as the function ζ̄ with switched parameters
as compared to equation 7:
                     h                       i
                  E Ũ (t + 1) − Ũ (t) | Ft ≤ ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN
                                                                  +
                                                                    ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                                       −
                                                                                         )).     (10)

Note that both bounds from equations equation 7 and equation 10 only use the assumption on the
bounds of fi (·) and gi (·) in Assumption 1, and hence hold under any of the aforementioned social
policies and they will be crucial for the asymptotic behavior of the system.

Proof of Theorem 3. We first prove the theorem for the welfare-based policy min-U, and then adapt
the proof for the effect-based policy max-g.
We note that the limit conditions from Assumption 1 allow us to follow the conditions stated in Roth-
schild (1975b): fi+ := sup fi (x) > 0 , fi− := inf fi (x) > 0 , gi+ := sup gi (x) > 0 , gi− :=
inf gi (x) > 0 . Remember that Zi (t + 1) := Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t), ∀i ∈ [N ]. Thus, conditioning
on individual i getting or not getting an intervention and using the monotonicity assumptions, we
obtain from the model in equation 1

                               E[Zi (t + 1)|ai (t) = 1, Ft ] = fi (Ui (t)) ≥ fi− ,
                                                                                                               (11)
                   −gi− ≥ E[Zi (t + 1)|ai (t) = 0, Ft ] = −gi (Ui (t)) ≥ −gi+ , ∀t.

                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With these conditions, together with the regularity and survival conditions, we substitute Ū (t)
in Rothschild (1975a) with Ū (t) defined in equation 5 and apply Theorem 1 from Rothschild
(1975a). The lower bound on equation 5 obtains the first part of the result in Theorem 1
(Rothschild, 1975a): lim inf Ui (t)/t ≥ ζ̄ a.s. for i ∈ [N ], which immediately implies that
                         t→∞
lim inf t→∞ mini Ui (t) → +∞ a.s. for i ∈ [N ].
Then, we need the following lemma.
Lemma 1. Suppose {Yt }t∈[T ] are random variables and FT -measurable, for any T ≥ 1. Suppose
|Yt | ≤ B and E[Yt | Ft−1 ] = µt with −B < µ ≤ µt ≤ λ < B for ∀t ∈ [T ] where B > 0, µ, λ are
constants. Then
                                 PT                PT
                                   t=0 Yt               µt
                         lim inf          = lim inf t=0    ≥ µ , a.s.
                          T →∞      T         T →∞   T
                                 PT                PT
                                      Yt                µt
                       lim sup t=0        = lim sup t=0    ≤ λ , a.s.
                         n→∞       T          n→∞    T

Proof of Lemma 1. The first inequality is immediate from Theorem 40 in (Freedman, 1973) with
Xt = Yt + B , Mt = µt + B ≥ µ + B and the second inequality is obtained similarly by setting
Xt = B − Yt , Mt = B − µt ≥ B − λ instead.

Now we continue with the proof for Theorem 3. We apply Lemma 1 with Yt = Ũ (t+1)− Ũ (t), B =
b, where b is the upperbound on Zi (t + 1) from the regularity conditions (Assumption 3), and
                        "                                                              #
                          X
                 µt = E      w̃i (ai (t)(fi (Ui (t)) + gi (Ui (t))) − gi (Ui (t))) | Ft .
                             i


Since limt→∞ mini Ui (t) = ∞, we obtain limt→∞ Ui (t) = +∞ for all i ∈ [N ]. Hence, we get
limt→∞ fi (Ui (t)) = fi+ , limt→∞ gi (Ui (t)) = gi− . A simple calculation finds that
                           lim µt = ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN
                                                       +
                                                         ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                            −
                                                                              )) a.s.                             (12)
                           t→∞
                                                                                                       PT
                                                                                                        t=0 µt
Since µt is uniformly bounded for ∀t ≥ 0, we know that limt→∞ µt = limT →∞                               T       , and
therefore
                         PT
                           t=0 µt
                     lim          = ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN
                                                       +
                                                         ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                            −
                                                                              )) a.s.                             (13)
                    T →∞    T
Hence we obtain:
                      PT
                        t=0 Yt             Ũ (T + 1)
                lim              = lim                = ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN
                                                                           +
                                                                             ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                                                −
                                                                                                  ))              (14)
               T →∞      T          T →∞        T
Next, apply Lemma 1 from Rothschild (1975b) and for ∀j ∈ [N ], we have

              Ũ (T + 1)       X           Ui (T ) Uj (T ) Uj (T )          Uj (T )
         lim             = lim     w̃i ·          −       +           = lim         ,
        T →∞       T      T →∞
                                i
                                             T       T          T      T →∞   T

finalizing the proof of Theorem 3 for the welfare-based Rawlsian policy min-U. Note that Lemma
1 from Rothschild (1975b) essentially shows that the welfare gap between any two individuals con-
                                                P Ui (T ) Uj (T )
verges to 0 over time, so we have used that lim    i   T    −   T     = 0, ∀i, j. Intuitively, this is
                                               T →∞
natural under a Rawlsian policy that always ‘lifts’
                                               P the lowest welfare individuals, under our bounded
welfare conditions. Finally, we also used that i w̃i = 1, by definition.
For the effect-based Rawlsian policy max-g, we note that if gi is strictly decreasing for all i, then the
individual targeted at each timestep t will be the exact same individual in min-U and max-g. Our
modeling conditions only require that gi is decreasing, but not strictly. Therefore, if the function gi
is constant for a set of individuals with welfare values under some threshold τ , as long as the targeted
individuals will be the one with the actual lowest welfare, min-U and max-g still coincide. Under the


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tie-breaking rule of choosing the individuals with the lowest welfare, the proof for computing Ri ’s
under max-g reduces to our proof for min-U. Under different tie-breaking rules (e.g., choosing the
individual with the smallest index) for max-g, the policies might actually differ in the asymptotic
rates of growth. We argue that a tie-breaking rule targeting the individuals with lowest welfare
under max-g policy is most natural, since it naturally applies Rawlsian principles when information
gathered from gi does not help differentiate individuals.
Finally, the corollary follows immediately under the uniform boundedness assumptions on the
bounds of fi , gi :
                                                                       !               !−1
                +          +      −            −
                                                           X    gi−        X     1
    Ri = ζ̄((f1 , . . . , fN ), (g1 , . . . , gN )) = M −                ·                 (15)
                                                           i
                                                             fi+ + gi−     i
                                                                             fi+ + gi−
                                                        −1
                             g−

                                                  N
        = M −N · +                       ·                                                 (16)
                          f + g−              f + + g−
           M             N −M −
        =      · f+ −              ·g                                                      (17)
           N                N


Proof of Theorem 4. We first note the intuition behind the proof, followed by the detailed technical
details. We note that while max-U is also known as the ‘staying with a winner’ policy in Radner
& Rothschild (1975), the proof technique does not generalize under non-constant functions fi , gi .
To this end, we introduce a novel proof that can characterize the individual rates of growth under
any informational contexts and for any functions that follow our regularity and modeling conditions
(Assumptions 2(a),(b) and 3).

Intuition: The main proof idea hinges on showing that a utilitarian policy tends to choose the
same individuals to whom it initially allocates interventions. While the initial conditions do not
change the convergence results, whoever were the first M individuals to obtain an intervention at
t = 0 have gained an advantage (a positive drift in the random process), whereas everyone else
has a disadvantage (a negative drive in the random process). We bound the probability of a policy
to reinforce its earlier preferred choices by the probability that an individual never drop below its
initial welfare level while the other individuals never grow below their initial welfare level. Then,
asymptotically, the rates of growth will converge in the following way: some fixed subpopulation
converges to the maximum welfare f + , whereas everyone else converges to the minimum decay g − .
First, consider the max-fg policy. Without loss of generality, consider the individual i being chosen
at timestep 0 (ai (0) = 1). We will apply Lemma 3 for the welfare process {Xi (t)} under an
intervention, i.e., Xi (t) = Ui (t)|ai (t) = 1 for all t, by showing that Xi (t) is a submartingale and
lower-bounding the probability of the welfare level decaying beyond its initial level, Xi (0) (equal
to the welfare initial level Ui (0). This defines a random process given that the individual i will be
chosen over and over again (the process is conditioned on ai (t) = 1). First, the process {Xi (t)} is
a submartingale since, conditioned on ai (t) = 1,
    E[Xi (t + 1)|Ft ] = E[Ui (t + 1)|Ft , ai (t) = 1] = Ui (t) + fi (Ui (t)) > Ui (t) = Xi (t),   (18)
and note the uniform bound for (Zi (t))i,t in regularity conditions (Assumption 3(c)) By an easy
induction on t, we get that |Xi (t)| ≤ ∞, ∀t, noting that Xi (0) = Ui (0) < ∞ by definition of the
initial conditions.
Given our regularity conditions (Assumption 3), we may now apply Lemma 3 in a particular way:
we consider Ui (0) = u for some u ∈ R, and we start the welfare process at t = 1. Note that
{Xi (t)}t≥1 is also a submartingale. Then, instead of bounding the probability of ruin, we bound the
probability of Xi (t) falling under the threshold u (where u := Ui (0)). We do that by the substitution
Wt = Xi (t) − u, ∀t ≥ 1, and Wt is still a submartingale. Thus, we can apply Lemma 3 to obtain
                               ψ(Xi (1)) ≤ exp(−r∗ · (Xi (1) − u)),                               (19)
where ψ(Xi (1)) = P(T (Xi (1)) < ∞), T (Xi (1)) = min{t ≥ 1 : Xi (t) ≤ u}.
In a similar fashion, we now consider all other individuals j who were not intervened on at the first
timestep t = 0. For each of these, the process {Yj (t)}, where Yj (t) := Uj (t)|aj (t) = 0 (conditioned


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on j not being chosen again) is a supermartingale:
     E[Yi (t + 1)|Ft ] = E[Ui (t + 1)|Ft , ai (t) = 0] = Ui (t) − gi (Ui (t)) < Ui (t) = Yi (t)        (20)
by applying equation 1 and noting the all functions gi (·) are positive by definition. In addition, again
we know |Yi (t)| < ∞ by uniform boundedness of |Zi (t)| in regularity conditions(Assumption 3(b)),
and noting that Yi (0) = Ui (0) < ∞ by definition of the initial conditions.
Again, we can apply Lemma 3 for the process {−Yj (t)}t≥1 (which is now a submartingale) and
ruin threshold −u to obtain
                                 ψ(−Yj (1)) ≤ exp(−r∗ · (u − Yj (1))),                                 (21)
where ψ(−Yj (1)) = P(T (Yj (1)) < ∞), T (Yj (1)) = min{t ≥ 1 : −Yj (t) ≤ −u}.
Next, we lower bound the probabability that the individuals who were chosen at timestep 0, denoted
as set S, will continue to be chosen at every timestep. To do so, we note that this probability is equal
to the probability that every i ∈ S is chosen at every subsequent t ≥ 1 and all other j ∈  / S are not
chosen at every t ≥ 1. Among all events that comprise this probability, one of them is the event
in which Xi (t) ≥ u and Xj (t) ≤ u, ∀j ∈    / S (remember here that Xi (t) = Ui (t)|ai (t) = 1 and
Yj (t) = Uj (t)|aj (t) = 0, for j ∈
                                  / S). Thus,
 P(ai (t) = 1 and aj (t) = 0, ∀j ∈
                                 / S, ∀t ≥ 1) ≥ P(Xi (t) ≥ u and Yj (t) ≤ u, ∀j ∈
                                                                                / S, ∀t ≥ 1) (22)
The righthandside consists of independent events w.r.t. t, since we have conditioned already on the
intervention, so we can further compute it as
                       Y                           Y
                           P(Xi (t) > u, ∀t ≥ 1) ·     P(Yj (t) < u, ∀t ≥ 1)
                          i∈S                             j ∈S
                                                            /
             Y                                               Y                                         (23)
         =         (1 − P(∃T < ∞ s.t. Xi (T ) ≤ u)) ·               (1 − P(∃T < ∞ s.t. Yj (T ) ≥ u))
             i∈S                                             j ∈S
                                                               /

Finally, we lowerbound equation 23 by the bound we obtained by our Lundberg-type inequality for
the welfare process:
           Y                                      Y
               (1 − P(∃T < ∞ s.t. Xi (T ) ≤ u)) ·   (1 − P(∃T < ∞ s.t. Yj (T ) ≥ u))       (24)
           i∈S                                            j ∈S
                                                            /
               Y                         Y
           ≥         (1 − ψ(Xi (1))) ·          (1 − ψ(−Yj (1)))                                       (25)
               i∈S                       j ∈S
                                           /
               Y                                         Y
           ≥         (1 − exp(−r∗ · (Xi (1) − u))) ·            (1 − exp(−r∗ · (u − Yj (1))))          (26)
               i∈S                                       j ∈S
                                                           /

Our regularity conditions ensure that equation 26 is lowerbounded by some positive constant p∗i > 0:
Assumption 3 states that ∃z ∗ , l > 0 s.t. P(Zi (t + 1) ≥ z ∗ |Ft ) ≥ l and P(Zi (t + 1) ≤ −z ∗ |Ft ) ≥ l.
Since l > 0, this offers a strictly positive lower bound on equation 26. Furthermore, p∗i does not
depend on F0 but it may depend on the initial individual i that was intervened on at timestep 0.
We take the minimum of p∗i among all individuals i ∈ [N ] (since any of them could have been
intervened on at timestep 0), and obtain p∗ := min{p∗i } > 0. Then, note that the probability
of individual i being chosen for all t ≥ 0 also depends the rule of max-fg and the tie-breaking
rule of choosing the smallest index, which will ensure the individual being constantly chosen once
the fi (Ui (t)) + gi (Ui (t)) ≥ fj (Uj (t)) + gj (Uj (t)) won’t be violated for all t ≥ 0. This is true
since in addition to the modeling condition that states that gi (·) is decreasing, we also assumed that
fi (·) + gi (·) is increasing.
As time grows, the probability of the utilitarian policy fixating on one single individual is lower-
bounded by 1 − (1 − p∗ )m where m denotes the number of times the set of individuals who receive
the intervention changes, which converges to 1 as m → ∞.
Lastly, we prove that for an individual i ∈ S with ai (t) = 1 for all t ≥ 0 a.s., we have Ri = f + a.s.,
                                                              / S, we have Rj = −g + a.s.
and for an individual j with aj (t) = 0 for all t ≥ 0 a.s., j ∈
In doing so, we apply Lemma 1 repeatedly:


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • First, for individual i ∈ S that gets chosen at the first timestep, we set Yi = Ui (t +
         1) − Ui (t), µ = f − and obtain from Lemma 1 that limt→∞ Ui (t) = +∞. For the same
         individual, we can apply Lemma 1 again with µ = λ = f + , which shows convergence of
         (Ui (t) − Ui (0))/t to f + . We then note that limt→∞ (Ui (t) − Ui (0))/t = Ri = f + .

                                      / S, we set Yt = Uj (t + 1) − Uj (t) and λ = −g − and obtain
       • Second, for any individual j ∈
         from Lemma 1 that limt→∞ Uj (t) = −∞. Finally, we apply Lemma 1 again for all such
         j with µ = λ = −g + , which shows convergence of (Uj (t) − Uj (0))/t to −g + . We then
         note that limt→∞ (Uj (t) − Uj (0))/t = Rj = −g + .


We note that the proof goes through in the exact same way for the max-U and max-f policies, since
the only place the functions fi and gi play a role is in the tie-breaking rule: when fi is increasing
and the tie-breaking rule always chooses the individual with the lowest index, the probability of a
policy continuing to choose the same set of individuals converges to 1, whereas the probability of
every choosing another individual j converges to 0.



Proof of Theorem 5. By the weak homogeneity condition (Assumption 3(c)) and the survival con-
                                              −M +
dition (Assumption 1), we have f − > N M          g . Then, we apply Lemma 1 by setting Yt =
Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t) and µt = N fi (Ui (t)) − (1 − M
                               M
                                                   N )gi (Ui (t)). We note that µt actually evaluates in
expectation the rate of welfare increase under the random policy, where E[ai (t) | Ft ] = M   N for any
                                                                             M −
t ≥ 0, i ∈ [N ] and Ft . Thus, we obtain that E[Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t) | Ft ] ≥ N fi − (1 − N )gi+ > 0
                                                                                             M

under the random policy. From this we conclude that limt→∞ mini Ui (t) = ∞, and thus every
individual’s welfare will increase unboundedly
                                            −       over time. Since limT →∞ Ui (T ) → +∞, we
have limT →∞ µT = M      N f +
                               −  1 −   M
                                        N  g    and  since µT is bounded, we apply Lemma 1 with
                                         −
Yt = Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t), λ = µ = M N  f   − (1 −  M    +
                                                   N )g . Finally we conclude

                           Ui (t) − Ui (0)   M −      M
                 Ri = lim                  =   f − 1−     g+ > 0 ,                a.s.             (27)
                       t→∞        t          N        N


A.1   L UNDBERG ’ S INEQUALITY FOR SUBMARTINGALES

In this subsection, we present technical details used in the proof of Theorem 4.
In Moriconi (1986) (page 179), the author briefly mentioned the Lundberg’s inequality also holds
for submartingales. We provide the proof below for completeness. First, we define the adjustment
coefficient for submartingales:
Definition 2. Let {Xt } be a submartingale, the adjustment coefficient, denoted by r∗ , is the positive
value such that {exp(−r∗ Xt )} is a martingale, i.e., E[exp(−r∗ Zt+1 )] = 1 where Zt+1 := Xt+1 −
Xt .
Lemma 2. (Lundberg’s inequality for submartingales) Let {Xt } be a submartingale with X0 =
u > 0, r∗ be the adjustment coefficient of {Xt } and assume {Zt } are i.i.d. . The probability of
ultimate ruin is bounded as follows

                                         ψ(u) ≤ exp(−r∗ u)

where ψ(u) := P(T (u) < ∞), T (u) := min{t ≥ 1 : Xt ≤ 0, X0 = u}.



Proof. The proof is similar to the one for analyzing the surplus of an insurance portfolio (refer to
Theorem 5.2 in Tse (2023)). We prove the result by induction on t, for ψ(t; u) := P(T (u) ≤ t) and


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


denoting
                                   Z −u
                      ψ(1; u) =           P(Z2 = x)dx
                                    −∞
                                   Z −u
                               ≤          exp(r∗ (−u − Z2 ))P(Z2 = x)dx
                                     −∞
                                                    Z −u
                                           ∗
                               = exp(−r u) ·               exp(−r∗ Z2 )P(Z2 = x)dx
                                                     −∞
                               (a)          ∗
                               = exp(−r u).
Assume Lundberg inequality holds for any time step less than t and u > 0 and now consider
ψ(t + 1, u),
                           Z ∞
   ψ(t + 1; u) = ψ(1, u) +     ψ(t, x)P(Z2 = x − u)dx
                             0
               (b)
                   Z −u               Z ∞
               ≤        P(Z2 = x)dx +     exp(−r∗ x)P(Z2 = x − u)dx
                     −∞                         0
                    Z −u                                         Z ∞
                ≤          exp(−r∗ (x + u))P(Z2 = x)dx +               exp(−r∗ (x + u))P(Z2 = x)dx
                     −∞                                           −u
                                                    (c)
                = exp(−r∗ u)E[exp(−r∗ Z2 )] = exp(−r∗ u).
where inequality (b) holds by Lundberg’s inequality for time step t.
Remark 1. Note in the proof of Lemma 2, using condition E[exp(−r∗ Z2 )] ≤ 1 in equality (a),(c)
is enough, which is a weaker condition than Z2 is adjustable.

The following corollary is an immediate result of the above lemma.
Corollary 3. Let {Xt } be a submartingale with E[Xt+1 | Xt ] = Xt + c where c > 0. Denote
Zt+1 := Xt+1 − Xt and {Zt } are i.i.d. Assume there ∃z ∗ > 0 s.t. P(Zt+1 ≥ z ∗ ) > 0 and
P(Zt+1 ≤ −z ∗ ) > 0 . There exists a positive constant r∗ such that
                                           ψ(u) ≤ exp(−r∗ u) .

Proof. The proof is immediate by noticing
               E[exp(−rXt+1 ) | Ft ] = exp(−rXt ) · E[exp(−r(Xt+1 − Xt )) | Ft ] .
Denote ϕ(r) := E[exp(−r∗ (Xt+1 − Xt )) | Ft ], which is continuously differentiable, and we
obtain ϕ(0) = 1, ϕ′ (0) = −c by computing the closed-form derivative. Since P(Zt+1 ≥ z ∗ ) > 0,
P(Zt+1 ≤ −z ∗ ) > 0, and hence we have limr→+∞ ϕ(r) = +∞. Hence there exists r∗ > 0 such
that ϕ(r∗ ) = 1. Moreover, since Zt are i.i.d. and {Xt } is adjustable (i.e., there exists an adjustment
coefficient as defined in Definition 2 that does not depend on {Xt }), we can apply Lemma 2 and we
conclude the proof.

The following lemma is an adapted version of Lemma 2 and will become useful in the proof of the
main result.
Lemma 3. (Lundberg’s inequality for a welfare process) Consider a random process {Xi (t)} de-
fined as Xi (t) = Ui (t)|ai (t) = 1, with Ui (0) = u and {Ui (t)} defined as the welfare process
in model 1, for i = 1, . . . , N . As such, {Xi (t)} defines a welfare process under an intervention,
i.e. ai (t) ≡ 1. Assume there exists z ∗ > 0, 0 < l < 1 s.t. P(Zi (t + 1) ≥ z ∗ | Ft ) ≥ l,
P(Zi (t + 1) ≤ −z ∗ ) ≥ l for any Ft and any i. Then, for an individual i, there exists a positive
constant r∗ , such that the probability of ultimate ruin is bounded as follows
                                           ψ(u) ≤ exp(−r∗ u)                                       (28)
where, by an abuse of notation, ψ(u) := P(T (u) < ∞), T (u) := min{t ≥ 1 : Xi (t) ≤ 0, Xi (0) =
u}.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. For an individual i and a timestep t, denote ϕ(r) := E[exp(−r(Xi (t + 1) − Xi (t))) | Ft ],
for any r. We observe
                                           b
                                           X
                                ϕ(r) =            P(Zi (t + 1) = k) exp(−rk),
                                           k=−b
                                           b
                                           X
                                ϕ′ (r) =          −kP(Zi (t + 1) = k) exp(−rk),
                                           k=−b
                                           b
                                           X
                            ϕ′′ (r) =             k 2 P(Zi (t + 1) = k) exp(−rk).
                                           k=−b

Notice that ϕ(0) = 1, ϕ (0) = −E[Zi (t + 1) | Ft ] ≤ −g − , and 0 < ϕ′′ (r) ≤ 2bk 2 exp(rb)
                            ′

for any Ft . First of all, we know that there exists a small interval for r near zero, (0, a] for some
r(Ft ) > 0, such that ϕ(x) ≤ 1 for x ∈ (0, r(Ft )] by applying Rolle’s theorem. Next, we claim
there exists r∗ > 0 s.t. ϕ(r∗ ) ≤ 1, that is independent of any Ft . This claim can be easily proved by
contradiction: assume for any ϵ > 0, there exists rϵ ≤ ϵ, Ft (ϵ) such that ϕ(rϵ ) > 1 . Note that under
Ft (ϵ) and since ϕ(0) = 1, there must be an x ∈ (0, rϵ ] such that ϕ′ (rϵ ) > 0. Making ϵ arbitrarily
small, we get that rϵ → 0 and since ϕ(0) = 1 and ϕ′ (0) < 0, there must exist x ∈ (0, rϵ ] such
that ϕ′′ (x) → +∞. This contradicts with the fact that ϕ′′ (r) ≤ 2bk 2 exp(rb) for any Ft . Hence
for our welfare process Zi (t), which is not i.i.d. for different t, and not adjustable, but it satisfies
E[exp(−r∗ Zi (t))] ≤ 1 for some positive constant r∗ that is independent of Ft and all i ∈ [N ].
Finally, we conclude the proof by pointing out that the proof of Lemma 2 still applies under condition
E[exp(−r∗ Zi (t))] ≤ 1 (see Remark 1).

B    P OLICY COMPARISON UNDER A RUIN CONDITION
Our survival condition, Assumption 1, defined a parameter condition in which there exists a policy
that can ‘lift’ every individual unboundedly, as time grows. We show that different versions of the
Rawlsian policy achieve this property (in addition, the constant proportions policy from Radner &
Rothschild (1975) will also achieve this property). Under the survival condition, our main result
shows that the Rawlsian policy will achieve better long-term social welfare.
In this section, we introduce a complementary condition to the survival condition, called a ruin
condition. Intuitively, under this condition, even a Rawlsian policy will not be able to ensure that
every individual will have positive welfare, asymptotically. As such, the lowest welfare will decay
indefinitely almost surely.
Note: we borrow the ‘ruin’ terminology from ruin theory, but the definition of a ‘ruin condition’ is
specific to our setting, as defined below. Our proofs make use of ruin theory in applying Lundberg’s
inequality, as seen in Appendix A.
Assumption 4 (Ruin condition). We assume ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN   +
                                                                  ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                                     −
                                                                                       )) < 0 where ζ̄ : R2N →
                                                                −
R is defined in equation 3. and fi := sup fi (x) > 0 , fi := inf fi (x) > 0 , gi+ := sup gi (x) >
                                      +

0 , gi− := inf gi (x) > 0 .
Theorem 6 (Theorem 2, formal). If the ruin condition is met, under regularity, modeling conditions,
and as long as fi (·) + gi (·) is increasing for all i ∈ [N ], the result in Theorem 1 is reversed:
                                       R̄utilitarian ≥ R̄Rawlsian    a.s.
where the Rawlsian and utilitarian policies are defined in the same informational contexts, i.e.
(min-U, max-U), (max-g, max-f), (max-g, max-fg).

Proof of Theorem 6. We prove this result similarly as in Theorem 1, by computing in closed-form
the individual rates of growth under every policies, and then computing the long-term social welfare
as an average of these rates. First, we note that we can compute the individual rates of growth
under utilitarian policies just like in Theorem 4 by noting that the proof does not make use of the
survival condition (the survival condition is only necessary to compute the individual rates of growth
under Rawlsian policies). Next, we compute the individual rates of growth for Rawlsian policies

                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


under the ruin condition in Theorem 7 (Corollary 4). We then use uniform boundedness to compute
the long-term social welfare for Rawlsian and utilitarian policies, noting that a utilitarian policy is
better than a Rawlsian policy as long as f + ≥ f − , which is true by the “rich-get-richer” modeling
condition.

We present a visualization of Theorem 6 in Figure 2 where we can observe the utilitarian policies
(max-U, max-f, max-fg) converge to a higher growth rate while Rawlsian policies (min-U, max-g)
converges to a suboptimal average growth rate. The experiment setting here is as same as Section 5.1.
Under uniform boundedness, the parameters for the shape of (fi (·))i , (gi (t))i are randomly sampled
within the same interval, which is weaker than the assumption in Theorem 6.

                                           0
                                                                    max-g (Rawlsian)
                                           10                       min-U (Rawlsian)
                                                                    max-fg (utilitarian)
                          Social welfare

                                           20                       max-f (utilitarian)
                                                                    max-U (utilitarian)
                                           30                       Random
                                                                    Rmin U (Rawlsian)
                                           40                       Rmax U (utilitarian)
                                           50

                                           60

                                                0   2000   4000   6000      8000       10000
                                                           Time step t
Figure 2: We show social welfare as the finite-time growth rate averaged over all individuals, for
all policies (solid lines), as well as theoretical expected growth rate (dashed lines) under the ruin
condition.

Theorem 7. Under modeling, regularity, and ruin conditions (Assumption 2.(a),(b), 3, 4), the min-U
policy leads to the following closed form solution of the individual rates of growth:
                   Ri = ζ̄((f1− , . . . , fN
                                           −
                                             ), (g1+ , . . . , gN
                                                                +
                                                                  )),     i = 1, · · · N,         a.s.
Corollary 4. With the addition of the uniform boundedness condition from Assumption 2.(c), we
can simplify the individual rates of growth, obtaining the long-term social welfare value for the
Rawlsian policy under the ruin condition
                                                           M − N −M +
                       R̄min−U = R̄max−g =                   f −   g <0                        a.s.
                                                           N     N


Proof of Theorem 7. Under the ruin condition, consider the upper bound in inequality 10 and we
obtain
                  E[Ũ (t + 1) − Ũ (t) | Ft ] ≤ ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN
                                                                    +
                                                                      ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                                         −
                                                                                           )) < 0.
Applying Lemma 1 with Yt = Ũ (t + 1) − Ũ (t), µ = ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN
                                                                       +
                                                                         ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                                            −
                                                                                              )), we obtain
Ũ (t + 1) → −∞ a.s. and hence mini∈[N ] Ui (t) → −∞. Here we use the same intuition as
Rothschild (1975a), proving there exists T ∗ such that
                                        maxi Ui (T ∗ ) − minj Uj (T ∗ )
                                           lim                          = 0.             (29)
                                 t→∞                   t
We prove equation 29 by applying Proposition 1 and Lemma 1 in Rothschild (1975a). Now with
equation 29, we know everyone has the same growth rate and hence Ui (t) → −∞ a.s. for all
i ∈ [N ]. Then by the uniform boundedness from our modeling condition and the monotonicity of
(fi (·))i , (gi (·))i , we have
                                "P                           #
                                   N
                                   i=1 (Ui (t + 1) − Ui (t))     M − N −M +
                          lim E                                =    f −        g
                         t→∞                 Nt                  N           N


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                               PN
                                 i=1 (Ui (t+1)−Ui (t))           −  N −M +
Apply Lemma 1 with Yt =                  N               ,λ=µ= M
                                                               Nf −   N g , we conclude
                                     M − N −M +
                               Ri =     f −            g , i = 1, · · · , N.
                                     N           N
Then since every individual has the same growth rate, we conclude our proof and our corollary
follows immediately. We note that the same result easily follows for the max-g policy, given the
tie-breaking rule that favors the individual with the lowest welfare.
Remark 2. To show convergence of the individual rates of growth under the ruin condition, uniform
boundedness is needed to obtain the same growth rate for every individual. In contrast, Theorem 3
does not require uniform boundedness for obtaining the same individual growth rate, asymptotically.

The following proposition is a counterpart for Proposition 2 in Rothschild (1975a) under the ruin
conditions. In the proof below, we emphasize the differences while keeping the other steps concise.
Proposition 1. Under the conditions of Theorem 7, let D(t) := maxi∈[N ] Ui (t) − minj∈[N ] Uj (t),
there exists a constant G such that if D(s) ≥ G and T ∗ is the first integer such that D(s + T ∗ ) < G,
then there exist H and K such that P(T ∗ > n) ≤ He−nK .

Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose K is any proper subset of [N ], and K′ is the complement of K
in [N ]. We take the case where the min-U policy only considers individuals in K while ignoring
individuals in K′ . We prove the following inequality by induction: there exists a constant TK such
that
            E[max′ Uj (t) − min Ui (t) | F0 ] ≤ max′ Uj (0) − min Ui (0) − 2,         ∀t ≥ TK .         (30)
               j∈K             i∈K                  j∈K             i∈K

The inequality in equation 30 allows us to satisfy the conditions in Proposition 2 from Rothschild
(1975a) and easily adapt the proof of Theorem 7. The base case N = 2 is trivial since we know
everything about the behavior of an individual i with ai (t) = 0 for all t ≥ 0. Now assume that for
N = N0 , Proposition 1 holds, and consider N = N0 + 1. Consider the set K, since |K| ≤ N0 and
by induction, we have
                               Ui (t)
                         lim          = ζ̄((fi− )i∈K , (gi+ )i∈K ), ∀i ∈ K, a.s.
                        t→∞       t
                                                                P              −1
where ζ̄K ((xi )i∈K , (yj )j∈K ) := M − k∈K xiy+y                         1
                                                                                  . As for the set K′ , apply
                                            P           i
                                                           i       i∈K xi +yi
the monotonicity of (gi (·))i∈K′ and the uniform boundedness condition, obtaining
                                      Ui (t + 1)
                                lim              = −g + ,      ∀i ∈ K′ ,   a.s.
                               t→∞         t
Hence we know that
               maxj∈K′ Uj (t) − mini∈K Ui (t)
          lim                                  = −g + − ζ̄((fi− )i∈K , (gi+ )i∈K ) < 0, a.s.
         t→∞                  t
By applying the Fatou-Lebesque theorem, we have

                maxj∈K′ Uj (t) − mini∈K Ui (t)
       lim E                                   | F0 = −g + − ζ̄((fi− )i∈K , (gi+ )i∈K ) < 0,
      t→∞                      t
Then there exists TK > 0 such that for all t > TK and

                 E max′ Uj (t) − min Ui (t) | F0 ≤ max′ Uj (0) − min Ui (0) − 2.
                      j∈K             i∈K                     j∈K          i∈K

At this point, we may apply Lemma 4 and Lemma 5 from Rothschild (1975a) and conclude our
proof.
Remark 3. The intuition for Proposition 1 is the following: when the ruin condition holds, indi-
viduals receiving an allocation will still decay in welfare, due to the strong decay functions effects
that the ruin condition models. However, this happens at a slower rate compared to individuals
whose welfare decays absent any intervention. As such, the welfare gap between the individuals
with the maximum welfare level and those with minimum welfare will be bounded, asymptotically,
and therefore everyone will decay, yet at a slower rate given the intervention of the social planner
than without any intervention.


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark 4. The survival and ruin conditions characterize two model states in which we can make
a definite comparison between Rawlsian policies and utilitarian policies in terms of the long-term
social welfare they achieve. There is a middle ground, in which neither survival nor ruin may hold, in
which the direct comparison between policies becomes much more difficult. We leave this direction
for future studies.

C    E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
This section contains detailed simulation notes for Section 5 and Appendix figures. For the simula-
tions in which the return and decay function bounds are uniform, we choose threshold parameters
Fi− , Fi+ , G−    +                −             +            −      −
             i , Gi s.t. fi (x) = f , gi (x) = g for x ≤ Fi , x ≤ Gi , respectively, and fi (x) = f ,
                                                                                                     +
            −             +         +
gi (x) = g for x ≥ Fi , x ≥ Gi , respectively, and we linearly interpolate between these thresh-
olds. Choosing Fi− < Fi+ and G−                +
                                      i > Gi ensures that fi is increasing and gi is decreasing on
the non-constant segments. We generate Fi , Fi+ , G−
                                              −              +
                                                        i , Gi randomly in the interval (0, ∆] for some
∆ > 0. For Figures 1, 2, and 4, we filter to ensure that fi (·) + gi (·) is increasing. For Figure 3,
we filter to ensure that fi (·) + gi (·) is increasing under some threshold τ , and decreasing above
threshold τ . For all figures, we average over 50 iterations and report the social welfare obtained at
every timestep. Our results are qualitatively the same for other functional forms of fi , gi , such as
sigmoid functions.
All code and data used in our simulations is available in this repository.

D    B EYOND A M ATTHEW EFFECT: MODELING VARIATIONS OF THE
     TREATMENT EFFECT FUNCTION

In the main text, we modeled a Matthew effect through the “rich-get-richer” and “poor-get-poorer”
behaviors induced by an increasing intervention return function fi (·) and a decreasing decay
function gi (·), under the assumption that the treatment effect fi (·) + gi (·) is also increasing. This
assumption suggests that interventions at higher level of welfare have a higher impact. We explore
a variation of this assumption in this section, assuming that there exists a threshold τ above which
the treatment effect is in fact decreasing. In doing so, we capture a diminishing return effect,
where individuals with the highest or lowest levels of welfare benefit less from an intervention
than individuals with moderate levels of welfare. This is motivated by recent policies that target
people with moderate welfare values: the algorithmic profiling policy introduced by Austria in
2020 (Allhutter et al., 2020) predicts a probability of an individual to re-enter the job market
based on an intervention (in a sense, a prediction of the treatment effect). The policy allocates an
intervention to those “in-the-middle”, suggesting that moderate welfare values are predictive of the
highest treatment effect. In addition, optimal taxation policy and redistributive taxation (Mankiw
et al., 2009; Benabou, 2000) often argue for an increasing tax scale or a decreasing benefit scheme
as a function of income. We provide a theoretical extension from our results in Theorem 1 under
stricter homogeneity assumptions, capturing a diminishing return on interventions.
Corollary 5 (Diminishing returns). Assume the conditions of Theorem 1, but with a threshold
τ > 0 s.t. fi (x), fi (x) + gi (x) are decreasing for x ≥ τ . Furthermore, assume that the functions
fi , gi are uniform for all individuals (fi (x) = fj (x), gi (x) = gj (x) for ∀i ̸= j ∈ [N ]). Finally,
limx→−∞ (fi (x) + gi (x)) < limx→+∞ (fi (x) + gi (x)). Then with positive probability, a Rawlsian
policy achieves a higher long-term social welfare than a utilitarian policy:
                                   P(R̄Rawlsian ≥ R̄utilitarian ) > 0,
where the Rawlsian and utilitarian policies are defined in the same informational contexts, i.e.
{min-U, max-U}, {max-g, max-f}, {max-g, max-fg}. Note here that all policies break the tie by
choosing the individual with the lowest welfare level.
Remark 5. Corollary 5 shows that our analysis under the simple assumptions on the monotonicies
of intervention return function and the decay function can be applied to more complicated cases.
When fi (·) + gi (·) is increasing, the choices of max-fg (max-f) policy and min-U policy diverge.
The tendency of max-fg (max-f) policy of focusing on the better-off population can cause long-term
loss by accumulating the decay of the ignored population. Furthermore, the ignored population
enters a low-welfare trap, since they will likely not be targeted again. See Figure 3 for an illustration


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of Corollary 5 where we can observe utilitarian policies (max-U, max-f, max-fg) show a lower
growth rate over the finite time horizon as compared to the Rawlsian policies (min-U, max-g).


Proof. First of all, since the asymptotic behavior of individuals under the min-U policy (i.e. being
lifted unboundedly) does not depend on the simple monotonicity property of the return functions,
we have Ui (t) → +∞ for ∀i ∈ [N ] under a Rawlsian policy with survival, regularity conditions
and existence of limx→−∞ (fi (x) + gi (x)) from Theorem 3. Hence we conclude R̄Rawlsian =
M +       N −M −
 Nf −       N g . However, before the turning point of the monotonicity of fi (·) + gi (·), the max-
fg policy tends to focus on the better-off individuals by applying the rule of max-fg policy. Hence
with positive probability, some individuals will be left behind (with fi (Ui (t)) + gi (Ui (t)) less than
limx→+∞ (fi (x) + gi (x))); then if these individuals will not receive budget for all t afterwards, the
probability of them never crossing the turning point (i.e., where the mononicity of the treatment
effect function changes) is lowerbounded by a positive constant independent of Ft by applying
Lemma 3.
And after the turning point, the max-fg policy coincides with the min-U policy and lifts every in-
dividual to infinity, asymptotically, with positive probability (not almost surely anymore since the
individuals can drop below
                        n +the turning   point of fi (·) + gi (·)). Hence we conclude  that with positive
                         M f −(k−1)g − −(N −M −k)g +
                                                                               o
probability, R̄max-fg ∈               N                 , k = 1, . . . , N − M. . With positive probabil-
ity, we have R̄max−fg ≤ R̄min−U .
A similar argument applies to the max-f policy by substituting fi (·) + gi (·) with fi (·) and hence
omitted here. For the max-U policy, Theorem 4 still applies and we have R̄max−fg ≤ R̄min−U with
positive probability.


                             370                                                  max-g (Rawlsian)
                                                                                  min-U (Rawlsian)
                             360                                                  max-fg (utilitarian)
                                                                                  max-f (utilitarian)
            Social welfare


                                                                                  max-U (utilitarian)
                             350                                                  Random
                                                                                  Rmin U (Rawlsian)
                             340
                                                                                  Rmax U (utilitarian)
                             330

                             320

                             310
                                   0   1000   2000   3000    4000   5000   6000
                                               Time step t
Figure 3: We show social welfare as the finite-time growth rate averaged over all individuals, for all
policies (solid lines), as well as theoretical growth rate for min-U and max-U policies (dashed lines)
under diminishing returns.



E    D IFFERENT TIE - BREAKING RULE FOR THE MAX - G POLICY

In Section 2 we introduced a rule that breaks the tie in favor of individuals with the smallest index,
when they have the same welfare values. Additionally, when the decay function values are the
same, the max-g policy chooses the individual with the lowest welfare. We explore a variation
where the max-g policy breaks the tie by also choosing the individual with the lowest welfare in
Figure 4, noting a slightly convergence rate than the min-U policy. All simulations details are the
same as in Section 5.


                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                  max-g (Rawlsian)
                             260                                                  min-U (Rawlsian)
                                                                                  max-fg (utilitarian)
                                                                                  max-f (utilitarian)



            Social welfare
                             250                                                  max-U (utilitarian)
                                                                                  Random
                             240                                                  Rmin U (Rawlsian)
                                                                                  Rmax U (utilitarian)
                             230

                             220

                             210
                                   0   1000   2000   3000    4000   5000   6000
                                               Time step t
Figure 4: Social welfare as the finite-time growth rate averaged over all individuals, for all policies
(solid lines), as well as theoretical expected growth rate, asymptotically (dashed lines). The tie-
breaking rule favors the individual with the lowest index for all policies.

F    P ROPORTIONAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION
In the main text of the paper, we restrict our attention to integer resources at each time step and
use a budget ≥ 1 to intervene in several individuals. Here, we consider interventions that allow
proportional allocation, as follows:
                                                               eUi (t)
                              proportional max-U: ai (t) = PN              ,
                                                                    Uj (t)
                                                              j=1 e

                                                             e−Ui (t)
                             proportional min-U: ai (t) = PN              .
                                                                  −Uj (t)
                                                            j=1 e
Theorem 8. Under regularity (Assumption 3) and modeling conditions (Assumption 2), and assume
that fi (x) ≡ f (x), gi (x) ≡ g(x), the proportional max-U policy leads to the following closed form
solution of the individual rates of growth:
                                              +
                                             f , i = J,
                                      Ri =                  a.s.
                                             −g + , i ̸= J,
where J is a random variable with values in [N ] whose exact value depends on U (0), f (·), and g(·).

Proof of Theorem 8. For ∀i, j ∈ [N ] s.t. Ui (t) ≥ Uj (t), we have ai (t) ≥ aj (t), then under the
assumption that fi (x) ≡ f (x), gi (x) ≡ g(x), we further obtain
            E[Zi (t + 1)] = ai (t) · f (Ui (t)) − (1 − ai (t)) · g(Ui (t))
                          ≥ aj (t) · f (Ui (t)) − (1 − aj (t)) · g(Ui (t))
                          ≥ aj (t) · f (Uj (t)) − (1 − aj (t)) · g(Uj (t)) = E[Zj (t + 1)].
where the last inequality holds because of modeling conditions (Assumption 2.(a), (b)). Consider
i ∈ Mt where Mt = arg maxj {Uj (t)} and i ∈ Mt , j ∈ [N ] such that Ui (t) − Uj (t) ≥ 1, we have
    E[Ui (t + 1) − Uj (t + 1) | Ft ] − (Ui (t) − Uj (t))
    = E[Zi (t + 1) − Zj (t + 1) | Ft ]
    = ai (t) · f (Ui (t)) − (1 − ai (t)) · g(Ui (t)) − (aj (t) · f (Uj (t)) − (1 − aj (t)) · g(Uj (t)))
    ≥ ai (t) · f (Ui (t)) − (1 − ai (t)) · g(Uj (t)) − (aj (t) · f (Ui (t)) − (1 − aj (t)) · g(Uj (t)))
    = (ai (t) − aj (t)) · f (Ui (t)) + (ai (t) − aj (t)) · g(Uj (t))
      eM (t) − eM (t)−1 − eM (t) − eM (t)−1 −
     ≥ P           Uj (t)
                          ·f + P         Uj (t)
                                                ·g
          j∈[N ] e              j∈[N ] e
         1 − e−1 −
     ≥          (f + g + ) > 0 .
            N


                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now treat Ui (t) − Uj (t) as the welfare process and apply adapted Lundberg’s inequality (Lemma 3),
we claim that with positive probability that Ui (t) − Uj (t) ≥ 1 for ∀t ≥ 0 when Ui (0) − Uj (0) ≥ 1
where i ∈ M0 . Then combine with the regularity condition (Assumption 3(c)), we have that with
positive probability (lowerbounded by a constant) that Ui (t) − Uj (t) ≥ 1 for ∀t > 0 where i ∈
M0 . Then we apply the same reasoning for j ∈ [N ]\i and conclude that with probability 1, the
proportional max-U policy will fixate on one single individual asymptotically.
Theorem 9. Under regularity (Assumption 3) and modeling conditions (Assumption 2.(a),(b)), the
survival condition (Assumption 1), the proportional min-U policy leads to the following closed form
solution of the individual rates of growth:
                    Ri = ζ̄((f1+ , . . . , fN
                                            +
                                              ), (g1− , . . . , gN
                                                                 −
                                                                   )), i = 1, . . . , N, a.s.

Proof of Theorem 9. The result can be proved by induction, and the proof of Theorem 3 applies
here with minor modifications. We assume for N − 1 individuals the conclusion holds, and consider
M := arg maxj {Uj (0)} and Mc := [N ]\M . For ∀l ∈ M,
                              e−D(t)           X                      1
               al (t) ≤              −D(t)
                                           ⇒        ai (t) ≥                     ,
                        1 + (N − 1)e          i∈Mc
                                                             1 + (N  −  1)e−D(t)
where D(t) = maxj∈[N ] Uj (t) − mini∈[N ] Ui (t). Hence there exists constant C such that when
D(t) ≥ C, the survival condition for Mc is satisfied and we have
                           X         c
 ŪMc (t + 1) − ŪMc (t) =       wiM ai (t) · fi (Ui (t)) − (1 − ai (t)) · gi (Ui (t))
                               i∈Mc
                               X          c
                           ≥          wiM ai (t) · fi− − (1 − ai (t)) · gi+
                               i∈Mc
                                                                            !−1
                                   X              X        gj+          1X
                           =      ai (t) −               ·
                             i∈Mc
                                                f − + gj+
                                            j∈Mc j
                                                                    f − + gk+
                                                                k∈Mc k
                                                                                   !−1
                                      1           X       gj+         X        1
                           ≥                  −                 ·                      >0
                              1 + (N − 1)e−C
                                                 j∈Mc j
                                                       f − + gj+     k∈Mc k
                                                                           f − + gk+
                      c
where ŪMc (t), wiM are defined as in equation 5 for set Mc . P
                                                              Hence we apply the conclusion
                                                                                 1
for Mc and claim that there exists constant TMc such that when i∈M ai (t) ≤ 1+(N −1)e −C for

∀t ≥ 0, we have

                          E minc Uj (t) ≥ minc +1, ∀t ≥ TMc ,
                              j∈M             j∈M

                          E maxc Uj (t) ≤ maxc −1, ∀t ≥ TMc .
                                   j∈M              j∈M
As for i ∈ M,
             E[Zi (t + 1) | ai (t), Ft ] ≤ ai (t)fi+ − (1 − ai (t))gi−
                                                                       N − 2 + e−D(t)

                                                    1
                                         ≤                  f  +
                                                                 −                       gi− ,
                                           N − 1 + e−D(t) i            N − 1 + e−D(t)
and when D(t) ≥ C ′ for constant C ′ > 0, we have
                                                N − 2 + e−D(t)

                           1                                                1
                                      f −+
                                                                    gi− < − min gi− .                 (31)
                   N − 1 + e−D(t) i             N − 1 + e−D(t)              2 i∈[N ]
                                                                                                  gi−
                                                                    n                                   o
                                                                           1         1
                                            P
Hence for the whole population [N ], if i∈Mt ai (t) ≤ min 1+(N −1)e            −C , 2 mini∈[N ]  +
                                                                                                fi +gi−  ,
there exists constant T such  that
                           E minc Uj (t) ≥ minc Uj (0) + 1,             ∀t ≥ T,
                             j∈M          j∈M

                            E max Uj (t) ≤ max Uj (0) − 1,              ∀t ≥ T.
                                   j∈M             j∈M
The rest of the proof goes through with minor modifications given the above facts.


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    M ODELING CHOICE ON MONOTONICITY

Use the assumption on the Matthew effect, we model (fi (·))i as increasing and (gi (·))i as de-
creasing. For other combinations of monotonicities (see Table 1), one could develop theoretical
foundation using similar tools. We provide finite-horizon simulations for different combinations of
monotonicities (as in Table 1) in Figure 5.

                       fi (·)
                                     Decreasing          Increasing        Constant
                gi (·)
                Decreasing       Mixed (Rawlsian)        Rawlsian      Mixed (Rawlsian)
                 Increasing      Mixed (utilitarian)     Utilitarian      Utilitarian
                  Constant              Tie                 Tie              Tie

Table 1: Here “increasing” denotes non-constant increasing functions and “decreasing” denotes non-
constant decreasing functions. Each cell represent the comparison between the utilitarian policies
and the Rawlsian policies under the monotonicicy combination of fi (·), gi (·) being “column-row”
using the measure of long-term social welfare. We use “Mixed (utilitarian)” to represent regions
where only utilitarian policies achieve the better long-term social welfare, “Mixed (Rawlsian)” to
represent regions where all of Rawlsian policies and only part of utilitarian policies achieve the
better long-term social welfare, “Utilitarian” to represent the region (discussed in this paper) where
all of utilitarian policies show superiority over all of Rawlsian policies, “Rawlsian” to represent the
region (discussed in this paper) where all of Rawlsian policies show better welfare than all utilitarian
policies, “Tie” to represent regions where utilitarian policies and Rawlsian policies perform equally
well. The max-g policy breaks the tie by choosing the individual with lowest welfare and the other
policies break the tie by choosing the individual with the smallest index. Our discussion in Section 3
is constrained to cell on the first row, second column because of our assumption about “rich-get-
richer” and “poor-get-poor”. All the simulations are conducted under the survival condition and the
uniform boundedness assumption.


From Figure 5, we observe the trend shifts as the monotonicity of decay functions gi (·) change. As
the monotonicity of decay functions describe where the instability of the society is located: decreas-
ing gi (·) stands for individuals are more fragile as their welfare level are lower while increasing gi (·)
implies more fragility of individuals with higher welfare level. Hence Rawlsian policies, which aim
to leave no one behind, would perform better under cases where gi (·) are decreasing. As when gi (·)
are constant (no inequality in decay functions), both types of policies will perform well show no
difference in long-term welfare.


H    P OLICY COMPARISON FOR HETEROGENEOUS POPULATIONS

In this section, we discuss the comparisons among policies when the uniform boundedness assump-
tion is violated and provide evidence that a Rawlsian policy still prevails over a utilitarian policy
when the heterogeneity of the population is bounded below some threshold.
When the uniform boundedness condition may not hold, a direct comparison between Rawlsian and
utilitarian policies becomes more intricate. We explore this case by simulating the long-term social
welfare values when the limits of the intervention return and decay functions fi , gi are different. We
use the same dataset and pre-processing procedure as Section 5.1 except we generate heterogeneous
bounds {fi− , fi+ , gi− , gi+ } and conduct comparison using finite-horizon simulation.
We draw the bounds gi− , gi+ , fi− , fi+ from normal distributions in the following way:

       • The variance of the normal distribution is modeled by a parameter σ 2 that controls the
         heterogeneity of the bounds: larger σ means more heterogeneous bounds.
       • The mean of the normal distribution is chosen differently for fi and gi : first of all, we
         choose means for the fi and gi functions that makes survival condition possible. Second,
         we introduce a parameter b that models the strength of the decay functions: larger b means
         that gi− and gi+ are closer, and therefore, the decay effect is bounded. A smaller b means


                                                    27
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 380
                 370                                                    380                                                             380
                                                                                                max-g (Rawlsian)

Social welfare


                                                       Social welfare


                                                                                                                       Social welfare
                 360
                                                                        370                     min-U (Rawlsian)                        370
                 350                                                                            max-fg (utilitarian)
                 340                                                    360                     max-f (utilitarian)                     360
                 330                                                                            max-U (utilitarian)
                                                                        350                     Random                                  350
                 320                                                                            Rmin U (Rawlsian)
                 310                                                    340                     Rmax U (utilitarian)                    340
                 300
                 290                                                    330                                                             330
                       0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000                      0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000                               0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
                                Time step t                                            Time step t                                                     Time step t
                 350
                                                                        380                                                             380
                 340                                                    370
Social welfare


                                                       Social welfare


                                                                                                                       Social welfare
                                                                        360                                                             370
                 330
                                                                        350
                                                                                                                                        360
                 320                                                    340
                                                                        330                                                             350
                 310
                                                                        320
                 300                                                    310                                                             340
                                                                        300
                 290                                                                                                                    330
                       0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000                      0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000                               0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
                                Time step t                                            Time step t                                                     Time step t
                                                                                                                                        415
                 380                                                                                                                    410
                                                                        380
Social welfare


                                                       Social welfare


                                                                                                                       Social welfare
                                                                                                                                        405
                 370
                                                                        370                                                             400
                 360                                                                                                                    395
                                                                        360                                                             390
                 350
                                                                        350                                                             385
                 340                                                                                                                    380
                                                                        340                                                             375
                       0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000                      0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000                               0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
                                Time step t                                            Time step t                                                     Time step t
  Figure 5: Social welfare as the finite-time growth rate averaged over all individuals, for all policies
  (solid lines), as well as theoretical growth rate for min-U and max-U policies (dashed lines) under
  different combination of monotonicities of {fi (·)}, {gi (·)}. The monotonicities of {fi (·)}, {gi (·)}
  corresponds to Table 1, e.g., top left plot is generated for decreasing {fi (·)} and {gi (·)}.


                           that the (relative) decay effect can get quite large for individuals with lower welfare, i.e.,
                           we expect a stronger “poor-get-poorer” effect.

  Based on this set-up, we simulate the following model: w.l.o.g., we set M = 1, for each in-
                                                                                           −
  dividual i ∈ [N ], gi− ∼ N bg + , b2 σ 2 , gi+ ∼ N g + , σ 2 , fi− ∼ N f − , ( fg+ )2 σ 2 , fi+ ∼

              +

  N f + , ( fg+ )2 σ 2 where g + , f − , f + are constant parameters, b ∈ (0, 1], σ 2 > 0. For each pair of
  (b, σ 2 ) parameters, we generate 50 sets of heterogeneous bounds ({gi− , gi+ , fi− , fi+ }i=1:N ). Under
  each set of heterogeneous bounds ({gi− , gi+ , fi− , fi+ }i=1:N ), we average the social welfare obtained
  over all individuals, averaging over 50 iterations of the generation process of the intervention and
  decay function bounds. We present the finite-time social welfare of individuals under different poli-
  cies using one set of randomly generated bounds {fi− , fi+ , gi− , gi+ } in Figure 6. Figure 7 illustrates
  a heatmap of the percentage of times when the min-U Rawlsian policy has better long-term welfare
  than the max-U utilitarian policy, for each value of b and σ (1 meaning that the min-U Rawlsian
  policy is better in all iterations). From Figure 7, we observe the min-U Rawlsian policy maintains
  the tendency to perform worse the max-U policy in a short-term while surpasses the max-U utili-
  tarian policy in the long-term for a range of σ values (in a sense, for bounded heterogeneity). As
  b decreases (and therefore the decay functions gi have a stronger effect), a Rawlsian policy starts
  performing better by preventing stronger loss caused by the decay of low-welfare individuals.


                                                                                         28
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                               max-g (Rawlsian)
                                             300                                                                               min-U (Rawlsian)
                                                                                                                               max-fg (utilitarian)
                                                                                                                               max-f (utilitarian)
                                             280                                                                               max-U (utilitarian)
                            Social welfare
                                                                                                                               Random
                                             260


                                             240


                                             220

                                                     0       1000     2000    3000      4000                5000   6000
                                                                        Time step t
  Figure 6: Social welfare as the finite-time growth rate average over all individuals, for all policies
  (solid lines) under one set of heterogeneous bounds.


                1.0000                                                                1.0              1.0000                                                  1.0


                                                                                      0.8                                                                      0.8
                0.7625                                                                                 0.7625
                                                                                       Coefficient b
Coefficient b


                                                                                      0.6                                                                      0.6
                0.5250                                                                                 0.5250
                                                                                      0.4                                                                      0.4

                0.2875                                                                                 0.2875
                                                                                      0.2                                                                      0.2


                0.0500                                                                0.0              0.0500                                                  0.0
                     0.25             25.19              50.12      75.06    100.00                         0.25    25.19        50.12       75.06    100.00
                                                   Coefficient 2                                                            Coefficient 2
                                                     (a)                                                                         (b)

  Figure 7: Percentage of iterations where min-U obtains better social welfare than max-U as the
  bounds {fi− , fi+ , gi− , gi+ }i=1:N vary according to parameters b and σ 2 , at time step t = 6000 (a)
  and t = 10 (b).


                                                                                        29
