Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DYNAMIC S PARSE T RAINING VERSUS D ENSE T RAIN -
ING : T HE U NEXPECTED W INNER IN I MAGE C ORRUP -
TION ROBUSTNESS

 Boqian Wu1,2,∗ , Qiao Xiao3,∗, Shunxin Wang1 , Nicola Strisciuglio1 , Mykola Pechenizkiy3 ,
         Maurice van Keulen1 , Decebal Constantin Mocanu2,3 , Elena Mocanu1
 1
   University of Twente, 2 University of Luxembourg, 3 Eindhoven University of Technology
 {b.wu,s.wang-2,n.strisciuglio,m.vankeulen,e.mocanu}@utwente.nl
       {q.xiao,m.pechenizkiy}@tue.nl, {decebal.mocanu}@uni.lu



                                                A BSTRACT

          It is generally perceived that Dynamic Sparse Training opens the door to a new era
          of scalability and efficiency for artificial neural networks at, perhaps, some costs in
          accuracy performance for the classification task. At the same time, Dense Train-
          ing is widely accepted as being the “de facto” approach to train artificial neural
          networks if one would like to maximize their robustness against image corrup-
          tion. In this paper, we question this general practice. Consequently, we claim that,
          contrary to what is commonly thought, the Dynamic Sparse Training methods can
          consistently outperform Dense Training in terms of robustness accuracy, partic-
          ularly if the efficiency aspect is not considered as a main objective (i.e., sparsity
          levels between 10% and up to 50%), without adding (or even reducing) resource
          cost. We validate our claim on two types of data, images and videos, using several
          traditional and modern deep learning architectures for computer vision and three
          widely studied Dynamic Sparse Training algorithms. Our findings reveal a new
          yet-unknown benefit of Dynamic Sparse Training and open new possibilities in
          improving deep learning robustness beyond the current state of the art.


1       I NTRODUCTION

If one would like to maximize as much as possible the robustness of a deep learning model on noisy
more realistic data (e.g., image corruption, out of distribution), what would be the typical approach?
Would one train directly a dense neural network (referred further as Dense Training) or a sparse neu-
ral network (referred further as Sparse Training)? Of course, there are many techniques to enhance
the model robustness, but still they would be applied on top of a basic optimization process which
usually requires training an artificial neural network. In order to give an answer to the previously
posed question, we would need to quantify the research and practitioner community perception,
which is a hard problem in itself. Yet, given the large body of literature on the topic, it is safely
to assume that the usual answer would be “Yes, Dense Training is the typical solution to maximize
the model robustness.”. Nevertheless, the reader can answer to this question by themselves, while
further in this manuscript we would like to bring more clarity and some new perspectives on this
topic.
With respect to Dense Training, recent studies have demonstrated that over-parameterized neural
networks, can achieve impressive generalizability on test data even without explicit regularizers
Zhang et al. (2021). This phenomenon is partly explained by the implicit regularization1 induced by
the optimization algorithm used during training, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) Zhang
et al. (2021); Keskar et al. (2017); Li & Liang (2018). Despite ongoing efforts to understand the
robustness behavior of deep neural network models, researchers always favor larger models, trained
    ∗
    Equal contribution.
    1
    In older neural network literature, regularization referred specifically to a penalty term added to the loss
function to prevent overfitting. Recently, as in Goodfellow et al. (2016), regularization is broadly defined as
“any modification to a learning algorithm intended to reduce test error without increasing training error.”


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


densely, due to their perceived robustness to unexpected variations in input data, such as additional
noise, contrast changes, and weather conditions, to a certain extent Hendrycks & Dietterich (2019);
Hendrycks et al. (2021). However, larger over-parameterized models do not necessarily gain more
robustness Algan & Ulusoy (2021); Wang et al. (2023).
With respect to sparse training, there are static sparse training Liu & Wang (2023) and Dynamic
Sparse Training (DST) Mocanu et al. (2018); Bellec et al. (2018); Mostafa & Wang (2019); Evci
et al. (2020); Yuan et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2021a), which maintain just a fraction of the parameters’
budget throughout the entire training process. Static sparse training involves sparsifying the network
before training and keeps the topology fixed during training. DST, a recent and efficient sparse-to-
sparse training approach, starts with a sparse neural network and simultaneously optimizes both its
weight values and connectivity. This optimization process is known as dynamic sparsity. Conse-
quently, it is mainly seen as an approach that can maximize deep learning scalability and efficiency,
at least in theory, as in practice, it is a difficult research problem to fully utilize sparsity during
training Nowak et al. (2023). Nevertheless, it is often overlooked that DST frequently achieves
performance comparable to, or even surpassing, that of its dense or static sparse counterparts Chen
et al. (2022b); Xiao et al. (2022); Graesser et al. (2022); Sokar et al. (2022); Atashgahi et al. (2022);
Liu et al. (2023); Sokar et al. (2023).
DST shares many similarities with dense training, including its adaptability to a range of learning
paradigms, such as continual learning Sokar et al. (2023) and reinforcement learning Graesser et al.
(2022), as well as tasks like feature selection Atashgahi et al. (2022), time series classification Xiao
et al. (2022). It is compatible with both convolutional and transformer-based architectures and uses
core techniques such as dropout, weight decay, and standard optimizers Dey et al. (2024). Despite
these parallels, DST utilizes hard sparsity—on top of the soft sparsity introduced by weight decay
or other regularization methods—which provides additional regularization. This naturally leads to
an intriguing question: Is somehow DST implicitly improving model robustness, and no one knew
about this yet?
Although several studies have investigated the impact of pruning model from Dense Training, lot-
tery ticket hypothesis methods Frankle & Carbin (2019); Frankle et al. (2020); Renda et al. (2020)
on image corruption robustness Liebenwein et al. (2021); Diffenderfer et al. (2021) and adversar-
ial robustness Liao et al. (2022), other research shows that static sparse networks, when increased
width and depth to maintain capacity, can also improve robustness Timpl et al. (2022). However,
a closer look at current DST research reveals a literature gap: the overlooked evaluation of DST
models under various unexpected image corruptions. In an attempt to respond to this, we examined
one of the classical DST algorithms, Sparse Evolutionary Training (SET) Mocanu et al. (2018), as
illustrated in Figure 1 (Left). We find that SET (with a sparsity ratio of 0.5) can markedly improve
model robustness against 18 out of 19 image corruptions, compared to Dense Training. Intuitively,
adding regularization (e.g., weight decay or dropout) during training is commonly believed to help
improve the generalization of neural networks. In light of the strong performance of the DST method
(e.g., SET) against common corruptions , we propose the Dynamic Sparsity Corruption Robustness
(DSCR) Hypothesis.
DSCR Hypothesis. Dynamic Sparse Training at low sparsity levels helps to improve model robust-
ness against image corruption in comparison with Dense Training.
We summarize our main contributions as follows:

       • This study questions the typical approach of using Dense Training to maximize model
         robustness and proposes Dynamic Sparse Training as a more capable alternative.
       • Formally, we propose the DSCR hypothesis which is validated in a wide range of corrup-
         tion scenarios (i.e., corruption type and severity), using different types of data (i.e., image
         and video), DST algorithms (i.e., SET, RigL, MEST and GraNet) and deep learning archi-
         tectures (i.e., VGG, ResNet, EfficientNet, DeiT and 3D ConvNet) (Section 4).
       • We give insights, from both spatial and spectral perspectives, on the underlying factors
         that explain the superior performance of DST. Our analysis shows that the dynamic spar-
         sity process in DST acts as an implicit regularization mechanism, enabling the model to
         automatically focus on more important features (e.g., low-frequency components) while
         reducing its attention to less important ones (e.g., high-frequency components) (Section 5).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             density = 1.0                                  target density                             soft memory bound
                                density                                 density                                 density                                    density
                                          density                                 density                                    density    regrow                       density
                                                       regrow
                                                                                                                                                                                    regrow
                                                                                                   regrow
                                                    remove                                  remove                                     remove                                  remove


                                                        training time                           training time                              training time                         training time

                                                (a) SET                                 (b) RigL                                   (c) MEST                              (d) GraNet
          robustness ACC gain


Figure 1: (Left) Robustness accuracy gain (%) in a sparsified ResNet34 trained with SET (sparsity
ratio=0.5) compared to its dense counterpart, tested on CIFAR100-C with various corruption types
shown on the Y-axis. Positive values indicate better performances of SET method. (Right) concep-
tual representation of model density during training across different DST algorithms: (a) SET, (b)
RigL (Note: In the regrow step, RigL requires full gradient calculations.), (c) MEST and (d) GraNet.


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   R ELEVANT METHODS FOR CORRUPTION ROBUSTNESS

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are susceptible to unseen changes in their inputs, a scenario com-
monly encountered in practical applications, such as common corruptions like Gaussian noise, defo-
cus blur, etc Hendrycks & Dietterich (2019). To enhance robustness against these common corrup-
tions, many methods have been developed, primarily focusing on data augmentation, for example,
AugMix Hendrycks* et al. (2020), AugMax Wang et al. (2021), PRIME Modas et al. (2022). These
approaches aim to reduce the distribution gap between the training and testing datasets. Alterna-
tively, other strategies to enhance corruption robustness concentrate on developing resilient learning
approaches, such as contrastive learning Chen et al. (2020), or on designing specialized network
components, like the push-pull layer Strisciuglio et al. (2020). Recent research has revealed that
LTH-based sparse models can provide enhanced robustness to common corruptions compared to
their denser counterparts Diffenderfer et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2022a). Additionally, Bair et al.
(2024) introduces an adaptive sharpness-aware pruning method, which regularizes the model to-
wards flatter regions, thereby improving robustness against image corruption. However, these meth-
ods are typically built on dense models either at the start or throughout training, often overlooking
the aspect of resource-aware training.


2.2   DYNAMIC S PARSE T RAINING

Dynamic Sparse Training (DST) Mocanu et al. (2018); Bellec et al. (2018); Mostafa & Wang (2019);
Evci et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2021); Yuan et al. (2021); Wu et al. (2025), as a sparse-to-sparse train-
ing paradigm, starts from scratch and maintains partial parameters throughout training, providing a
promising approach to significantly improve training and inference efficiency while still preserving
accuracy. Recent research has focused on deciphering the mechanisms of DST Liu et al. (2021c);
Evci et al. (2022; 2019), and has broadened its application in various domains, such as continuous
learning Sokar et al. (2023), reinforcement learning Graesser et al. (2022); Tan et al. (2023), feature
selection Sokar et al. (2022); Atashgahi et al. (2022), time series classification Xiao et al. (2022),
network architecture design Liu et al. (2023), and vision transformers Chen et al. (2021).
Moreover, recent studies have concentrated on developing improved DST algorithms Dettmers &
Zettlemoyer (2019); Mostafa & Wang (2019); Yuan et al. (2021); Jayakumar et al. (2020); Liu et al.
(2021a). For instance, Dettmers & Zettlemoyer (2019) introduced a technique to regrow weights
based on the momentum of existing weights, while Yuan et al. (2021) proposed a method that utilizes
both weight and gradient information for pruning. More recently, it has been demonstrated that DST
can enhance the performance of DNNs on biased data Zhao et al. (2023) and adversarial samples
Chen et al. (2022b). However, the majority of DST research relies on pristine benchmark datasets,
leaving the robustness of DST models against image corruption relatively unexplored. This paper
aims to systematically investigate the robustness behavior of DST when exposed to various image
corruptions.


                                                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   P ROBLEM D EFINITION
                                               n                                      n
Given ntr i.i.d. training samples {(xtr       tr   tr                         te   te   te
                                         i , yi )}i=1 and nte test samples {(xi , yi )}i=1 , we aim to
evaluate the model’s robustness in scenarios where the test inputs are corrupted relative to the
benchmarked training datasets, (i.e., ptr (x) ̸= pte (x)) while the conditional input-label relation-
ship remains consistent (i.e., ptr (y | x) = pte (y | x)). To achieve this, we utilize standard image
benchmark datasets such as CIFAR10 Krizhevsky et al. (2009), CIFAR100 Krizhevsky et al. (2009),
TinyImageNet Le & Yang (2015) and ImageNet Deng et al. (2009) for training. Then, we evaluate
the performance (robustness accuracy) of the models on the corresponding corruption benchmark
datasets, including CIFAR10-C, CIFAR100-C, TinyImageNet-C and ImageNet- C/C̄/3DCC. More
details of datasets can be found in Appendix A.2.

3.2   DYNAMIC S PARSE T RAINING

Consider a dense neural network fθ , the sparsification of fθ can be formulated as: fθ⊙M 7→ fθ′ ,
where M is a set of binary masks and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. The sparsity ratio S
                                                            ′
of the resulting subnetwork, fθ′ , is defined as S = 1 − ∥θ   ∥0
                                                         ∥θ∥0 , where ∥ · ∥0 represents the L0 norm,
counting the number of non-zero elements. The target memory budget (or density) ratio b is given by
∥θ ′ ∥0
 ∥θ∥0 . The topology of the sparse network is dynamically updated during training every ∆t iterations
through a parameters remove-regrow process. Specifically, connections with low importance are
removed, and new connections are regrown based on criteria like gradient information Evci et al.
(2020) or randomly Mocanu et al. (2018). Dynamic sparse models are the resulting models from
DST. In our study, we explore various DST approaches as follows:

       • DST with fixed memory budget in forward: To the best of our knowledge, SET is pio-
         neering work in DST. SET follows a magnitude-based removal and random regrow strategy,
                                                            ′
         maintaining a fixed the memory budget, that is ∥θ    ∥0
                                                          ∥θ∥0 ≡ b, throughout the entire training
         process, as shown in Figure 1 (right (a)). RigL Evci et al. (2020) regrows weights based
         on the gradient information of all weights, while maintaining a constant memory budget
         during the forward phase of training, as shown in Figure 1 (right (b)). In both approaches,
         the mask M is updated every ∆t iterations.
       • DST with soft memory budget in forward: Memory-Economic Sparse Training (MEST)
         Yuan et al. (2021), with Soft Memory Bound Elastic Mutation, starts with a sparse model
                                            ′
         having a memory budget of ∥θ         ∥0
                                          ∥θ∥0 = b + bs , where bs > 0 represents the soft memory
         bound that decays during training. Subsequently, at intervals of ∆t, weights are removed
         based on magnitude and gradient information, reducing the memory budget to b, and then
         regrown it to b + bs , as illustrated in Figure 1 (right (c)). The soft memory constraint bs ,
         gradually decays to zero, allowing the model to reach the target memory budget b.
       • DST with flexible memory budget in forward: GraNet Liu et al. (2021a) starts with a
                                         ′
         denser neural network (i.e., ∥θ   ∥0
                                      ∥θ∥0 < 1). During training, at intervals of ∆t, it removes
         weights based on magnitude and regrows connections using gradient information, similar
         to RigL. The main difference is that fewer connections are regrown than those removed.
         This process dynamically updates the mask M throughout training, gradually reaching the
         target memory budget ratio b by the end, as shown in Figure 1 (right (d)).

In this paper, for simplicity in analysis, we use a unified magnitude-based removal approach and
implement either random ((·)r ) or gradient-based (i.e., re-growing the weights with the highest
magnitude gradients)((·)g ) regrow strategy across different DST methods. Unlike their original
papers Yuan et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2021a), where MEST utilized random regrow and GraNet
employed gradient-based regrow, we explore both strategies for each model. Thus, for random
regrow DST, our analysis includes SET, MESTr , and GraNetr , while for gradient-based regrow
DST, we examine RigL, MESTg , and GraNetg . This approach allows us to consistently evaluate the
robustness of DST models under varying memory budget constraints, such as fixed, soft, or flexible,
during training.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     C AN DST I MPROVE ROBUSTNESS AGAINST I MAGE C ORRUPTION ?
In this section, we aim to carry out extensive experiments to verify the DSCR Hypothesis across a
wide variety of DST methods, models and data. To this end, we conduct a comprehensive set of
experiments to evaluate the robustness accuracy of DST models with different sparsity ratios in the
presence of image corruption.
To comprehensively validate the DSCR Hypothesis, our study embarks on an extensive analysis
evaluating the robustness behavior of sparsely trained models. We train using several representative
DST algorithms, including SET, Rigging the Lottery (RigL) Evci et al. (2020), Memory-Economic
Sparse Training (MEST) Yuan et al. (2021), and Gradual Pruning with zero-cost Neuroregeneration
(GraNet) Liu et al. (2021a), across a wide range of model architectures (i.e., VGG Simonyan &
Zisserman (2015), 2D/3D ResNet He et al. (2016), EfficientNet Tan & Le (2019), DeiT Touvron
et al. (2021) and Two-Stream Inflated 3D ConvNet (I3D) Carreira & Zisserman (2017)).
Our analysis spans a range of image corruption benchmarks—CIFAR10-C Hendrycks & Dietterich
(2019), CIFAR100-C Hendrycks & Dietterich (2019), TinyImageNet-C Hendrycks & Dietterich
(2019), ImageNet-C Hendrycks & Dietterich (2019), ImageNet-C̄ Mintun et al. (2021), ImageNet-
3DCC Kar et al. (2022) and corrupted UCF101 Soomro et al. (2012) —covering 19 types of im-
age corruptions for CIFAR10/100-C, 15 types for TinyImageNet-C and ImageNet-C, 10 types for
ImageNet-C̄ and 11 types for ImageNet-3DCC, with each corruption tested across five severity lev-
els. The corrupted UCF101 dataset includes 16 corruption types with four severity levels. This anal-
ysis provides a comprehensive perspective on the robustness evaluation of sparsely trained models.
Detailed dataset descriptions and implementation setup can be found in Appendix A.1 and A.3.1.
        dense        SET                                     dense         RigL


            (a)              (b)              (c)                    (a)           (b)              (c)

Figure 2: Robustness accuracy (%) for (a) VGG16 on CIFAR10-C, (b) ResNet34 on CIFAR100-
C and (c) EfficientNet-B0 on TinyImageNet-C, comparing different DST algorithms with dense
training. Left: Results for DST algorithms with random regrow strategy, including SET, MESTr ,
and GraNetr . Right: Results for DST algorithms with gradient-based regrow strategy, such as RigL,
MESTg , and GraNetg .

4.1   OVERALL P ERFORMANCE

Figure 2 showcases the average robust accuracy across various types of corruption, with severity
levels ranging from 1 to 5, on the CIFAR10/100-C and TinyImageNet-C datasets. We can find that
DST models outperform their Dense training counterparts (as indicated by the blue line in Figure 2)
in terms of robustness accuracy across several sparsity ratios. This trend is evident in both the ran-
dom regrow (Figure 2, left) and gradient-based regrow (Figure 2, right) strategies. Specifically, for
CIFAR100-C and TinyImageNet- C, DST models with sparsity ratios ranging from 0.3 to 0.7 gen-
erally show encouraging improvements in robustness. For CIFAR10-C, at certain sparsity ratios,
such as 0.4, the overall DST methods achieve decent robust performance against image corruptions.
Moreover, based on our experimental setup, at least 40% of both training computational and memory
costs can be saved while simultaneously enhancing corruption robustness. Details on FLOPs and
parameter counts are available in the Appendix A.3.2. This finding substantiates our DSCR Hypoth-
esis across different DST methods, varying sparsity ratios, and architectures (i.e., VGG, ResNet, and
EfficientNet).

4.2   P ERFORMANCE ON C ORRUPTION T YPES

We further evaluate the DST methods across various corruption types with different severities. Fig-
ure 3 provides detailed relative robustness gains 2 for each type of corruption in ImageNet-C and
    2
      Defined as (Accs,sl − Accd,sl )/Accd,sl , where Accs,sl and Accd,sl represent the accuracies of models
trained using DST and dense training, respectively, at a severity level of sl.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ImageNet-C̄ Mintun et al. (2021), compared to their dense model counterparts. It is worth mention-
ing that the X-axis in Figure 3 represents different types of corruption, which are ordered according
to the amount of high-frequency information they contain, as in Saikia et al. (2021). Intriguingly,
on ImageNet-C and ImageNet-C̄ 3 , DST models show significant potential in enhancing robustness
against specific corruptions, such as impulse, Gaussian, and shot noise on ImageNet-C, as well as
brownish, Perlin, plasma, and blue noise on ImageNet-C̄. It is worth noting that these corruptions
are typically characterized by relatively high-frequency information. This finding is consistent on
CIFAR10-C, CIFAR100-C, and TinyImageNet-C, and due to page limitations, the results for these
datasets are detailed in Appendix A.4.
         Robustness Acc: 38.70 %             Robustness Acc: 38.64 %            Robustness Acc: 38.72 %


         Robustness Acc: 41.44 %             Robustness Acc: 40.50 %            Robustness Acc: 41.07 %


                (a)                                  (b)                                (c)
Figure 3: Relative robustness accuracy gain (%) on ImageNet-C (top) and ImageNet-C̄ (bottom) for
ResNet50, trained using DST with gradient-based strategies (i.e., (a) RigL, (b) MESTg , (c) GraNetg )
at a sparsity ratio of 0.1, compared to a dense baseline (which has a mean robustness accuracy of
38.38% on ImageNet-C and 40.38% on ImageNet-C̄). Positive values reflect better performance by
the sparse models compared to the dense baseline. The five bars, ranging from light to dark shades,
represent corruption severity levels from 1 to 5 for each type of corruption. The title indicates the
mean robustness accuracy for each corresponding DST method.

Additionally, we observe that DST models exhibit a more pronounced advantage in robustness over
Dense Training models under high severity levels, particularly with noise corruptions. Specifically,
as shown in Figure 3 (top (b)), the robustness performance of MESTg at severity level 5 for impulse
noise and Gaussian noise demonstrates nearly a 25% improvement. This finding is also evident
in CIFAR10-C, CIFAR100-C, and TinyImageNet-C; more details can be found in Appendix A.4.
This observation highlights the potential of models trained with DST to tackle high-frequency cor-
ruptions, especially in harsher scenarios, offering the potential to enhance DNNs’ robustness in
complex corruption-prone environments.

4.3   ROBUSTNESS OF DST MODELS : IS TRUE FOR OTHER DATASETS , TASKS , AND
      ARCHITECTURES ?

Herein, we evaluate the robustness of DST models using a more realistic corruption dataset (e.g.,
ImageNet-3DCC Kar et al. (2022)), and across different tasks (e.g., video classification), with mod-
ern architectures (transformer-based, e.g., DeiT-base Touvron et al. (2021)).
Evaluation on ImageNet-3DCC. We evaluate DST models on the ImageNet-3DCC, a challenging
dataset with realistic corruptions. The ImageNet-3DCC dataset introduces corruptions aligned with
3D scene geometry, simulating real-world shifts including camera motion, weather conditions, oc-
   3
     Our experiments primarily focus on DST with gradient-based regrow strategy when training on ImageNet.
As our implementation is based on PyTorch, this regrow approach tends to achieve strong performance on
ImageNet more quickly with this framework Liu et al. (2021a). However, it is worth noting that the random-
based approach has also shown significant improvements when implemented in JAX Lee et al. (2024), which
can be future exploration.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


clusions, depth of field, and lighting variations. The improved average test accuracy on ImageNet-
3DCC, as shown in Table 1, indicates that DST models excel not only at handling synthetic dis-
tortions, as discussed in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2, but also at adapting to practical, real-world
corruptions.
Evaluation on video classification. We ex-
tended our exploration to video data using the Table 1: The robustness accuracy (%) of
UCF101 dataset Soomro et al. (2012), an action dense and DST models on ImageNet-3DCC and
recognition dataset containing 101 categories UFC101 datasets.
                                                         Dataset      Model    Dense RigL MESTg GraNetg
and approximately 13K videos. Following the
                                                     ImageNet-3DCC  ResNet50   43.62 44.08 43.87 44.46
settings described in Schiappa et al. (2023), we                   3D ResNet50 51.14 52.71 53.00 53.57
compared the performance of dense training              UCF101
                                                                       I3D     53.58 55.00 56.30 55.21
and DST at a sparsity level of 0.1 on two archi-
tectures: 3D ResNet50 and Two-Stream Inflated 3D ConvNet (I3D) Carreira & Zisserman (2017).
Further implementation details are provided in Appendix A.3.1. Both models were trained from
scratch for 100 epochs on UCF101. Our analysis, based on a test set featuring 16 corruptions across
severity levels 1 to 4, as shown in Table 1, revealed that DST models consistently achieved superior
robust accuracy compared to their dense counterparts, even within the context of video data.
          Robustness Acc: 54.73 %               Robustness Acc: 55.15 %            Robustness Acc: 54.94 %


                                Text


                (a)                                   (b)                                 (c)
Figure 4: Relative robustness accuracy gain (%) on ImageNet-C for a DeiT-base, dynamically
trained with gradient-based methods (i.e., (a) RigL, (b) MESTg , (c) GraNetg ) at a sparsity ratio
of 0.1, compared to a dense baseline (with a robustness accuracy of 54.68% on ImageNet-C). Posi-
tive values indicate superior performance by the sparse models.

Evaluation on transformer-based architecture. We evaluate the relative robustness accuracy gain
of various sparse and dense DeiT-base models on ImageNet-C across different corruption types,
as shown in Figure 4. Following the experimental settings in Chen et al. (2021), we conducted
training from scratch over 200 epochs. The results show that DST models generally outperform
their dense counterparts, with a particularly better advantage in handling noise corruptions. This
finding, consistent with our observations in CNNs discussed in previous sections, suggests that the
robustness benefits of DST models are applicable to alternative architectures, including transformer-
based model.
In Appendix A.9, we compare the robustness of dense trained and DST models on an image segmen-
tation task and find that DST models are robust not only in image and video classification but also
in image segmentation. In summary, our empirical findings indicate that DST methods can surpass
Dense Training models in robustness performance across various datasets at specific sparsity ra-
tios, without (or even reduce) extra resource cost 4 . Furthermore, DST models tend to perform better
against different types of corruption, particularly those with more high-frequency information. The
mystery behind these observations will be further explored in the following sections.


5    W HAT IS B EHIND THE C ORRUPTION ROBUSTNESS G AIN IN DST?

Building on the previous empirical results, where DST showed improved robustness against com-
mon corruptions, we are motivated to explore the inner reasons for the robustness of DST models.
Our focus is on analyzing how DST and Dense Training models utilize their parameters in the spatial
domain and process the input in the spectral domain.
    4
      We use a binary masking operation to simulate the sparisty, the computation cost of binary masking oper-
ation is negligible or even reduced when the hardware support sparse matrix product.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1                    A NALYSIS T HROUGH S PATIAL D OMAIN

Traditionally, the constraints on weight values, such as L2 regularization, during dense training have
been an effective method to mitigate the problem of overfitting. In contrast, DST imposes sparsity
constraints, enabling the selective removal of parameters. In this section, we aim to intuitively
investigate how DST affects the location of non-zero weights. To achieve this, we performed a
visualization analysis to pinpoint the locations of sparse parameters for DST models. Figure 5
showcases the non-zero weight counts and the sum of weight magnitudes (i.e., absolute values) for
each kernel in a specific layer.
output channel index
output channel index


                       input channel index   input channel index   input channel index   input channel index   input channel index

                        (a) Dense                (b) SET               (c) RigL             (d)                   (e)

Figure 5: Visualization of the non-zero weight count (1st row) and the sum of weight magnitudes
(2nd row) within a 3×3 kernel from the #layer3.3.conv2 of ResNet34 after training on the CIFAR100
using dense training or different DST methods (with a sparsity ratio of 0.5). Each value in the figure
is derived from calculations within the kernel, with lighter colors indicating larger values.

Interestingly, the heatmaps in Figure 5 show dark vertical and horizontal lines, indicating a concen-
tration of either sparsified weights or weights with smaller magnitudes in the filters corresponding
to specific input or output channels (features). While both dense and DST models exhibit such a
concentration phenomenon, in the case of the dense model, this concentration is solely due to the
adjustment of weight magnitudes. These magnitudes tend to converge near, but not exactly at, zero,
as indicated by the consistently non-zero weight count of 9 in Figure 5 (1st row (a)). In contrast, the
dynamic sparse model attributes this phenomenon to both the adjustment of weight magnitudes and
the allocation of sparsified weights, as shown in Figure 5 (1st row (b, c, d, e)), where the non-zero
weight count approaches zero. The findings are consistently evident in other layers, particularly in
deeper layers, and across different models. More visualizations can be found in the Appendix A.5.
Compared to dense training, we suggest that dynamic sparsity in DST introduces a form of implicit
regularization. This leads to the prominence of sparsified weights on particular filters, indicating a
reduced connectivity to specific features that are determined to be less crucial.
Furthermore, based on the empirical results in Section 4.2, we observed that DST models are sur-
prisingly more effective at countering corruptions rich in high-frequency information compared
to their dense training counterparts. We assume that the improved robustness of DST models
against these corruptions stems from their inherent tendency to de-emphasize high-frequency fea-
tures. This selective focus on specific frequency ranges enhances the network’s robustness against
high-frequency corruptions, thereby providing a distinct advantage in handling noise corruptions
rich in high-frequency information. Further analysis will be provided in the following section.

5.2                    A NALYSIS F ROM S PECTRAL D OMAIN

Motivated by previous work Yin et al. (2019), which examines ImageNet accuracy after low-pass
and high-pass filtering to understand how neural networks utilize frequency information for image
recognition, and building on the observations and assumptions from the previous section, we will
further explore dynamic sparse models from a spectral perspective.
In this section, we explore how the test accuracy of both DST and Dense Training models is affected
by the removal of high and low-frequency components from the test data after training. In detail,
the test images are first transformed into the Fourier spectrum, followed by a frequency attenuation


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


operation. The attenuation is applied in two forms: high-frequency attenuation ahigh and low-
frequency attenuation alow , each controlled by an attenuation radius r. A larger r leads to more
information being filtered out, as depicted in Figure 6.
We define Acchigh (M, r) and Acclow (M, r) as the test accuracies
of a model M ∈ M, when tested on datasets processed with high-
frequency attenuation ahigh and low-frequency attenuation alow re-
spectively, using an attenuation radius r. Here, M represents the
set of all considered models. The Radius-Accuracy (RA) curves for
                                                                                  Fourier spectrum            Fourier spectrum
ahigh and alow illustrate the relationship between frequency atten-
uation range and test accuracy:                                       Figure 6:       Illustration of
                                                                      high-frequency ahigh , and
         CM,high := {(r, Acchigh (M, r)) | M ∈ M, r ∈ R},         (1) low-frequency a
                                                                                         low attenua-
          CM,low := {(r, Acclow (M, r)) | M ∈ M, r ∈ R},          (2) tion.    Gray areas indicate
                                                                      the removed frequency com-
where R denotes the set of attenuation radius. Figure 7 (left) il- ponents, with low frequencies
lustrates a toy example of ImageNet with attenuated high and low- near the center.
frequency information at different attenuation radius, and provides
the RA Curves CM,high and CM,low colored with orange and blue,
respectively. In detail, with high-frequency attenuation, images appear blurred but remain recogniz-
able to the human. In contrast, low-frequency attenuation leaves only the basic outlines of objects
visible. Figure 7 (right) shows the detailed RA curves for both dense and dynamic sparse models
across different datasets. These models are tested on the CIFAR100, TinyImageNet, and ImageNet
test sets, each processed with high- and low-frequency attenuation at varying radius.

                                                              Dense
                                                              SET


                                                                                                      Dense
                                                                      Dense
                                                                                                      RigL
                                                                      SET


                 high frequency attenuation                 Dense
                                                            SET                       SET                                RigL

                 low frequency attenuation


                attenuation range
                                              attenuation range       attenuation range              attenuation range
                                                    (a)                        (b)                          (c)

Figure 7: (Left) A toy example demonstrating the impact of high- and low-frequency attenuation
on dense ResNet50 model using the ImageNet test set. (Right-top) High-frequency attenuation and
(Right-bottom) Low-frequency attenuation performance: (a) ResNet34 (sparsity 0.5) on CIFAR100,
(b) EfficientNet-B0 (sparsity 0.5) on TinyImageNet, and (c) ResNet50 (sparsity 0.1) on ImageNet.
The x-axis represents the attenuation radius, and the y-axis shows test accuracy.

Observation 1: Equal attention for low-frequency information. Given models M ∈ M and the
set of attenuation radius r ∈ R, it is observed that CM,low lie below the CM,high . This reveals that
attenuating low-frequency information significantly degrades classification accuracy, highlighting
the crucial role of low-frequency information in image recognition tasks, consistent with findings
in Yin et al. (2019). Under low-frequency attenuation alow , both DST and Dense Training models
exhibit similar performance, as shown in Figure 7 (right, 2nd row), suggesting that DST models
allocate attention to low-frequency information in a manner comparable to their Dense Training
counterparts.
Observation 2: Less attention to high-frequency information: When subjected to high-frequency
attenuation ahigh , DST models consistently outperform Dense Training models across all evaluated
datasets, as shown in Figure 7 (right, 1st row). This suggests that high-frequency attenuation has
less impact on DST models, indicating they are less sensitive to high-frequency information. This
finding further supports the robustness of dynamic sparse models against common image corruptions
rich in high-frequency content, as discussed in Section 5.1.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Based on the above observation, we conclude that DST introduces a form of implicit regularization,
reducing the focus on high-frequency information. This selective attention in dynamic sparse models
enhances their robustness, especially in handling corrupted images with high-frequency content,
such as noise corruption.
Previous works Li et al. (2021); Grabinski et al. (2022) have pointed out that high-frequency compo-
nents can cause frequency aliasing when downsampling operations (e.g., AveragePooling and Max-
Pooling) are performed in the spatial domain of neural networks, as explained by the sampling theo-
rem in information theory. Specifically, (Li et al., 2021) demonstrated that relying on low-frequency
components of wavelets improves noise robustness, attributing this to the suppression of aliasing
effects. Furthermore, (Grabinski et al., 2022; 2023) showed that removing high-frequency compo-
nents to reduce frequency aliasing enhances the robustness of networks. These studies validate that
reducing high-frequency components mitigates frequency aliasing and improves robustness, align-
ing with our findings on the relationship between DST models’ tendency to pay less attention to
high-frequency information and their improved robustness against common corruptions.


6     F URTHER A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION

Our study questions the conventional approach of using “de facto” dense training for model robust-
ness in favor of sparse training. Due to the page constraint, we also analyze the complementarity
between DST and data augmentation (e.g., Mixup Zhang et al. (2018)) in Appendix A.7, and fur-
ther explore DST’s robustness with Out-Of-Domain (OOD) data and Grad-CAM Selvaraju et al.
(2017) in Appendix A.8 and A.10, respectively. Furthermore, we extend and validate our DSCR
hypothesis with more recent DST methods, including Cannistraci-Hebb soft training (CHTs) Zhang
et al. (2024b;a), which employs more complex growth criteria and topology initialization, as de-
tailed in Appendix A.6. In the future, it is worth moving beyond the basic fact revealed in this paper,
i.e., vanilla DST outperforms vanilla Dense Training for model robustness, and to devise new DST
methods for model robustness especially in the high sparsity regime, and to replace Dense Training
with DST in the current state-of-the-art techniques for model robustness. Additionally, while we
empirically analyze robustness behaviors between dense and sparse training and provide insights
from both spatial and frequency domains, further work on the theoretical understanding of this phe-
nomenon, along with a fine-grained exploration of different components of DST (e.g., topology
initialization, regrowth methods and regrowth weight initialization), could provide deeper insights
for the development of more robust and efficient networks. This would be a promising direction for
future research.


7     C ONCLUSION

This paper questioned the typical approach of Table 2: Summary of the main results present-
using “de facto” Dense Training to maximize ing the 9 scenarios studied in this paper. The
model robustness in deep learning, and revealed table takes a snapshot at a particular sparsity
an unexpected finding. That is: “Dynamic level and presents the robustness accuracy (%)
Sparse Training at low sparsity levels can train of the gradient-based regrow DST methods. The
more robust models against image corruption bold values represent the best performer between
than Dense Training.”. This finding has been Dense Training and each DST method taken sep-
confined formally in the DSCR Hypothesis and arately.
rigorously validated on nine scenarios (as sum-       Data      Dataset        Model       Dense         Dynamic Sparse Training
                                                      type                                Training Sparsity RigL MEST      g  GraNet
                                                                                                                                  g
marized in Table 2 where a striking observation               CIFAR10-C
                                                              CIFAR100-C
                                                                              VGG16
                                                                             ResNet34
                                                                                           73.32
                                                                                           51.65
                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                            73.64
                                                                                                            52.56
                                                                                                                     73.47
                                                                                                                     52.56
                                                                                                                                73.32
                                                                                                                                51.78
can be made - all DST algorithms studied out- images TinyImageNet-C
                                                              ImageNet-C
                                                                          EfficientNet-B0
                                                                             ResNet50
                                                                                           15.42
                                                                                           38.38
                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                            16.46
                                                                                                            38.70
                                                                                                                     16.5
                                                                                                                     38.64
                                                                                                                                15.82
                                                                                                                                38.72
perform Dense Training in all scenarios). To                  ImageNet-C̄
                                                            ImageNet-3DCC
                                                                             ResNet50
                                                                             ResNet50
                                                                                           40.38
                                                                                           43.62
                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                            41.44
                                                                                                            44.08
                                                                                                                     40.50
                                                                                                                     43.87
                                                                                                                                41.07
                                                                                                                                44.46
understand what factors contribute to this com-               ImageNet-C
                                                                UCF101
                                                                                DeiT
                                                                           3D ResNet50
                                                                                           54.68
                                                                                           51.14
                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                            54.73
                                                                                                            52.71
                                                                                                                     55.15
                                                                                                                     53.00
                                                                                                                                54.94
                                                                                                                                53.57
                                                     videos
pelling and intriguing DST behaviour, to the Total wins UCF101                  I3D        53.58
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                     0.1    55.00    56.3
                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                55.21

end, we present a deeper analyze. We show that
the dynamic sparsity process performs a form of implicit regularization which makes the model to
automatically learn to focus on the more informative features (e.g., rich in low-frequency), while
paying less attention to the less informative ones (e.g., rich in high-frequency).


                                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Qiao Xiao is supported by the research program ‘MegaMind - Measuring, Gathering, Mining and
Integrating Data for Self-management in the Edge of the Electricity System’, (partly) financed by the
Dutch Research Council (NWO) through the Perspectief program under number P19-25. Elena Mo-
canu is partly supported by the Modular Integrated Sustainable Datacenter (MISD) project funded
by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate under the European Important Projects
of Common European Interest - Cloud Infrastructure and Services (IPCEI-CIS) program for 2024-
2029. This research used the Dutch national e-infrastructure with the support of the SURF Cooper-
ative, using grant no. EINF-7499.

R EFERENCES
Görkem Algan and Ilkay Ulusoy. Image classification with deep learning in the presence of noisy
  labels: A survey. Knowledge-Based Systems, 215:106771, 2021.
Mike Ashby, Christiaan Baaij, Peter Baldwin, Martijn Bastiaan, Oliver Bunting, Aiken Cairncross,
 Christopher Chalmers, Liz Corrigan, Sam Davis, N. van Doorn, Jon Fowler, Graham Hazel, Basile
 Henry, David Page, Jonny Shipton, and S. C. Steenkamp. Exploiting unstructured sparsity on
 next-generation datacenter hardware. 2019.
Zahra Atashgahi, Ghada Sokar, Tim van der Lee, Elena Mocanu, Decebal Constantin Mocanu,
  Raymond Veldhuis, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Quick and robust feature selection: the strength of
  energy-efficient sparse training for autoencoders. Machine Learning, pp. 1–38, 2022.

Anna Bair, Hongxu Yin, Maying Shen, Pavlo Molchanov, and José M. Álvarez. Adaptive sharpness-
  aware pruning for robust sparse networks. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), May 2024.
Guillaume Bellec, David Kappel, Wolfgang Maass, and Robert Legenstein. Deep rewiring: Training
  very sparse deep networks. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
João Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? A new model and the kinetics
   dataset. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4724–4733,
   2017.
Tianlong Chen, Yu Cheng, Zhe Gan, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, and Zhangyang Wang. Chasing sparsity
  in vision transformers: An end-to-end exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:19974–19988, 2021.
Tianlong Chen, Zhenyu Zhang, Sijia Liu, Yang Zhang, Shiyu Chang, and Zhangyang Wang. Data-
  efficient double-win lottery tickets from robust pre-training. In Proceedings of the 39th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3747–3759, 2022a.
Tianlong Chen, Zhenyu Zhang, Pengjun Wang, Santosh Balachandra, Haoyu Ma, Zehao Wang,
  and Zhangyang Wang. Sparsity winning twice: Better robust generalization from more efficient
  training. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022b.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1597–1607, 2020.
Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, Joel Emer, and Vivienne Sze. Eyeriss v2: A flexible accelerator for
  emerging deep neural networks on mobile devices. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected
  Topics in Circuits and Systems, 9(2):292–308, 2019.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pp. 248–255, 2009.
Tim Dettmers and Luke Zettlemoyer. Sparse networks from scratch: Faster training without losing
  performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04840, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nolan Dey, Shane Bergsma, and Joel Hestness. Sparse maximal update parameterization: A holistic
  approach to sparse training dynamics. In Amir Globersons, Lester Mackey, Danielle Belgrave,
  Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024.

James Diffenderfer, Brian R. Bartoldson, Shreya Chaganti, Jize Zhang, and Bhavya Kailkhura. A
  winning hand: Compressing deep networks can improve out-of-distribution robustness. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Utku Evci, Fabian Pedregosa, Aidan Gomez, and Erich Elsen. The difficulty of training sparse
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.10732, 2019.

Utku Evci, Trevor Gale, Jacob Menick, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. Rigging the lottery:
  Making all tickets winners. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2943–2952.
  PMLR, 2020.

Utku Evci, Yani Ioannou, Cem Keskin, and Yann Dauphin. Gradient flow in sparse neural networks
  and how lottery tickets win. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  6577–6586, 2022.

M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman.     The
 PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge 2012 (VOC2012) Results. http://www.pascal-
 network.org/challenges/VOC/voc2012/workshop/index.html.

Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel M. Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear mode
  connectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 119, pp. 3259–3269, 2020.

Ian J. Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron C. Courville. Deep Learning. Adaptive computation
  and machine learning. MIT Press, 2016.

Julia Grabinski, Steffen Jung, Janis Keuper, and Margret Keuper. Frequencylowcut pooling - plug
  and play against catastrophic overfitting. In Shai Avidan, Gabriel J. Brostow, Moustapha Cissé,
  Giovanni Maria Farinella, and Tal Hassner (eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2022 - 17th European
  Conference, 2022.

Julia Grabinski, Janis Keuper, and Margret Keuper. Fix your downsampling asap! be natively more
  robust via aliasing and spectral artifact free pooling. CoRR, abs/2307.09804, 2023.

Laura Graesser, Utku Evci, Erich Elsen, and Pablo Samuel Castro. The state of sparse training in
  deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7766–7792.
  PMLR, 2022.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.

Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common cor-
  ruptions and perturbations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The many faces of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In 2021
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada,
  October 10-17, 2021.

Dan Hendrycks*, Norman Mu*, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Justin Gilmer, and Balaji Laksh-
  minarayanan. Augmix: A simple method to improve robustness and uncertainty under data shift.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, et al. The many faces of robustness: A critical
  analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8340–8349, 2021.

Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Razvan Pascanu, Jack W. Rae, Simon Osindero, and Erich Elsen. Top-kast:
  Top-k always sparse training. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-
  Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.

Oguzhan Fatih Kar, Teresa Yeo, Andrei Atanov, and Amir Zamir. 3d common corruptions and
  data augmentation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  18941–18952. IEEE, 2022.

Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. In 5th
  International Conference on Learning Representations. OpenReview.net, 2017.

Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.

Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.

Joo Hyung Lee, Wonpyo Park, Nicole Elyse Mitchell, Jonathan Pilault, Johan Samir Obando Ceron,
  Han-Byul Kim, Namhoon Lee, Elias Frantar, Yun Long, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, et al. Jaxpruner:
  A concise library for sparsity research. In Conference on Parsimony and Learning, pp. 515–528.
  PMLR, 2024.

Qiufu Li, Linlin Shen, Sheng Guo, and Zhihui Lai. Wavecnet: Wavelet integrated cnns to suppress
  aliasing effect for noise-robust image classification. IEEE Trans. Image Process., 30:7074–7089,
  2021.

Yuanzhi Li and Yingyu Liang. Learning overparameterized neural networks via stochastic gradient
  descent on structured data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Ningyi Liao, Shufan Wang, Liyao Xiang, Nanyang Ye, Shuo Shao, and Pengzhi Chu. Achieving
  adversarial robustness via sparsity. Mach. Learn., 111(2):685–711, 2022.

Lucas Liebenwein, Cenk Baykal, Brandon Carter, David Gifford, and Daniela Rus. Lost in pruning:
  The effects of pruning neural networks beyond test accuracy. CoRR, abs/2103.03014, 2021.

Shiwei Liu and Zhangyang Wang. Ten lessons we have learned in the new ”sparseland”: A short
  handbook for sparse neural network researchers. CoRR, abs/2302.02596, 2023.

Shiwei Liu, Tianlong Chen, Xiaohan Chen, Zahra Atashgahi, Lu Yin, Huanyu Kou, Li Shen, Mykola
  Pechenizkiy, Zhangyang Wang, and Decebal Constantin Mocanu. Sparse training via boosting
  pruning plasticity with neuroregeneration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:9908–9922, 2021a.

Shiwei Liu, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Amarsagar Reddy Ramapuram Matavalam, Yulong Pei,
  and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Sparse evolutionary deep learning with over one million artificial neu-
  rons on commodity hardware. Neural Computing and Applications, 33:2589–2604, 2021b.

Shiwei Liu, Lu Yin, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Do we actually need
  dense over-parameterization? in-time over-parameterization in sparse training. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6989–7000. PMLR, 2021c.

Shiwei Liu, Tianlong Chen, Xiaohan Chen, Xuxi Chen, Qiao Xiao, Boqian Wu, Tommi Kärkkäinen,
  Mykola Pechenizkiy, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, and Zhangyang Wang. More convnets in the
  2020s: Scaling up kernels beyond 51x51 using sparsity. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eric Mintun, Alexander Kirillov, and Saining Xie. On interaction between augmentations and cor-
  ruptions in natural corruption robustness. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N.
  Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3571–
  3583, 2021.
Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Elena Mocanu, Peter Stone, Phuong H Nguyen, Madeleine Gibescu,
  and Antonio Liotta. Scalable training of artificial neural networks with adaptive sparse connec-
  tivity inspired by network science. Nature communications, 9(1):2383, 2018.
Apostolos Modas, Rahul Rade, Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, and
  Pascal Frossard. Prime: A few primitives can boost robustness to common corruptions. In Shai
  Avidan, Gabriel Brostow, Moustapha Cissé, Giovanni Maria Farinella, and Tal Hassner (eds.),
  Computer Vision – ECCV 2022, 2022.
Hesham Mostafa and Xin Wang. Parameter efficient training of deep convolutional neural networks
  by dynamic sparse reparameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  4646–4655. PMLR, 2019.
Aleksandra Nowak, Bram Grooten, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, and Jacek Tabor. Fantastic weights
  and how to find them: Where to prune in dynamic sparse training. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021,
  NeurIPS 2023, 2023.
Alexandra Peste, Eugenia Iofinova, Adrian Vladu, and Dan Alistarh. AC/DC: alternating com-
  pressed/decompressed training of deep neural networks. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina
  Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 8557–8570, 2021.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019.
Alex Renda, Jonathan Frankle, and Michael Carbin. Comparing rewinding and fine-tuning in neural
  network pruning. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020,
  Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Tonmoy Saikia, Cordelia Schmid, and Thomas Brox. Improving robustness against common corrup-
  tions with frequency biased models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 10211–10220, 2021.
Madeline Chantry Schiappa, Naman Biyani, Prudvi Kamtam, Shruti Vyas, Hamid Palangi, Vibhav
 Vineet, and Yogesh S. Rawat. A large-scale robustness analysis of video action recognition mod-
 els. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14698–14708.
 IEEE, 2023.
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2015.
Ghada Sokar, Zahra Atashgahi, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Decebal Constantin Mocanu. Where
  to pay attention in sparse training for feature selection? In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Ghada Sokar, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Avoiding forgetting and al-
  lowing forward transfer in continual learning via sparse networks. In Machine Learning and
  Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, pp. 85–101. Springer, 2023.
Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. UCF101: A dataset of 101 human
  actions classes from videos in the wild. CoRR, abs/1212.0402, 2012.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nicola Strisciuglio, Manuel Lopez-Antequera, and Nicolai Petkov. Enhanced robustness of convo-
  lutional networks with a push–pull inhibition layer. Neural Computing and Applications, 32(24):
  17957–17971, 2020.

Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural
 networks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.

Yiqin Tan, Pihe Hu, Ling Pan, Jiatai Huang, and Longbo Huang. RLx2: Training a sparse deep re-
  inforcement learning model from scratch. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.

Lukas Timpl, Rahim Entezari, Hanie Sedghi, Behnam Neyshabur, and Olga Saukh. Understanding
  the effect of sparsity on neural networks robustness. CoRR, abs/2206.10915, 2022.

Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and
  Hervé Jégou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In Ma-
  rina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139, pp. 10347–10357. PMLR, 2021.

Haotao Wang, Chaowei Xiao, Jean Kossaifi, Zhiding Yu, Anima Anandkumar, and Zhangyang
  Wang. Augmax: Adversarial composition of random augmentations for robust training. In
  A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, 2021.

Shunxin Wang, Raymond Veldhuis, and Nicola Strisciuglio. The robustness of computer vision
  models against common corruptions: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06024, 2023.

Boqian Wu, Qiao Xiao, Shiwei Liu, Lu Yin, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Decebal Constantin Mocanu,
  Maurice Keulen, and Elena Mocanu. E2enet: Dynamic sparse feature fusion for accurate and
  efficient 3d medical image segmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  37:118483–118512, 2025.

Qiao Xiao, Boqian Wu, Yu Zhang, Shiwei Liu, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Elena Mocanu, and Dece-
  bal Constantin Mocanu. Dynamic sparse network for time series classification: Learning what to
  “see”. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Dong Yin, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Jonathon Shlens, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, and Justin Gilmer. A
  fourier perspective on model robustness in computer vision. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2019.

Geng Yuan, Xiaolong Ma, Wei Niu, Zhengang Li, Zhenglun Kong, Ning Liu, Yifan Gong, Zheng
  Zhan, Chaoyang He, Qing Jin, et al. Mest: Accurate and fast memory-economic sparse training
  framework on the edge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:20838–20850,
  2021.

Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Commun. ACM, 64(3):107–115, 2021.

Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cissé, Yann N. Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empiri-
  cal risk minimization. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Yingtao Zhang, Jialin Zhao, Ziheng Liao, Wenjing Wu, Umberto Michieli, and Carlo Vittorio Can-
  nistraci. Brain-inspired sparse training in mlp and transformers with network science modeling
  via cannistraci-hebb soft rule. Preprints, June 2024a. doi: 10.20944/preprints202406.1136.v1.

Yingtao Zhang, Jialin Zhao, Wenjing Wu, Alessandro Muscoloni, and Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci.
  Epitopological learning and cannistraci-hebb network shape intelligence brain-inspired theory for
  ultra-sparse advantage in deep learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024b.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiaxu Zhao, Lu Yin, Shiwei Liu, Meng Fang, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. REST: enhancing group
   robustness in dnns through reweighted sparse training. In Machine Learning and Knowledge
   Discovery in Databases: Research Track - European Conference, ECML PKDD 2023, Turin,
   Italy, September 18-22, 2023, Proceedings, Part II, 2023.
Aojun Zhou, Yukun Ma, Junnan Zhu, Jianbo Liu, Zhijie Zhang, Kun Yuan, Wenxiu Sun, and Hong-
  sheng Li. Learning n:m fine-grained structured sparse neural networks from scratch. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     DATASET I NTRODUCTION

A.1.1    C ORRUPTION DATASET
Image corruptions refer to visible distortions in images that lead to data distribution shifts from that
of the original data. They are common in practical applications when models are deployed in the real
world. Typical corruptions include Gaussian noise, impulse noise, defocus blur, etc. In Figure 8, we
display the common image corruptions on the CIFAR-10 dataset.


           Figure 8: Visualization of the common image corruptions on CIFAR10 dataset.


A.2     R ELATED BENCHMARKS

        • CIFAR-10/100-C Hendrycks & Dietterich (2019) is synthetically generated on top of the
          test set of CIFAR-10/100 dataset. It includes 19 sub-datasets, each corrupted with a type
          of image corruption (Gaussian noise, impulse noise, shot noise, speckle noise, defocus
          blur, Gaussian blur, glass blur, motion blur, zoom blur, brightness, fog, frost, snow, spatter,
          contrast, elastic transform, JPEG compression, pixelate, saturate). Each corruption dataset
          contains five subsets, which have images corrupted with five severity levels. The higher the
          severity, the more influence the corruption has on the test images.
        • Tiny-ImageNet-C Hendrycks & Dietterich (2019) consists of 15 types of common im-
          age corruptions, and is synthetically generated from Tiny-ImageNet dataset. The types of
          corruption are Gaussian noise, impulse noise, shot noise, defocus blur, glass blur, motion


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             blur, zoom blur, brightness, fog, frost, snow, contrast, pixelate, elastic transform, and JPEG
             compression, with 5 severity levels.
          • ImageNet-C Hendrycks & Dietterich (2019) consists of 15 types of common image cor-
            ruptions, and is synthetically generated from ImageNet dataset. The types of corruption are
            Gaussian noise, impulse noise, shot noise, defocus blur, glass blur, motion blur, zoom blur,
            brightness, fog, frost, snow, contrast, pixelate, elastic transform, and JPEG compression,
            with 5 severity levels.
          • ImageNet-C̄ Mintun et al. (2021) are perceptually dissimilar to ImageNet-C in our trans-
            form feature space, consists of 10 types of common image corruptions. The types of corrup-
            tion are blue noise, brownish noise, caustic refraction, checkerboard cutout, cocentric sine
            waves, inverse sparkles, perlin noise, plasma noise, single frequency greyscale, sparkles,
            with 5 severity levels.
          • ImageNet-3DCC Kar et al. (2022): addresses several aspects of the real world, such as
            camera motion, weather, occlusions, depth of field, and lighting. It consists of 11 types of
            common image corruptions: near focus, far focus, fog 3d, flash, color quant, low light, xy
            motion blur, z motion blur, iso noise, bit error, h265 abr, with 5 severity levels.
          • Corrupted UCF101 Soomro et al. (2012): a realistic action recognition dataset featuring
            videos collected from YouTube, spanning 101 different action categories. It consists of 16
            corruptions: motion blur, compression, defocus blur, gaussian noise, shot noise, impulse
            noise, zoom blur, rotate, static rotate, speckle noise, sampling, reverse sampling, jumble,
            box jumble, freeze, translate, with 4 severity levels.

A.3      E XPERIMENT S ETUP

A.3.1        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

For CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and TinyImageNet, the codes were implemented in Python using PyTorch
and executed on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. Each was run three times using three fixed random
seeds. The ImageNet experiments were run using distributed computing on four NVIDIA A100
GPUs. A batch size of 64 was utilized for each task, resulting in a combined total batch size of
256. For the UCF101 dataset, we followed the settings described in Schiappa et al. (2023), utilizing
the codebase 5 . For the FashionMNIST dataset, we followed the training settings detailed in Zhang
et al. (2024b;a), using the codebase 6 .


Table 3: The experimental hyperparameters settings. The hyperparameters include Learning Rate
(LR), Batch Size (BS), LR Schedule (LRS), Optimizer (Opt), Weight Decay (WD), Sparsity Dis-
tribution (Sparsity Dist), Topology Update Interval (∆T ), Pruning Rate Decay Schedule (Sched),
Initial Pruning Rate (P).
        Model                  Data            # Epoch        LR       BS         LRS            Opt        WD      Sparsity Dist 2    ∆T         Sched 3       P
       VGG16               CIFAR10              160        0.1      100      Cosine         SGD 4 5e-4               Uniform            500 polynomial 0.1
     ResNet34              CIFAR100             160        0.1      100      Cosine          SGD           5e-4      Uniform            500 polynomial 0.1
  EfficientNet-B0        TinyImageNet           100        0.1      128      Cosine          SGD           5e-4      Uniform            100 polynomial 0.1
                                                                                    1
     ResNet50              ImageNet              90        0.1      256       Step           SGD           1e-4        ERK             2000 polynomial 0.1
     DeiT-base             ImageNet             200      0.0005 512          Cosine        AdamW 5e-2                Uniform           7000 polynomial 0.5
 3D ResNet50/I3D            UCF101               80        0.1        8      Cosine          SGD           1e-3        ERK              300 polynomial 0.1
        MLP            Fashion-MNIST            100       0.025       8      Cosine          SGD           5e-4        ERK              300 polynomial 0.1
   FCN-VGG16           Pascal VOC 2012           80      0.0001       4    polynomial        SGD           1e-4        ERK              500       cosine       0.5
 1
   Step denotes a schedule that the learning rate decayed by 10 at every 30 epochs until 90 epochs.
 2
   For the uniform distribution, the sparsity ratio of each layer is the same (i.e. Si = 1 − ∥θi′ ∥0 /∥θi ∥0 ), where θi is the parameters in i-th layer. ERK
   distribution allocates higher sparsities to layers with more parameters, while assigning lower sparsities to smaller layers. In ERK, the number of
   parameters of the sparse convolutional layers is scaled proportionally to 1 − nni−1i−1 +ni +wi +hi
                                                                                          ×ni ×wi ×hi , where ni−1 and ni are the number of input channels
   and output channels in i-th layer, wi and hi are the width and the height of the kernel.
                                                                                                           0.01
 3                                                                                             step
   The remove and regrow ratio is decayed according to a polynomial strategy: p× 1 − stepcurrent                , where stepcurrent is the current step and steptotal
                                                                                                    total
   is the total number of training steps.
 4
   SGD optimizer with momentum 0.9.



   5
       https://github.com/Maddy12/ActionRecognitionRobustnessEval
   6
       https://github.com/biomedical-cybernetics/Cannistraci-Hebb-training


                                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3.2        T HE C OMPUTATIONAL AND M EMORY C ONSUMPTION
In this section, we present the computational cost in terms of Floating-Point Operations (FLOPs)
for training and inference, as well as the memory cost in terms of the number of parameters, for
different models across different sparsity ratios.
CIFAR-10: For the CIFAR10 dataset, we train VGG16 for 160 epochs. The soft memory bound
for MEST is set to 10% of the target density. For example, if the sparse network’s density is 0.3,
then the soft memory bound is 0.03, resulting in an initial model density of 0.33. This soft memory
bound is decayed to 0 using a polynomial strategy. The initial density of GraNet is set at 0.8. Every
500 training steps, it prunes weights to achieve a density described by the formula: di − (di −
                 3
dt ) 1 − t−t
           n∆t
              0
                   , where di is the initial density, dt is the target density, and n∆t is set to half of the
total training time.


Table 4: Training FLOPs (TrFLOPs, ×1016 ), Inference FLOPs (InFLOPs, ×109 ), and the number
of model parameters (Param, ×106 ) for VGG16 on CIFAR10 at various sparsity ratios (S) using
different DST algorithms.
                                   TrFLOPs (×1016 )                                   InFLOPs (×108 )                                                     Param (×106 )
        S            0.7     0.6      0.5     0.4     0.3     0.0     0.7      0.6       0.5     0.4      0.3          0.0         0.7        0.6          0.5         0.4      0.3      0.0
      Dense            -      -        -       -       -     1.51      -         -        -        -        -         6.30          -           -           -           -        -      15.25
    SET / RigL       0.46   0.61     0.76    0.91    1.06      -     1.92      2.55     3.17     3.80     4.42          -         4.95        6.43        7.89        9.37     10.81      -
 MESTr / MESTg       0.51   0.67     0.84    1.00    1.17      -     1.92      2.55     3.17     3.80     4.42          -         4.95        6.43        7.89        9.37     10.81      -
 GraNetr / GraNetg   0.68   0.73     0.85    0.97    1.09      -     1.92      2.55     3.17     3.80     4.42          -         4.95        6.43        7.89        9.37     10.81      -



CIFAR-100: For the CIFAR100 dataset, we train ResNet34 for 160 epochs. The soft memory
bound for MEST is set to 10% of the target density. For example, if the sparse network’s density
is 0.3, then the soft memory bound is 0.03, resulting in an initial model density of 0.33. This soft
memory bound is decayed to 0 using a polynomial strategy. The initial density of GraNet is set
at 0.8. Every 500 training steps, it prunes weights to achieve a density described by the formula:
                             3
di − (di − dt ) 1 − t−t   0
                        n∆t    , where di is the initial density, dt is the target density, and n∆t is set to
half of the total training time.


Table 5: Training FLOPs (TrFLOPs, ×1016 ), Inference FLOPs (InFLOPs, ×109 ), and the number
of model parameters (Param, ×106 ) for ResNet34 on CIFAR100 at various sparsity ratios (S) using
different DST algorithms.
                                  TrFLOPs (×1016 )                                   InFLOPs (×109 )                                                      Param (×106 )
        S            0.7    0.6      0.5     0.4     0.3     0.0     0.7      0.6      0.5      0.4      0.3         0.0         0.7         0.6          0.5          0.4      0.3      0.0
      dense            -      -        -       -       -     5.57      -        -        -        -        -         2.32          -       -            -               -        -      21.33
    SET / RigL       1.68   2.24     2.79    3.35    3.90      -     0.67     0.93     1.18     1.40     1.62          -         6.45    8.57         10.70           12.82    14.95      -
 MESTr / MESTg       1.85   2.46     3.07    3.68    4.29      -     0.67     0.93     1.18     1.40     1.62          -         6.45    8.57         10.70           12.82    14.95      -
 GraNetr / GraNetg   2.51   2.68     3.13    3.63    4.02      -     0.67     0.93     1.18     1.40     1.62          -         6.45    8.57         10.70           12.82    14.95      -



TinyImageNet: For the TinyImageNet dataset, we train EfficientNet-B0 for 100 epochs. The soft
memory bound for MEST is set to 10% of the target density. For example, if the sparse network’s
density is 0.3, then the soft memory bound is 0.03, resulting in an initial model density of 0.33. This
soft memory bound is decayed to 0 using a polynomial strategy. The initial density of GraNet is set
at 0.8. Every 500 training steps, it prunes weights to achieve a density described by the formula:
                             3
di − (di − dt ) 1 − t−t   0
                        n∆t    , where di is the initial density, dt is the target density, and n∆t is set to
half of the total training time.


Table 6: Training FLOPs (TrFLOPs, ×1015 ), Inference FLOPs (InFLOPs, ×109 ), and the number
of model parameters (Param, ×106 ) for EfficientNet-B0 on TinyImageNet at various sparsity ratios
(S) using different DST algorithms.
                                   TrFLOPs (×1015 )                                    InFLOPs (×109 )                                                     Param (×106 )
         S            0.7    0.6      0.5     0.4      0.3     0.0     0.7      0.6       0.5      0.4         0.3         0.0         0.7         0.6          0.5      0.4     0.3     0.0
      Dense            -      -         -       -       -     1.98       -        -        -        -        -          6.63          -              -        -           -        -     4.26
    SET/ RigL        0.66   0.85      1.04    1.23    1.42      -      2.21     2.85     3.48     4.12     4.75           -         1.89           2.29     2.68        2.68     3.08      -
 MESTr / MESTg       0.72   0.92      1.13    1.34    1.55      -      2.21     2.85     3.48     4.12     4.75           -         1.89           2.29     2.68        2.68     3.08      -
 GraNetr / GraNetg   0.89   1.02      1.15    1.32    1.46      -      2.21     2.85     3.48     4.12     4.75           -         1.89           2.29     2.68        2.68     3.08      -


                                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ImageNet: For the ImageNet dataset, we train ResNet50 for 90 epochs. The soft memory bound
for MEST is set to 0.2, and the sparse network’s density is 0.9, then the soft memory bound is
0.92, resulting in an initial model density of 0.92. This soft memory bound is decayed to 0 using a
polynomial strategy. The initial density of GraNet is set at 0.95. Every 2000 training steps, it prunes
                                                                                          3
weights to achieve a density described by the formula: di − (di − dt ) 1 − t−t         0
                                                                                     n∆t    , where di is the
initial density, dt is the target density, and n∆t is set to half of the total training time.


Table 7: Training FLOPs (TrFLOPs, ×1018 ), Inference FLOPs (InFLOPs, ×109 ), and the number
of model parameters (Param, ×106 ) for ResNet50 on ImageNet at sparsity ratios (S = 0.1) using
different DST algorithms.
                                TrFLOPs (×1018 )   InFLOPs (×109 )   Param (×106 )   Init density → Final density
                       Dense          2.28              8.21            25.56                    1.0
                       RigL           2.17              7.80            23.00                0.9 → 0.9
                      MESTg           2.18              7.80            23.00                0.92 → 0.9
                      GraNetg         2.20              7.80            23.00                0.95 → 0.9


The Resource Consumption and Robustness. Even if it is outside of the scope of this paper, in
the traditional DST style, we provide an overview of the relationship between resource efficiency
and the model’s robustness against common corruption. Figure 9 showcases the computational
cost (i.e. training FLOPs and model sizes) and robustness of dense and dynamic sparse models on
TinyImageNet-C (results for other datasets can be found in the above.
We can find that the dense model, with the highest resource
usage (e.g., FLOPs and parameter count), does not necessar-
ily lead to better robustness. In the end, we also investigate
other training paradigms: iterative dense and sparse training,
represented by AC/DC Peste et al. (2021) algorithm. AC/DC
begins with a dense warm-up, then starts alternating dense and
sparse training, returning accurate sparse-dense model pairs
at the end of the training process. We find that AC/DC also
exhibits decent robustness, as in Figure 9. However, in most
cases, AC/DC tends to require more training FLOPs compared
with DST methods.
                                                                 Figure 9: The comparison of train-
It is worth noting that the computational costs in this work are ing FLOPs, parameter count (rep-
theoretical and not fully realized gains on current hardware in- resented by the area of each cir-
frastructures. This is a common limitation in the literature on cle), and robustness accuracy of
sparse training methods, as most current hardware and soft- the dense and sparse EfficientNet-
ware systems are optimized for dense matrix operations rather B0 on TinyImageNet. Each point
than sparse ones. However, recent advancements in model represents the result for a specific
sparsity are increasingly aligning with hardware and software sparsity ratio.
developments to fully leverage the benefits of sparsity. For ex-
ample, NVIDIA’s A100 GPU supports 2:4 sparsity Zhou et al. (2021), and other innovations are
making strides toward efficient sparse implementations Chen et al. (2019); Ashby et al. (2019). Si-
multaneously, software libraries such as Liu et al. (2021b); Mocanu et al. (2018) are emerging to
enable truly sparse network implementations. These advancements are paving the way for future
deep neural networks to achieve greater efficiency in terms of computation, memory, and energy
use.


A.4    T HE ROBUSTNESS ACCURACY FOR DIFFERENT CORRUPTION TYPES AND SERVERITIES

Figure 10, 11, 12, 13 14 and 15 showcase the relative gains7 in robustness at each of these severity
levels. We observe that dynamic sparse models exhibit a more pronounced advantage in robustness
over dense models, particularly under high severity levels of high-frequency corruption.

   7
     Defined as (Accs,l − Accdense )/Accd,l , where Accs,l and Accd,l represent the accuracies of dynamic
sparse and dense models, respectively, under severity level l.


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Compared with the dense model, the relative robustness gain of different dynamic sparse
models with sparsity 0.5 trained by (a) SET, (b) MESTr , (c) GraNetr under different severities of
CIFAR10-C.


Figure 11: Compared with the dense model, the relative robustness gain of different dynamic sparse
models with sparsity 0.5 trained by (a) RigL, (b) MESTg , (c) GraNetg under different severities of
CIFAR10-C.


Figure 12: Compared with the dense model, the relative robustness gain of different dynamic sparse
models with sparsity 0.5 trained by (a) SET, (b) MESTr , (c) GraNetr under different severities of
CIFAR100-C.


Figure 13: Compared with the dense model, the relative robustness gain of different dynamic sparse
models with sparsity 0.5 trained by (a) RigL, (b) MESTg , (c) GraNetg under different severities of
CIFAR100-C.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Compared with the dense model, the relative robustness gain of different dynamic sparse
models with sparsity 0.5 trained by (a) SET, (b) MESTr , (c) GraNetr under different severities of
TinyImageNet-C.


Figure 15: Compared with the dense model, the relative robustness gain of different dynamic sparse
models with sparsity 0.5 trained by (a) RigL, (b) MESTg , (c) GraNetg under different severities of
TinyImageNet-C.

A.5   A NALYSIS T HROUGH THE L ENS OF F ILTER

Figure 16 and 17 showcases the non-zero weight counts and the sum of weight magnitudes (i.e.,
absolute values) for each kernel in a specific layer of dynamic sparse VGG16 and ResNet34 trained
on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, respectively.
Additionally, we investigated the accuracy of test data subject to high-frequency or low-frequency
information attenuation during dense or dynamic sparse training. In Figure 18, the results indi-
cate that at the beginning of training, the superiority of dynamic sparse models in handling high-
frequency information removal starts to appear, becoming more evident as training progresses.
Considering the phenomenon of sparse weight concentration on the filter after training, it becomes
evident that dynamic sparse training dynamically allocates computational resources to prioritize rel-
evant low-frequency features during the learning process.

A.6   DSCR H YPOTHESIS IN R ECENT DST A LGORITHMS

In this paper, we primarily
investigate the robustness      Table 8: Robustness accuracy (%) of MLP on Fashion MNIST-C.
of fundamental DST mod-           Dense                         Dynamic Sparse Training
                                 Training   Sparsity     SET          RigL       CHTs+CSTI CHTs+BSW
els initialized from random                   97%    23.44 ± 1.79 25.23 ± 1.39 24.50 ± 1.03 26.64 ± 1.06
                               19.82 ± 0.32
sparse networks with the                      95%    25.55 ± 0.32 25.03 ± 1.11 27.38 ± 0.25 27.13 ± 0.33
basic removal and regrowth
criteria, to validate our DSCR hypothesis in commonly used settings. With the emergence of other
recent and promising DST methods, we also include an initial exploration to further validate our
hypothesis on these methods, such as Cannistraci-Hebb soft training (CHTs) Zhang et al. (2024b;a),
which employ more complex growth criteria and topology initialization. We compare dense training
with CHTs using Correlated Sparse Topological Initialization (CHTs+CSTI) and bipartite small-
world networks (CHTs+BSW) on robustness accuracy, using the Fashion-MNIST corrupted dataset
with an MLP model, as shown in Table 8. More training details are provided in Appendix A.3.1.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Visualizing non-zero weight count (1st row) and the sum of weight magnitudes (2nd row)
in filters of VGG16 (#layer feature.20, #layer feature.30 and #layer feature.40 with kernel size 3×3)
after training on CIFAR10 using different DST algorithms: (b) SET, (c) RigL, (d) MESTr and (e)
GraNetr , compared with (a) dense counterpart. Each point represents the corresponding value of a
filter.

The results indicate that the recent DST method (i.e., CHTs) achieves even more inspiring robustness
performance, further validating our DSCR hypothesis on the robustness of DST.


A.7   H OW DATA AUGMENTATION INTERACTS WITH DST?

We extend our analysis to explore how data augmentation (e.g.,
Mixup Zhang et al. (2018)) interacts with dynamic sparse train- Table 9: Robustness accuracy
ing in comparison to dense training. From Table 9, we observe: (%) on CIFAR100 with and
In general, data augmentation helps improve model generalization without Mixup.
by providing increased input variability. For DST, combining data  w/ mixup Dense training SET
augmentation with dynamic sparse training can lead to even greater    ×        51.68       52.60
                                                                      ✓        54.75       54.93
robustness compared to dense training, suggesting that dynamic
sparse training (e.g., SET) interacts with data augumentation in a
complementary way.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: Visualizing non-zero weight count (1st row) and the sum of weight magnitudes (2nd row)
in filters of ResNet34 (#layer2.0.conv2, #layer2.1.conv1 and #layerlayer3.3.conv2 with kernel size
3 × 3) after training on CIFAR100 using different DST algorithms: (b) SET, (c) RigL, (d) MESTr
and (e) GraNetr , compared with (a) dense counterpart. Each point represents the corresponding
value of a filter.

A.8   T HE PERFORMANCE OF DST ON OUT- OF - DOMAIN (OOD) TEST DATA

ImageNet-R Hendrycks et al. with 30,000 images of art, cartoons, and other 14 renditions from 200
ImageNet classes, presents a notable domain shift from the original dataset. We report the average
test accuracy on ImageNet-R for dense and DST models trained on the original ImageNet.
ImageNet-v2 Recht et al. is a valuable dataset for         Table 10: Average classification accu-
evaluating the generalization of models trained on orig-   racy (%) on ImageNet-R dataset. The
inal ImageNet dataset. ImageNet-v2 contains three          bold highlights result that are better than
test subsets: Top-images, Threshold-0.7, and Matched-      the dense model.
frequency. Each subset comprises ten images per class,       Dense RigL MESTg GraNetg
selected from a pool of candidates according to various      37.84 40.04        38.33       38.46
selection frequencies.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: The impact of high-frequency (top) and low-frequency attenuation (bottom) on TinyIm-
ageNet during training. Test accuracy for (a) dense model, (b) dynamic sparse model from SET. (c)
The accuracy difference between sparse and dense models, where a positive value indicates that the
sparse models perform better.
As shown in Table 10 and 11, the results from Table 11: Average robustness accuracy (%) on
ImageNet-R and ImageNet-v2 correspond to ImageNet-v2 dataset. The bold highlights result
the evaluation on domain adaptation and gen- that are better than the dense model.
eralization, respectively. The results show that                        Dense RigL MESTg GraNetg
DST models reliably surpass dense models on              Top-images     77.80 77.88 78.33 78.21
ImageNet-R and exhibit superior performance             Threshold-0.7   72.95 72.81 73.23 73.58
in the majority of scenarios on ImageNet-v2.          Matched-frequency 64.62 64.23 64.14 64.60
                                                        Avg. accuracy   71.79 71.64 71.90 72.13
This suggests that models trained with DST
not only handle common data corruptions ef-
fectively but also excel in the face of significant domain shifts.

A.9      T HE PERFORMANCE OF DST ON THE SEGMENTATION TASK

We compared the performance of a dense trained fully convolutional network (FCN) with a VGG16
backbone on the Pascal VOC 2012 Everingham et al. clean dataset, then test on corrupted Pascal
VOC 2012 (generated following the ImageCorruption library 8 , which includes 19 types of corrup-
tion at 5 severity levels). The results are presented in Table 12.
Unlike classification tasks on CIFAR or ImageNet, Table 12: Clean metric (%) on Pascal VOC
where the sparse topology is randomly initialized, 2012 and Robustness metric (%) on cor-
we first prune the backbone to obtain the sparse rupted Pascal VOC 2012.
model, then perform sparse fine-tuning on the train-             Metric        Dense training SET (s=0.2) SET (s=0.1)
ing set of the Pascal VOC 2012 clean dataset, and fi-       clean pixAcc (↑)      85.65         85.63       85.66
                                                             clean mIoU (↑)       46.34         46.69       47.10
nally test it on both the clean and corrupted versions   robustness pixAcc (↑)    76.80         77.30       77.39
                                                          robustness mIoU (↑)     22.60         22.73       23.09
of the Pascal VOC 2012 test set, as the VGG16 back-
bone for the segmentor is typically pretrained on ImageNet. The results show that DST models are
not only robust in image and video classification but also in image segmentation tasks.

A.10       G RAD -CAM

Grad-CAM (Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping) Selvaraju et al. (2017) generates a
heatmap highlighting important regions by weighting the feature maps based on the gradient val-
ues. It provides practitioners with a visual indication of the areas on which the network focuses
when making predictions. We visualize and compare the Grad-CAM outputs of both dense models
and dynamic sparse models, as shown in Figure 19. We present different cases, including clean
background ((a) and (b)), and complex background (c). Interestingly, we observe that the highlight-
ing region of dynamic sparse models is smaller than that of the dense model. In Figure 19 (a), the
dynamic sparse models focus on the face of the cat for prediction, while the dense models pay atten-
tion to both the face and body of the cat. In Figure 19 (b), the dynamic sparse models specifically
   8
       https://github.com/bethgelab/imagecorruptions


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


emphasize the wings of the eagle. In contrast, the dense models primarily concentrate on a single
wing while also capturing irrelevant contexts, leading to larger attention regions. In the case of a
more complex background (In Figure 19 (c)), the dynamic sparse models tend to allocate some at-
tention to the surrounding elements. However, the attention regions are still relatively smaller and
primarily focused on the face of the bear, especially in the sparse model sparsified by SET.
These visualizations provide further support for our hypothesis that dynamic sparse models effec-
tively allocate limited resources to the most crucial features. As a result, dynamic sparse models can
be robust against image common corruptions, making them a promising approach for addressing
real-world challenges.

B    I MPACT S TATEMENT
In an era dominated by over-parameterized models and the pervasive presence of image corruption,
the design of resource-aware and robust AI models is of increasing importance. Gaining insight
into the robust behavior of dynamic sparse models against image corruption paves the way for em-
bracing these environmentally friendly models in challenging environments. This holds significant
implications across various domains, including medical diagnosis, robotics, autonomous vehicles,
and other AI applications. Furthermore, our insights into the inner workings of sparse models help
us understand the reasoning behind their robust decisions. Overall, we advance our fundamental
understanding of dynamic sparse training and provide future perspectives for scalable, efficient, and
trustworthy AI. We do not anticipate any negative societal impacts resulting from this research.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 19: Grad-CAM for TinyImageNet-C. The images are corrupted by different corruptions with
clean background (a) and (b), and complex background (c).


                                               27
