Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH COMBINATORIAL
ACTIONS FOR COUPLED RESTLESS BANDITS

 Lily Xu,1,2∗ Bryan Wilder,3 Elias B. Khalil,4 Milind Tambe1
 1
  Harvard University, 2 University of Oxford, 3 Carnegie Mellon University, 4 University of Toronto



                                               A BSTRACT
             Reinforcement learning (RL) has increasingly been applied to solve real-world
             planning problems, with progress in handling large state spaces and time hori-
             zons. However, a key bottleneck in many domains is that RL methods cannot ac-
             commodate large, combinatorially structured action spaces. In such settings, even
             representing the set of feasible actions at a single step may require a complex
             discrete optimization formulation. We leverage recent advances in embedding
             trained neural networks into optimization problems to propose SEQUOIA, an
             RL algorithm that directly optimizes for long-term reward over the feasible action
             space. Our approach embeds a Q-network into a mixed-integer program to select
             a combinatorial action in each timestep. Here, we focus on planning over restless
             bandits, a class of planning problems which capture many real-world examples of
             sequential decision making. We introduce CO RMAB, a broader class of restless
             bandits with combinatorial actions that cannot be decoupled across the arms of the
             restless bandit, requiring direct solving over the joint, exponentially large action
             space. We empirically validate SEQUOIA on four novel restless bandit problems
             with combinatorial constraints: multiple interventions, path constraints, bipartite
             matching, and capacity constraints. Our approach significantly outperforms exist-
             ing methods—which cannot address sequential planning and combinatorial selec-
             tion simultaneously—by an average of 24.8% on these difficult instances.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has made tremendous progress in recent years to solve a wide range
of practical problems (Treloar et al., 2020; Marot et al., 2021; Silvestro et al., 2022; Degrave et al.,
2022). While successful at dealing with large or infinite state spaces, RL struggles with discrete,
combinatorial action spaces. This limitation is pertinent to many real-world sequential decision-
making problems, where resource constraints frequently lead to combinatorial action spaces (Dulac-
Arnold et al., 2020). Consider, for example, a sequential resource allocation problem in which public
health workers are dispatched to visit patients. The workers each have a limited daily budget to
maximize patient well-being. These requirements give rise to an exponentially large combinatorial
action space to optimize over, even when the number of workers and patients is small.
A suitable framework for modeling such problems is that of restless multi-armed bandits (Niño-
Mora, 2023), which have been applied to settings from clinical trial design (Villar et al., 2015)
to behavioral interventions (Mate et al., 2022). An “arm” of the restless bandit corresponds to a
patient in the aforementioned public health example. At every timestep, each arm is in one of
a finite number of states (e.g., representing the health of that individual), and we aim to select
actions so that arms move into the more beneficial states. Typically, restless bandit solutions have
been confined to relatively simple and thus tractable problem structures. For example, the common
Whittle index policy (Whittle, 1988) requires that each arm be independent, each action impacts
only a single arm, and arms transition independently (Figure 1A). Under these assumptions, the
problem admits a threshold-based top-K policy which decouples the combinatorial action selection
by learning policies for each arm independently.
Real-world applications, on the other hand, often involve complicated problem structures beyond the
simple budget constraint, for which action decomposition would substantially degrade performance.
     ∗
         Contact: lily.x@columbia.edu. Code available at: https://github.com/lily-x/combinatorial-rmab


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Enables decoupling                                                              Cannot decouple

    Restless bandit     A. Multiple interventions      B. Bipartite matching                       C. Capacity constrained                             D. Path planning
    a0   a1   a2   a3           a0        a1    a2      a0 10am a1 10am a2 11am                          a0              a1              a2                  s0     s1
                                                              2pm         11am         4pm
                                                                                                       b0 = 4         b1 = 7            b2 = 2
                                                                                                                                                     start


                                                     s0 10am s1 11am s2 10am s3 11am                s0           s1             s2            s3             s3     s2
    s0   s1   s2   s3      s0        s1    s2   s3      2pm         5pm          2pm         4pm   c0 = 3       c1 = 2         c2 = 5       c3 = 3


Figure 1: Restless bandits are a variant of planning over Markov decision processes, where each
“arm” transitions depending on whether it is acted upon. Standard restless bandits can be solved
with threshold-based policies, but these approaches are unable to address challenging settings with
combinatorial constraints on the actions that cannot be decoupled, prohibiting the application of easy
heuristic solutions. Our paper considers this class of strongly coupled restless bandits (CO RMAB).
We describe these new problem formulations (A–D) for restless bandits in detail in Section 3.


Figure 1A–D illustrate four such scenarios. For example, consider the problem of planning a route
for a health worker to visit patients within a travel constraint (see Figure 1D): each action (path) im-
pacts multiple patients and cannot be decomposed further (e.g., into separate edges) while ensuring
the overall path is feasible. Another example is where actions represent heterogeneous interventions
that may impact not just a single arm but several simultaneously. Individuals may be acted on by
multiple actions simultaneously (e.g., exposure to different messaging campaigns or nurse visits),
with a potentially nonlinear cumulative effect (Figure 1B).
In these more complex settings, we can no longer decompose the actions and must reason about
the entire combinatorial structure at once. Coupled with combinatorial constraints, the discrete
action space becomes notoriously difficult to optimize the reward function over. Thus, existing
algorithms cannot accommodate this class of problems. To that end, we consider the restless bandit
problem with combinatorial actions (which we call CO RMAB) in four problem settings (Figure 1A–
D, described in Section 3) that highlight its broad applicability.
The existing literature at the intersection of RL and combinatorial optimization has not consid-
ered sequential problems where the action space in each step is combinatorial. Rather, existing
approaches solve single-stage combinatorial optimization problems with RL by decomposing them
into iterative choices from a small action set, such as iteratively choosing the next node in a traveling
salesperson or vehicle routing problem (Dai et al., 2017; Barrett et al., 2020; Delarue et al., 2020).
Here, we consider for the first time sequential combinatorial settings where the reward comes not
from a single-shot action but is incurred after enacting a policy over many timesteps. We leverage
recent advances in integrating deep learning with mathematical programming, in which a neural
network with ReLU activations can be directly embedded into a mixed-integer program (Fischetti
& Jo, 2018; Serra et al., 2018). By integrating this technique with an RL training procedure, we
show how to learn the long-term reward using a deep Q-network to approximate the value function,
while tractably optimizing this Q-network over the discrete combinatorial space at each step with a
mixed-integer program. We call our algorithm SEQUOIA, for SEQUential cOmbInatorial Actions.
Our paper contributes: (1) four new problem formulations for restless bandits with combinatorial ac-
tion constraints, (2) a general-purpose solution approach that combines deep Q-learning with math-
ematical programming, and (3) empirical evaluations demonstrating the strength of this approach.
Our work opens up a broad class of problem settings for restless bandits with more complex action
constraints. Beyond restless bandits, our work enables general RL planning over Markov decision
processes with per-timestep combinatorial action spaces.


2        P ROBLEM DESCRIPTION

We consider offline, stochastic planning for restless bandits with combinatorial action constraints,
where the transition dynamics and reward are known a priori, but the state and action space are too
large to be solved directly. Specifically, we consider the setting where the arms are strongly coupled
so we cannot decouple the arms of the bandit into independently controlled Markov chains using a
Lagrangian relaxation. We begin by describing the standard restless bandit, then present our general
formulation for constrained combinatorial-action RMABs, which we refer to as CO RMAB.


                                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.1   S TANDARD RESTLESS BANDITS

The standard restless bandit problem is modeled by a set of J Markov decision processes (MDPs).
Each MDP (S, A, P, R) represents one arm of the restless bandit. The state sj ∈ S of an arm j
transitions to next state s′j depending on the selected action aj ∈ A, with known probability
Pj (sj , aj , s′j ) : S × A × S → [0, 1]. We use the vector s ∈ S × to denote the joint state of all
J arms, and similarly a ∈ A× for the joint action. Traditional restless bandits assume that each
action acts on a single arm only, enabling an optimal policy that decouples the solution into inde-
pendent, per-arm subproblems.
Each state sj ∈ S has an associated reward rj (sj ) and the total reward at each timestep t is the sum
                                        PJ
of the rewards of the arms: R(t) (s) = j=1 rj (sj ). The traditional restless bandit problem requires
                                                                                        PJ
selecting a binary action aj ∈ {0, 1} for each arm, subject to a total budget constraint j=1 aj ≤ B.

2.2   R ESTLESS BANDITS WITH STRONGLY COUPLED ACTIONS ( CO RMAB)

We now introduce CO RMABs, a broader class of problems for restless bandits where actions may
be strongly coupled due to combinatorial constraints. We consider a set of N actions ai that each
impact the transition probability of some subset of the arms. At each timestep, we must pick a
combinatorial action over the arms i.e., the action vector a must be in C ⊆ A× , a set defined by
constraints. (We provide example instantiations of C in Section 3.) Now, the transition probabilities
may be coupled, with individual actions impacting multiple arms. We denote the joint transition
probability as P × : S J × AN × S J → [0, 1]J .
From a given state s, by Bellman’s optimality principle we seek the combinatorial action a that
maximizes the expected long-term reward, with discount factor γ ∈ (0, 1]:
           max Q(s, a)                                                                               (1)
           a∈C
                                        X
             s.t. Q(s, a) = R(s) + γ           P × (s, a, s′ )V (s′ )       ∀s ∈ S × , a ∈ C
                                       s′ ∈S
                 V (s) = max Q(s, a)                                        ∀s ∈ S ×
                          a∈C


This value function is difficult to implement as the max over actions a is taken over a combinatorial
number of possible actions, and there are a combinatorial number of constraints (for each possible
state s). Enumerative methods are therefore intractable. We address CO RMAB problems of this
form using a combination of RL to learn the Q-function and mixed-integer programming to find an
optimal constraint-feasible action a.

3     E NABLING NEW PROBLEM FORMULATIONS FOR RESTLESS BANDITS
We introduce four instantiations of CO RMAB problems which cannot be modeled or solved by
standard restless bandit approaches. These formulations consider compounding effects from mul-
tiple interventions, path planning, bipartite matching, and capacity constraints—each of which is
a widely applicable challenge for resource allocation problems. To the best of our knowledge, the
following problem formulations are all novel for restless bandits.
In each case, action selection requires various forms of constrained optimization. Note that planning
in each instance still requires specifying the Q-function, which serves as the objective in each setting;
in Section 4, we will address how to resolve estimating the Q-function. Additional details, including
MILP formulations for each problem setting, are provided in Appendix C.

Multiple interventions for public health In public health programs, different informational cam-
paigns may impact different groups of individuals. Interventions could include, for example, radio,
ads at bus stations, church events, or fliers. We model this problem as a restless bandit where one
action can impact a fixed subset of arms. We propose the first combinatorial setting in which (a) one
action impacts multiple arms, and (b) multiple actions may be applied simultaneously to each arm
with compounding effects. One example of this setting is visualized in Figure 1A.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, each action ai ∈ {0, 1} corresponds to one of N possible messaging interventions, each arm j
corresponds to a patient, and the state sj of a patient represents their engagement level in a health
program. In this model, we consider sj ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} where each is associated with a higher level
of engagement. More details in Appendix B.2. The transition probability for patient j in state sj
                                         −
transitioning to a higher s+ j or lower sj state is:

             Pj (sj , a, s+               ⊤
                                                     Pj (sj , a, s−                      +

                          j ) = ϕ ωj (sj ) a ,                    j ) = 1 − Pj (sj , a, sj ) ,    (2)
where ωj (sj ) ∈ RN is an individual and state-specific coefficient vector describing their response
to different interventions, a is the action vector, and ϕ : R → [0, 1] is a known link function. Each
action has a cost ci and we are limited by a total budget B, giving rise to the optimization problem:
                                         X
                    max Q(s, a) s.t.         cj aj ≤ B ; aj ∈ {0, 1} ∀j ∈ [J] .
                     a
                                       j∈[J]

Note that this combinatorial problem formulation generalizes the standard restless bandit: we can
recover the original restless bandit setting by considering N = J actions, where the jth action is
connected to the jth arm and the edge weight ωj equals the transition probability Pj (sj , aj = 1, s′j ).
In our experiments, we consider a sigmoid link function, which has been widely used in the public
health literature (Levy et al., 2006). We show that using a piecewise linear approximation of this
link function, which can be easily encoded into the MILP solver, solves the problem effectively.

Schedule-constrained CO RMAB (Bipartite matching) Here, actions (e.g., volunteer health
workers) and arms (e.g., patients) both have limited time windows for scheduling, with K avail-
able timeslots. We must assign workers to patients to form a valid schedule, where workers and
patients are matched such that they have mutually agreed upon times. Each worker can only be
assigned once. This problem resembles bipartite matching (Figure 1B).

Capacity-constrained CO RMAB Suppose we have N workers each with a budget constraint bi ,
and the J arms each have some cost cj for contacting them (Figure 1C). This problem is an instance
of the NP-hard generalized assignment problem (Özbakir et al., 2010). The goal is to assign workers
to patients while respecting each worker’s capacity constraint.

Path-constrained CO RMAB Now suppose that each arm of the restless bandit lies in a network,
represented as a graph (V, E) (see Figure 1D). For example, nodes may correspond to patients’
residential locations if we are scheduling at-home patient interventions (Kergosien et al., 2009). We
have one arm at each node j ∈ V, with edges (j, k) ∈ E connecting the nodes. We include self-
loops, so (j, j) ∈ E for all j ∈ V. The action is to pick a path along the edges in E with a constraint
on its total length T ; we act on each arm whose node we visit along the path.

4     S OLVING RMAB S WITH COMBINATORIAL ACTIONS
We present a novel algorithm, SEQUOIA, which builds on deep Q-learning (DQN) by integrating
a mixed-integer linear program (MILP) for combinatorial action selection. We start by introducing
the basic DQN+MILP framework in Section 4.1. In Section 4.2, we provide a set of strategies to
find a good initialization for the Q-network and improve computational efficiency. We visualize our
approach in Figure 2, and Algorithm 1 provides pseudocode for the Q-network training procedure.
While we focus on the restless bandit problem setting, SEQUOIA generalizes to other sequential
planning problems with per-timestep combinatorial actions, provided that the restrictions on the
actions can be represented as constraints in a mixed-integer program.

4.1   Q- LEARNING WITH COMBINATORIAL ACTIONS

Deep Q-learning aims to estimate the long-run value of action a from state s, denoted Q(s, a), by
parameterizing the Q-function with a neural network. The DQN algorithm (Mnih, 2013) samples
(action, next state, reward) sequences via a mix of random actions and on-policy samples (i.e.,
actions that maximize the current estimate of Q). The samples are used to improve the Q-function
via temporal difference (TD) updates which aim to minimize the residual in the Bellman equation.


                                                   4
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Standard                                        Q(s, a(0))            2. SEQUOIA evaluation Solve MILP to ind best action
       DQN      state s                                Q(s, a(1))
                      observed
                                                       Q(s, a(2))                                 state s
                                                                                                  observed
                For small, non-combinatorial action spaces.
                         Intractable for our setting.
                                                                                                                                 estimated Q-value
                                                                               decision           action a                              Q(s, a)
                                                                               variables    decision variables
        1. SEQUOIA training                                                  from MILP
                                                                             are inputs
                                                                                                  a1, …, aN
           Learn Q-function approximator                                        into NN

                                                used to generate on-policy trajectories
                                                                                           max Q(s, a)           use Q-value (from NN) as objective
                                                                                            a
           state s
                                                                                           s.t.     a ∈ {0,1}    N
                                             estimated Q-value
          action a                                  Q(s, a)                                         combinatorial constraints on a
        batched samples
         from memory                              embed trained deep Q-network into MILP            constraints and weights θ to embed NN


f


    Figure 2: An overview of our SEQUOIA algorithm. Standard DQN takes as input the state and
    outputs estimated Q-values for actions, which are assumed to be easily enumerable. In contrast, we
    consider cases when the actions are too large to be enumerated due to their combinatorial constraint
    structure. PART 1. We therefore train a Q-network where the action a is included as an input
    (Algorithm 1; described in Section 4.1). PART 2. We then embed that Q-network into a mixed-
    integer program, which also specifies the combinatorial action constraints (e.g., the formulations
    provided in Section 3). In evaluating the objective, the MILP solver conducts a forward pass through
    the neural network in order to calculate the expected Q-value. Solving the MILP thus finds an
    action a (the decision variables) that maximizes the predicted Q-value Q(s, a) (our objective).


    This framework breaks down when the action space is exponentially large, as in our setting. The first
    challenge is that typical uses of DQN output Q-values for all actions simultaneously by mapping the
    state to one network output per action. Since our domain has an exponentially large action space, we
    instead use DQN to estimate the Q-value of a given state–action pair, where the action is represented
    as a binary vector a of length N (Figure 2, Part 1).
    While this allows for a concise representation of the Q-function, it leaves a critical bottleneck: com-
    puting the temporal difference loss requires identifying the best action on policy, that is, according
    to the current Q-function (Algorithm 1, lines 9 and 13). That is, it requires solving problems of
    the form maxa Q(s, a; θ) where θ denotes the parameters of the Q-network. With standard DQN,
    this problem would be solved by evaluating all actions and picking the best one, but brute-force
    enumeration is infeasible for combinatorial spaces.
    Instead, we leverage recent advances that enable encoding a neural network into a mixed-integer
    linear program to enable optimization over the trained network (Fischetti & Jo, 2018; Serra et al.,
    2018). Using these methods, we embed an extra set of variables and constraints in the MILP. This
    is possible because neural networks are specified as a series of linear inequalities, commonly con-
    nected with a rectified linear unit (ReLU) as the activation function. Such a neural network can thus
    be modeled as a binary mixed-integer linear program, with a continuous variable representing the
    output of each hidden unit and a binary variable representing the output of each ReLU. Specifically,
    a single hidden unit in a neural network is represented as:
                                                                    x = σ(w⊤ y + b)                                                                   (3)
    where the activation function σ is the MILP-representable ReLU: σ(a) = ReLU(a) = max{0, a}.
    Fischetti & Jo (2018) show that this hidden unit can be expressed as:
                                                    w⊤ y + b = x − s, x ≥ 0, s ≥ 0                                                                    (4)
                                                 z = 1 =⇒ x ≤ 0, z = 0 =⇒ s ≤ 0                                                                       (5)
                                                                          z ∈ {0, 1}                                                                  (6)
    with binary variable z and continuous variables x and s. The two logical constraints (eq. 5) are
    translated into big-M constraints. In this way, a fully-connected feed-forward neural network with
    D hidden layers and P neurons per layer can be represented exactly within a MILP with O(DP )
    binary variables and linear constraints (see Section 4.2.1 of Huchette et al. (2023)).


                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 SEQUOIA for RL with combinatorial actions
Input: MDP instance (S, A, P, R) and a set of constraints C ⊆ A
Parameter: Epsilon-greedy parameter ϵ, target update frequency F
 1: Initialize action–value function Q with weights θ
 2: Strategically generate actions, and store state–action samples in memory D
 3: Pre-train Q with myopic observed reward, using state–action samples from D
 4: Initialize target network Q̂: θ − = θ
 5: Construct MILP with current network weights θ and constraints C
 6: for episode = 1, . . . , E do
 7:    for t = 1, . . . , T do
 8:       With probability ϵ, select random action a(t) ∈ C
 9:       Otherwise, select a(t) = arg maxa MILP(s(t) ; θ− )
10:       Execute action a(t) , calculate expected reward R(t) , and observe next state s(t+1)
11:       Store transition (s(t) , a(t) , R(t) , s(t+1) ) in D
12:       Sample random minibatch of transitions (s(k) , a(k) , R(k) , s(k+1) ) from D
13:       Set y (k) = R(k) + γ maxa MILP(s(k) ; θ− )
14:       Gradient descent step on (y (k) − Q(s(k) , a(k) ; θ))2
15:       Every F steps, update Q̂ = Q
16: return Q-function Q



Specifically, we use the MILP to represent the Q-function Q(s, a), the objective of our planning
problem, as specified in the problem formulations in Section 3. We therefore embed the trained
Q-network into the MILP formulations of our constraints and use its output as our objective. Thus
every time we solve the MILP to determine an optimal action, we implicitly simulate a forward pass
of the neural network to calculate the Q-value. In every new episode, we build a new MILP instance
which includes constraints that represent the current policy network Q with parameters θ, along with
the original constraints on the actions. Then the inner step of arg maxa (line 9) solves that MILP to
pick a combinatorial action a for state s that maximizes the expected long-run return of pair (s, a),
based on estimates from the neural network Q (Figure 2, Part 2).
Typically, DQN requires executing the current policy as determined by the current Q-network to get
on-policy samples. However, whereas standard DQN assumes we can enumerate all actions to pick
the one with the highest Q-value, doing so is intractable in our setting (Figure 2). Instead, we must
solve the MILP, using the current network parameters θ− , in order to determine an action. To both
encourage exploration and reduce the computational complexity, we select a random feasible action
with probability ϵ (line 8).
Our algorithm runs this modified DQN training procedure. On top of these key changes to accom-
modate combinatorial actions, we incorporate standard best practices for DQN (Hessel et al., 2018),
including double DQN (Van Hasselt et al., 2016), prioritized experience replay (Schaul et al., 2016),
and gradient clipping (Zhang et al., 2020).
Once the Q-network is fully trained, we use this network for planning. At inference time, we solve
the MILP once at every timestep, computing the best action to take from current state s using the
MILP encoding of the final Q-network (with parameters θ) and the action constraints. In other
words, we solve for: maxa MILP(s; θ), depicted in Figure 2, Part 2.

4.2   S MART ACTION GENERATION AND OTHER COMPUTATIONAL ENHANCEMENTS

There are two independent critical computational bottlenecks with integrating neural networks into
MILPs. First, solving the MILP at every timestep is necessary for both training and evaluation,
but is extremely expensive: for the discounted future reward estimate in line 13, we must perform
that calculation for every sample in the minibatch at every timestep. For a training instance with
E episodes, time horizon H, and minibatches of size M , we have EHM repeated MILP solves.
Even a modest problem setting of E = 1,000, H = 20, and M = 32 requires a prohibitive 640,000
solves of the MILP. Second, Q-learning requires diverse samples of the state and action spaces to
learn well, but both the state and action are combinatorial.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Warm starting with off-policy samples We design an initialization process, run before the main
DQN algorithm (line 2), to help alleviate both of these computational bottlenecks. The main idea is
to generate cheap but informative samples which provide rewards observations for a wide diversity
of actions, allowing us to warm-start the Q-network much more effectively before training with
on-policy samples. We use three strategies for this process.
First, we initialize the Q-network to approximate the single-step (myopic) expected rewards. This
leverages our access to a cost-effective simulator for the state transitions and immediate rewards: we
can draw a large training set of sampled state-reward pairs from the simulator and fit the Q-network
to the immediate reward. Such a simulator is cheap and available, as we are focused here on planning
over a known MDP. Training with myopic samples provides an informative initialization when we
start learning the long-run rewards.
Second, we draw sampled actions according to the implied myopic policy to seed the training process
with a set of “reasonable” actions. Specifically, we use the MILP embedding of the Q-network to
find the action maximizing the learned approximation of the single-step reward. This allows the
method to work out-of-the-box for different settings, without having to explicitly derive a MILP
formulation for the optimal myopic action and incur extra expensive computation from repeatedly
solving the MILP. We then train the network using temporal difference updates on the sampled
actions and rewards to learn their long-term values.
Third, we introduce diversity into the sampled actions with additional random perturbations. One
source of diversity is to randomly flip entries of the myopic action (we call this “perturbed myopic”).
Another is to randomly sample infeasible actions by, e.g., starting with the all-ones or all-zeros
vector for a and then randomly flipping a small number of entries (isolating the impact of including
or knocking-out individual actions). This leverages the property that, in restless bandits, we can
simulate valid state transitions even for infeasible actions because the state transitions are defined
independently per-arm. Incorporating perturbed and even infeasible actions greatly increases the
diversity of potential samples because for some combinatorial constraints it may be difficult to even
find a single feasible solution (and otherwise may be difficult to explore parts of the action space).
Similar issues arise if the per-step feasible action space is relatively small (e.g., if the budget is small
with B ≪ N ). Including examples of infeasible actions provides a more diverse training set for the
Q-network, encouraging better generalization even to feasible actions.

Variance reduction Throughout, we incorporate two additional strategies to lower variance and
improve computational efficiency. First, we directly calculate the expected one-step reward (instead
of using the observed reward after state transition), which reduces variance (line 10). Second, we
memoize the solutions to MILPs seen multiple times in between updates to the Q-network. As
we use experience replay with a reasonably small buffer size (10,000) we expect to see repeated
samples, enabling us to store the optimal solution to avoid repeated solves. To avoid stale solves, we
discard old samples at the same rate that we update the target network Q̂.

5    E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate the performance of SEQUOIA on the four CO RMAB settings introduced in Sec-
tion 3. In the appendix, we provide further details about the domains (Appendix C), baselines
(Appendix D), implementation (Appendix F), and runtime (Appendix G).

Baselines To understand the challenge of combinatorial action selection, we perform an ablation of
our method and test I TERATIVE DQN, which leverages the Q-network training used by SEQUOIA
to maximize future return. We do not give this method access to a MILP solver, so we instead use
a greedy heuristic to overcome the combinatorial action selection problem, greedily selecting the
next-best action component (that maximizes the Q-value) while there are still feasible actions. Note
that this baseline would not be possible before this paper, because on-policy training of the DQN
requires the techniques we developed.
To understand the importance of sequential planning in these settings, we consider three myopic
baselines. These myopic solution approaches focus on maximizing the expected reward from the
immediate next state, based on the current state and transition probabilities (with no Q-network or
any type of rollout). We implement a M YOPIC policy as a MILP that directly encodes (as a linear


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          (a) Multiple interventions            (b) Scheduling
                                                      3


                        Average reward (normalized)
                                                                                       3
                                                      2                                2
      N O ACTION
      R ANDOM                                         1                                1
      S AMPLING                                       0                                0
                                                          J = 20     40        100         J = 20    40          100
      I TER . M YOPIC
      M YOPIC                                              (c) Capacity constraints          (d) Path constraints
      I TER . DQN                                                                      3
                                                      3
      SEQUOIA                                         2                                2
                                                      1                                1
                                                      0                                0
                                                          J = 20     40        100         J = 20    40          100


Figure 3: Across all problem settings, SEQUOIA achieves consistently better performance com-
pared to existing methods, which do not consider both combinatorial selection and sequential plan-
ning. We evaluate with J = {20, 40, 100} arms and N = {5, 10, 20} workers. The y-axis depicts
the average per-timestep reward, normalized to the reward achieved by the R ANDOM baseline such
that RR ANDOM = 1. For the path-constrained problem, note that there are no I TERATIVE M YOPIC or
I TERATIVE DQN baselines, as there is no simple iterative approach for selecting a valid cycle.


objective) the expected reward of the immediate next state, while using the same MILP solver as
SEQUOIA. M YOPIC would be optimal in a static (non-sequential) setting, but is not necessarily
so in the sequential contexts we consider here. We also use a S AMPLING approach, which mirrors
the method proposed by He et al. (2016), that randomly samples k = 100 actions of the up to N    B
possible combinatorial actions and picks the action with the largest expected myopic reward. The
final myopic baseline is an I TERATIVE M YOPIC solution construction algorithm that greedily selects
one feasible component to build up the full action, similar to I TERATIVE DQN, but using the best
single-step reward instead of the predicted Q-value.
Lower bounds on performance are benchmarked by R ANDOM which randomly samples a feasible
action, and N O ACTION which always takes the null action a = 0. We are not aware of additional
RL algorithms from the literature that could be applied to CO RMAB; this is due to the large combi-
natorial action space. For instance, many algorithms in the RLlib library (Liang et al., 2018) support
discrete actions, but not combinatorial ones.

Experiment setup For each problem instance, we randomly generate transition probabilities, con-
straints, and initial states. We ensure consistency by enforcing, across all algorithms, that transi-
tion dynamics and initial states across every problem instance (across every episode) are consistent
across all methods. We evaluate the expected reward of each algorithm across 50 episodes of length
H = 20 and average results over 30 random seeds. We use Gurobi to solve the MILP, in which we
embed a two-layer neural network with ReLU activations. Runtime analysis and implementation
details, including hyperparameters, are in Appendix E.

Results SEQUOIA achieves consistently strong performance over the M YOPIC baseline, demon-
strating the importance of accounting for long-run return, even in relatively simple MDP settings
such as restless bandits. Additionally, note that the M YOPIC approach can only be implemented in
settings with simple (e.g., linear or quadratic) constraints and objectives that can be handled by an
integer programming solver, whereas SEQUOIA can learn arbitrary objective functions.
To better understand the challenging combinatorial structure of the problem, we look at the iter-
ative baselines which achieve significantly lower performance. Even in the capacity-constrained
setting where it performs best, the I TERATIVE DQN approach performs on average 12.1% lower
than our non-iterative SEQUOIA—an important takeaway, given that many heuristic approaches
for overcoming combinatorial action structure rely on iterative construction heuristics (Dai et al.,
2017; Barrett et al., 2020). The S AMPLING heuristic comes close to M YOPIC with 20 arms, but
dramatically falls behind at 100 arms—unsurprising, as the action space jumps many orders of mag-


                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


nitude from roughly 20                          100
                                                                 20
                      5 = 15,504 actions to 20 ≈ 5.4 × 10           (without considering feasibility
constraints). This result underscores the challenge of effectively exploring combinatorially large
action spaces.
To show generality and robustness of SEQUOIA, we used the same network architecture and train-
ing procedure for all of the different problem settings. Our method works well even without per-
domain hyperparameter tuning, which would improve performance further, especially in scaling to
larger and more complex problem structures.


6   R ELATED WORK

Restless multi-armed bandits RMABs generalize multi-armed bandits by introducing arm states
that transition depending on whether the arm is acted on. Even when transition probabilities are fully
known, computing an optimal RMAB policy is PSPACE-hard (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1994) due
to the combinatorial state and action space. Heuristic approaches to solve RMABs center around
the Whittle index policy (Whittle, 1988; Weber & Weiss, 1990) which uses a Lagrangian relaxation
to exploit the fact that the arms are weakly coupled (Adelman & Mersereau, 2008; Hawkins, 2003).
These relaxations break down in strongly coupled action settings (Ou et al., 2022), our setting here.
Many other solution approaches for RMAB problems are variants of the Whittle index policy, in-
cluding deep learning to estimate the Whittle index by training a separate network for each arm
(Nakhleh et al., 2021); tabular Q-learning (Avrachenkov & Borkar, 2022); and explicitly encoding
the Bellman update as a MIP to overcome uncertainty in transition probabilities (Wang et al., 2023).
One recent work considers rewards that are not separable across arms, using Monte Carlo tree search
to explore arm combinations (Raman et al., 2024), but the action space is still determined by a sim-
ple budget constraint. Here, we introduce the first solution approach for restless bandits integrating
both deep learning and mathematical programming.

RL for combinatorial optimization An iterative heuristic to solve a static combinatorial opti-
mization problem can be represented as a Markov decision process. RL can then be used to obtain
a good policy for constructing a feasible solution. By “static”, we mean deterministic problems that
are fully specified. This iterative approach have been used by Dai et al. (2017), Barrett et al. (2020),
and Grinsztajn et al. (2023); see Mazyavkina et al. (2021) for a more complete survey and Berto
et al. (2024) for benchmark problems. The action space in such approaches is not combinatorial: to
construct a solution to a traveling salesperson problem, one needs to select the single next node to
visit in every timestep of the decision process. Breaking with this approach, Delarue et al. (2020)
consider combinatorial actions in a capacitated vehicle routing problem, where at every timestep of
the decision process a subset of nodes that form a tour and respect the vehicle’s capacity constraint
must be selected. This combinatorial action selection problem is formulated as a MIP whose ob-
jective function is the Q-value as estimated by a ReLU neural network. However, their setting is
simpler, as they consider a single-shot decision that is deterministic, rather than traditional RL prob-
lems which are inherently both stochastic and sequential, such as those that can be represented as an
MDP. Additionally, Tang et al. (2020) leverage deep RL for general integer programming solvers to
adaptively select cuts, where the action space is the set of all possible Gomory’s cutting planes; their
approach for addressing the large action space is to sample from the set of feasible cuts according to
a specified weighting.

RL with combinatorial actions In the RL literature, it is fairly common to deal with combina-
torial state spaces, but combinatorial action spaces have received far less attention. A key early
example is AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016), which used deep RL to estimate the probability of win-
ning with each move, combined with Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) to explore the combinatorial
rollout. Feng et al. (2020) apply MCTS and deep RL to deterministic planning, solving 2D puzzles
in a deterministic setting.
Dulac-Arnold et al. (2015) deal with large discrete (but not combinatorial) action spaces. Their
action selection strategy is sublinear in the number of actions, but this is still prohibitive when the
number of actions is exponential as  in our setting. He et al. (2016) consider simply sampling a
fixed number of actions from the N   B combinatorial action space. Tkachuk et al. (2023) provide
a theoretical analysis of RL with combinatorial actions when the value function approximation is


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


linear in the state–action pair. Because the reward functions in many practical applications may be
nonlinear, we opt for neural network function approximations, which are beyond the scope of the
aforementioned theory. Brantley et al. (2020) propose an algorithm for budget-constrained contin-
uous action spaces in a tabular RL setting. However, our state spaces are also combinatorial (in
addition to our discrete action space), making a tabular state representation impossible. Song et al.
(2019) propose to split up combinatorial action selection into iterative non-combinatorial selections;
an iterative policy must be learned for this purpose. In contrast, and similar to Tkachuk et al. (2023),
we access an optimization solver to find feasible combinatorial actions at each timestep, removing
the need for any iterative decomposition of the combinatorial selection as the latter requires learning
an additional policy.

Embedding neural networks in optimization models There has been considerable interest in
embedding trained neural networks into larger mathematical optimization models; see Huchette
et al. (2023) for a survey. Two primary use cases are (1) adversarial machine learning problems,
such as finding perturbations of an input that worsen the prediction maximally (Fischetti & Jo,
2018) or verifying network robustness (Tjeng et al., 2018); (2) replacing a function that is difficult
to describe analytically with a neural network approximation and then optimizing some decision
variables over the approximation (Lombardi & Milano, 2018). As feed-forward neural networks
with ReLU activations are piecewise-linear functions in their inputs, they can be represented using
a polynomial-size MILP (Fischetti & Jo, 2018; Anderson et al., 2020; Ceccon et al., 2022).

7   C ONCLUSION
Much recent work has focused on RL for combinatorial optimization, but here we address RL with
combinatorial optimization in the action space. Specifically, we consider offline planning for restless
multi-armed bandits where combinatorial action constraints prevent decoupling the problem.
We design our experimental settings around restless bandits because they are an increasingly com-
mon planning formulation that requires optimizing for long-term reward in a sequential setting over
a discrete, combinatorial action space. However, our method is a general approach for stochastic
planning with per-timestep combinatorial actions, provided that the feasible set of actions can be de-
scribed as an MDP. In particular, our use of model-free RL (via DQN) enables direct adaptation to a
wide range of planning problems. Extending SEQUOIA to broader RL planning problems beyond
restless bandits would benefit from more efficient methods to explore the large set of state–action
transitions, as well as more structured learning methods, such as graph neural networks or other
specialized architectures to capture characteristics of the problem setting.
We explored connections to the literature of (stochastic) AI planning, as exemplified by the modeling
framework RDDL (Sanner, 2011; Taitler et al., 2023). RDDL is a powerful language for expressing
sequential planning problems with known transition dynamics. Of the two direct (i.e., non-RL)
solution methods there, the JAX-based gradient ascent method (Gimelfarb et al., 2024) struggles to
deal with complex constraints and discrete variables, and the Gurobi-based planner cannot handle
stochasticity. However, furthering the connection between the RL-based SEQUOIA and the AI
planning perspective is likely to be fruitful.
Another line of exploration deals with further reducing the reliance on potentially expensive calls
to a MILP solver. Solving the MILP, both in training the Q-network (Algorithm 1, line 13) and at
inference time, is the major computational bottleneck. We use Gurobi to solve the MILP, which uses
branch-and-bound to progressively add linear constraints to a continuous relaxation of the problem,
but every call to a MILP solver is relatively expensive. We therefore considered solving a continuous
nonlinear relaxation of the action selection problem for a faster heuristic approach. We solve these
relaxed problems using IPOPT (Wächter & Biegler, 2006), a state-of-the-art nonlinear optimization
algorithm that produces stationary continuous action vectors. After a solution has been found, we
sample discrete, binary solutions by flipping biased coins parameterized by the IPOPT solution
values. On the capacity-constrained CO RMAB, this heuristic approach finds significantly better
actions than Gurobi, if we allot the same amount of time to each solver. Real-time applications in
which decisions must be made instantaneously or in which the number of actions is very large can
benefit from this and similar ideas.



                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Xu acknowledges funding from a Google PhD fellowship and Siebel Scholars. Wilder acknowledges
the AI Research Institutes Program funded by the National Science Foundation under AI Institute
for Societal Decision Making (AI-SDM), Award No. 2229881. Khalil acknowledges support from
the NSERC Discovery Grant program and the SCALE AI Research Chair program.


R EFERENCES
Daniel Adelman and Adam J Mersereau. Relaxations of weakly coupled stochastic dynamic pro-
  grams. Operations Research, 56(3):712–727, 2008.

Ross Anderson, Joey Huchette, Will Ma, Christian Tjandraatmadja, and Juan Pablo Vielma. Strong
  mixed-integer programming formulations for trained neural networks. Mathematical Program-
  ming, 183(1-2):3–39, 2020.

Konstantin E Avrachenkov and Vivek S Borkar. Whittle index based Q-learning for restless bandits
  with average reward. Automatica, 139:110186, 2022.

Thomas Barrett, William Clements, Jakob Foerster, and Alex Lvovsky. Exploratory combinatorial
  optimization with reinforcement learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
  pp. 3243–3250, 2020.

Federico Berto, Chuanbo Hua, Junyoung Park, Laurin Luttmann, Yining Ma, Fanchen Bu, Jiarui
  Wang, Haoran Ye, Minsu Kim, Sanghyeok Choi, Nayeli Gast Zepeda, André Hottung, Jianan
  Zhou, Jieyi Bi, Yu Hu, Fei Liu, Hyeonah Kim, Jiwoo Son, Haeyeon Kim, Davide Angioni, Wouter
  Kool, Zhiguang Cao, Jie Zhang, Kijung Shin, Cathy Wu, Sungsoo Ahn, Guojie Song, Changhyun
  Kwon, Lin Xie, and Jinkyoo Park. RL4CO: an extensive reinforcement learning for combinatorial
  optimization benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17100, 2024. https://github.com/
  ai4co/rl4co.

Albert Bou, Matteo Bettini, Sebastian Dittert, Vikash Kumar, Shagun Sodhani, Xiaomeng Yang,
  Gianni De Fabritiis, and Vincent Moens. TorchRL: A data-driven decision-making library for
  PyTorch. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.

Kianté Brantley, Miro Dudik, Thodoris Lykouris, Sobhan Miryoosefi, Max Simchowitz, Aleksandrs
  Slivkins, and Wen Sun. Constrained episodic reinforcement learning in concave-convex and knap-
  sack settings. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33:16315–16326,
  2020.

Francesco Ceccon, Jordan Jalving, Joshua Haddad, Alexander Thebelt, Calvin Tsay, Carl D Laird,
  and Ruth Misener. OMLT: Optimization & machine learning toolkit. Journal of Machine Learn-
  ing Research (JMLR), 23(1):15829–15836, 2022.

Hanjun Dai, Elias Khalil, Yuyu Zhang, Bistra Dilkina, and Le Song. Learning combinatorial opti-
  mization algorithms over graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  30, 2017.

Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco
  Carpanese, Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, et al. Mag-
  netic control of tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–
  419, 2022.

Arthur Delarue, Ross Anderson, and Christian Tjandraatmadja. Reinforcement learning with com-
  binatorial actions: An application to vehicle routing. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 33:609–620, 2020.

Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Richard Evans, Hado van Hasselt, Peter Sunehag, Timothy Lillicrap,
  Jonathan Hunt, Timothy Mann, Theophane Weber, Thomas Degris, and Ben Coppin. Deep rein-
  forcement learning in large discrete action spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.07679, 2015.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Nir Levine, Daniel J Mankowitz, Jerry Li, Cosmin Paduraru, Sven Gowal,
  and Todd Hester. An empirical investigation of the challenges of real-world reinforcement learn-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11881, 2020.
Justin Dumouchelle, Rahul Patel, Elias B Khalil, and Merve Bodur. Neur2SP: Neural two-stage
  stochastic programming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 35,
  2022.
Dieqiao Feng, Carla P Gomes, and Bart Selman. Solving hard AI planning instances using
  curriculum-driven deep reinforcement learning. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence (IJCAI), 2020.
Matteo Fischetti and Jason Jo. Deep neural networks and mixed integer linear optimization. Con-
 straints, 23(3):296–309, 2018.
Michael Gimelfarb, Ayal Taitler, and Scott Sanner. JaxPlan and GurobiPlan: Optimization baselines
 for replanning in discrete and mixed discrete-continuous probabilistic domains. International
 Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS), 34:230–238, 2024.
Nathan Grinsztajn, Daniel Furelos-Blanco, Shikha Surana, Clément Bonnet, and Tom Barrett. Win-
  ner takes it all: Training performant RL populations for combinatorial optimization. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 36:48485–48509, 2023.
Jeffrey Thomas Hawkins. A Langrangian decomposition approach to weakly coupled dynamic opti-
   mization problems and its applications. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003.
Ji He, Mari Ostendorf, Xiaodong He, Jianshu Chen, Jianfeng Gao, Lihong Li, and Li Deng. Deep
   reinforcement learning with a combinatorial action space for predicting popular Reddit threads.
   Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2016.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
 deep reinforcement learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2018.
Joey Huchette, Gonzalo Muñoz, Thiago Serra, and Calvin Tsay. When deep learning meets polyhe-
  dral theory: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00241, 2023.
Yannick Kergosien, Christophe Lenté, and Jean-Charles Billaut. Home health care problem: An
  extended multiple traveling salesman problem. In Multidisciplinary International Scheduling
  Conference: Theory and Applications (MISTA), 2009.
David T Levy, Joseph E Bauer, and Hye-ryeon Lee. Simulation modeling and tobacco control:
  creating more robust public health policies. American Journal of Public Health, 96(3):494–498,
  2006.
Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg, Joseph Gon-
  zalez, Michael Jordan, and Ion Stoica. RLlib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 3053–3062. PMLR, 2018.
Michele Lombardi and Michela Milano. Boosting combinatorial problem modeling with machine
 learning. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 5472–5478,
 2018.
Antoine Marot, Benjamin Donnot, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Adrian Kelly, Aidan O’Sullivan, Jan
  Viebahn, Mariette Awad, Isabelle Guyon, Patrick Panciatici, and Camilo Romero. Learning to run
  a power network challenge: a retrospective analysis. In NeurIPS 2020 Competition and Demon-
  stration Track, pp. 112–132. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Mate, Lovish Madaan, Aparna Taneja, Neha Madhiwalla, Shresth Verma, Gargi Singh,
  Aparna Hegde, Pradeep Varakantham, and Milind Tambe. Field study in deploying restless multi-
  armed bandits: Assisting non-profits in improving maternal and child health. In AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nina Mazyavkina, Sergey Sviridov, Sergei Ivanov, and Evgeny Burnaev. Reinforcement learning
  for combinatorial optimization: A survey. Computers & Operations Research, 134:105400, 2021.

Volodymyr Mnih. Playing Atari with deep reinforcement learning. NeurIPS Deep Learning Work-
  shop, 2013.

Khaled Nakhleh, Santosh Ganji, Ping-Chun Hsieh, I Hou, Srinivas Shakkottai, et al. NeurWIN:
  Neural Whittle index network for restless bandits via deep RL. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 34:828–839, 2021.

José Niño-Mora. Markovian restless bandits and index policies: A review. Mathematics, 11(7):
  1639, 2023.

Han-Ching Ou, Christoph Siebenbrunner, Jackson Killian, Meredith B Brooks, David Kempe, Yev-
  geniy Vorobeychik, and Milind Tambe. Networked restless multi-armed bandits for mobile inter-
  ventions. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS),
  2022.

Lale Özbakir, Adil Baykasoğlu, and Pınar Tapkan. Bees algorithm for generalized assignment prob-
  lem. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 215(11):3782–3795, 2010.

Christos H Papadimitriou and John N Tsitsiklis. The complexity of optimal queueing network
  control. In IEEE Annual Conference on Structure in Complexity Theory, pp. 318–322. IEEE,
  1994.

Naveen Raman, Ryan Shi, and Fei Fang. Global rewards in restless multi-armed bandits. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.

Scott Sanner. Relational dynamic influence diagram language (RDDL): Language description.
  ICAPS International Probabilistic Planning Competition (IPPC), 2011.

Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

Grant Schoenebeck and Biaoshuai Tao. Beyond worst-case (in)approximability of nonsubmodular
  influence maximization. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory (TOCT), 11(3):1–56, 2019.

Thiago Serra, Christian Tjandraatmadja, and Srikumar Ramalingam. Bounding and counting linear
  regions of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
  4558–4566. PMLR, 2018.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

Daniele Silvestro, Stefano Goria, Thomas Sterner, and Alexandre Antonelli. Improving biodiversity
  protection through artificial intelligence. Nature Sustainability, 5(5):415–424, 2022.

Hyungseok Song, Hyeryung Jang, Hai H Tran, Se-eun Yoon, Kyunghwan Son, Donggyu Yun, Hyoju
  Chung, and Yung Yi. Solving continual combinatorial selection via deep reinforcement learning.
  In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2019.

Ayal Taitler, Michael Gimelfarb, Jihwan Jeong, Sriram Gopalakrishnan, Martin Mladenov, Xiaotian
  Liu, and Scott Sanner. ppyRDDLGym: From RDDL to Gym environments. In ICAPS workshop
  on Bridging the Gap Between AI Planning and Reinforcement Learning (PRL), 2023.

Yunhao Tang, Shipra Agrawal, and Yuri Faenza. Reinforcement learning for integer programming:
  Learning to cut. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.

Vincent Tjeng, Kai Y Xiao, and Russ Tedrake. Evaluating robustness of neural networks with mixed
  integer programming. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Volodymyr Tkachuk, Seyed Alireza Bakhtiari, Johannes Kirschner, Matej Jusup, Ilija Bogunovic,
  and Csaba Szepesvári. Efficient planning in combinatorial action spaces with applications to
  cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2023.
Neythen J Treloar, Alex JH Fedorec, Brian Ingalls, and Chris P Barnes. Deep reinforcement learn-
  ing for the control of microbial co-cultures in bioreactors. PLoS Computational Biology, 16(4):
  e1007783, 2020.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double Q-
  learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2016.
Sofı́a S Villar, Jack Bowden, and James Wason. Multi-armed bandit models for the optimal design
  of clinical trials: benefits and challenges. Statistical Science: A Review Journal of the Institute of
  Mathematical Statistics, 30(2):199, 2015.
Andreas Wächter and Lorenz T Biegler. On the implementation of an interior-point filter line-search
  algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical Programming, 106:25–57, 2006.
Kai Wang, Lily Xu, Aparna Taneja, and Milind Tambe. Optimistic Whittle index policy: Online
  learning for restless bandits. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2023.
Richard R Weber and Gideon Weiss. On an index policy for restless bandits. Journal of Applied
  Probability, 27(3):637–648, 1990.
Peter Whittle. Restless bandits: Activity allocation in a changing world. Journal of Applied Proba-
  bility, 25(A):287–298, 1988.
Jingzhao Zhang, Tianxing He, Suvrit Sra, and Ali Jadbabaie. Why gradient clipping accelerates
   training: A theoretical justification for adaptivity. International Conference on Learning Repre-
   sentations (ICLR), 2020.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    N OTATION TABLE
List of symbols used in the paper and their description.

                                     Table 1: Symbols used in the paper.

     Symbol                Description
                                             Problem description
     sj ∈ S                state of arm j ∈ [J]
     aj ∈ A                action taken on arm j
     Pj (sj , aj , s′j )   probability that arm j in state sj transitions to state s′j under action aj
     rj (sj )              reward at time t for arm j in state sj
     R(t) (s)              reward for restless bandit instance with joint state s
     B                     budget
     H                     time horizon
     s ∈ S×                joint state of all arms
     a ∈ A×                joint action of all arms
     C ⊆ A×                feasible action space, as determined by set of constraints
     P×                    joint transition probability across all arms
     Q(s, a)               Q-value for action a under state s
     V (s)                 value function for state s
     γ                     discount factor
     E                     number of episodes
     M                     minibatch size
                                     Notation for SEQUOIA algorithm
     ϵ                     epsilon-greedy parameter
     D                     dataset of historical trajectories stored in replay memory
     Q                     Q-network
     θ                     Q-network neural network parameters
     Q̂                    target Q-network
     θ−                    target Q-network neural network parameters
     F                     target Q-network update frequency
                                          Problem-specific symbols
     x∗                    decision variables used in MIP (where ∗ denotes indices)
     N                     action dimension (e.g., number of workers for capacity-constrained)
     ϕ                     [multi-intervention] link function
     ω                     [multi-intervention] weights of edges for probability transition function
     ci                    [multi-intervention & capacity] cost of action i
     bi                    [capacity] budget constraint for worker i
     K                     [scheduling] number of timeslots in schedule
     Wik                   [scheduling] matrix denoting whether worker i is available at slot k
     Ajk                   [scheduling] matrix denoting whether arm j is available at slot k
     V                     [routing] set of vertices in graph
     E                     [routing] set of edges in graph
                           [routing] source node for network flow problem
     fj,k,t                [routing] network flow from node j to k at step t
     T                     [routing] max path length


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     S IMULATION DETAILS

B.1   T HE NEED FOR SEQUENTIAL PLANNING IN RMAB S

Myopic policies can perform arbitrarily badly in restless bandits. In Figure 4, we offer a clear
example through a restless bandit with two arms, three states, and budget B = 1. Suppose the
probability p of transitioning right one state is p = 1 when the arm is acted upon and p = 0
otherwise (in which case the arm will move leftward). If the arms begin at state s(0) = (0, 0), the
myopic policy would always act on arm 1, whereas the optimal policy would be to repeatedly act on
arm 2. Thus in these experiments, we consider multi-state settings (specifically with |S| = 4 states)
to emphasize the sequential aspect of the problem.
Many standard restless bandit problems consider a binary state, binary action setting. The multi-state
(|S| > 2) setting enables more realistic modeling of many problems, such as patient engagement or
health status.

                                                                                            10


                                                                                   Reward
                                                                                             8
                                                                                             6
                                                                                             4
        Arm 1                                Arm 2                                           2
                   p           p        p                p           p         p             0
                                                                                                        n      c IA
            0.1         0.2         1             0.2         0.1         10                         tio om pi
                                                                                                   Ac andMyo Q U O
      1−p         1−p         1−p           1−p         1−p         1−p                          No R      S E


Figure 4: Even in a simple two-arm problem setting with budget B = 1, a myopic policy can lead
to arbitrarily poor performance in restless bandits. Each arm has three states, with positive reward
in each state. Suppose that the probability p of transitioning right one state is p = 1 when the arm
is acted on and p = 0 otherwise. This problem instance leads to the rewards on the right, where
the gap between myopic and SEQUOIA can be arbitrarily large depending on the rewards at the
rightmost state. This poor performance results even in this simple problem setting.



B.2   BASE MODEL : R ESTLESS BANDIT WITH 4 STATES

To evaluate our sequential planning algorithm, we design a simulator that is designed to ensure the
myopic policy is non-optimal. Thus across all experimental settings, we consider restless bandit
problems with |S| = 4 states, where a fraction of the arms are long-run beneficial to act on (but
myopically non-optimal), and the remainder of the arms are short-run beneficial to act on but my-
opically non-optimal. This base restless bandit problem is implemented as the MultiStateRMAB
class.
In these four states s ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, we model that users can only transition between consecutive
states in a single timestep; for example, they cannot skip from state s = 1 to state s′ = 3. We denote
moving up a state as s+ and moving down as s− . For completeness: s− = max{0, s − 1} and
s+ = min{3, s + 1}.
The bad arms have the following reward for each of the four states: [0.1, 0.15, 0.2, rbad ] where rbad
is drawn randomly from {4, 5, 6}, and the good arms have reward [0.2, 0.15, 0.1, rgood ] where rgood
is drawn randomly from {1, 2, 3}.
For the bad arms, the transition probability of moving up a state is drawn uniformly at random
between [0.0, 0.2], and the probability of moving down a state is drawn from [0.7, 0.9].


C     D OMAIN DETAILS

C.1   PATH - CONSTRAINED

We encode the constraints of this path-planning problem as flow constraints on a time-unrolled
graph. We allow the maximum path length T to be double the budget, that is, T = 2 · B. All arms
pulled must fall along the path visited; we can pull at most B arms out of at most T visited.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Graph used for the path-constrained problem, based on a diagram of the London under-
ground. Blue represents nodes used for J = 20. Green nodes are added for J = 40, and orange
nodes are added for J = 100.


We introduce flow variables fj,k,t , which equal 1 if we take the edge from node j to k as the t-th
segment of our path and 0 otherwise. Thus for every edge (j, k) in E, we have decision variables
fj,k,t and fk,j,t for all t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. Node ∈ V is the source, where we must begin and end the
path. Finally, decision variable aj indicates whether we act on arm j, i.e., we pass through node j.
             max Q(s, a)                                                                           (7)
             f ,a
                    X
              s. t.      f               ,k,1 = 1
                   k:(     ,k)∈E
                         X
                                   fk,    ,T = 1
                   k:(k,    )∈E
                     X
                             fj,k,t = 1                             ∀t ∈ [T ]
                   (j,k)∈E
                      X                        X
                               fk,j,t =                  fj,k,t+1   ∀j ∈ V, t ∈ [T − 1]
                   k:(k,j)∈E                 k:(j,k)∈E
                            X        X
                   aj ≤                       fj,k,t                ∀j ∈ V
                           t∈[T ] k:(j,k)∈E
                   X
                         aj ≤ B
                   j∈V

                   fj,k,t ∈ {0, 1}                                  ∀j, k ∈ V, t ∈ [T ]
                   aj ∈ {0, 1}                                      ∀j ∈ V


Implementation The underlying graph is based on a real-world network of the London tube,
where one node is placed at each station.1 . We have that the graph is fully connected. We visualize
  1
    Map data is available on the Github repo, and comes from https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/London_Underground_geographic_maps


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


this graph in Figure 5, where we color the subset of nodes used for the three problem settings
J = {20, 40, 100}. For simplicity, we consider the cost of each edge to be 1, but heterogeneous
costs on the edges could be easily implemented.
Due to the significantly increased complexity of the MILP for this path-constrained problem, due to
having the encode the time-unrolled graph with N JT nodes, we take advantage of the decoupled
reward structure for this problem in the training process. That is, in the training loop (lines 9 and 13
in Algorithm 1) we impose only the budget constraint and not the path constraint. This significantly
speeds up the training time, as for the setting with J = 20, the MILP is simplified from 800 variables
and 213 constraints to only 20 variables and 1 constraint. In the setting with J = 100, the reduction
is even greater, from 14,740 variables and 4,043 constraints to 100 variables and 1 constraint.
Note that for all the problem instances we describe here, with the exception of the multi-action
setting, the reward structure is decoupled, as each action impacts the transition probability for only
a single arm. Thus this heuristic training process can be used for all settings in which the reward
structure can be decoupled.


C.2   S CHEDULING

We have N workers and J arms (e.g., patients). Each worker has some set of available timeslots, and
each patient has their own set of available timeslots, out of K timeslots. We can assign at most one
worker to one patient for each timeslot, and each patient must be intervened on by two compatible
workers. We can intervene on at most B patients.
This scheduling problem can be formulated as follows:

              max Q(s, a)                                                                           (8)
              x,a
                    X
               s.t.    aj ≤ B
                     j∈[J]
                     X
                             xijk ≤ 1                        ∀i ∈ [N ], k ∈ [K]
                     j∈[J]
                         X
                                    xijk ≤ 2                 ∀j ∈ [J]
                     i∈[N ],k∈[K]
                                    X
                    2 · aj ≤                  xijk           ∀j ∈ [J]
                               i∈[N ],k∈[K]

                    aj ≥ xijk                                ∀i ∈ [N ], j ∈ [J], k ∈ [K]
                    aj ∈ {0, 1}                              ∀j ∈ [J]
                    xijk ∈ {0, 1}                            ∀i ∈ [N ], j ∈ [J], k ∈ [K]

The scheduling constraints are encoded as binary matrices, where Wik and Ajk denote whether
resource i (or patient j) is available at timeslot k. We introduce a decision variable xijk whenever
a worker i and patient j are both available at timeslot k, so xijk exists iff Wik = Ajk = 1. Then,
xijk = 1 indicates the assignment of worker i to arm j at timeslot k, and aj indicates whether we
“pull” arm j. Each worker can only be assigned once per timeslot.
This problem also generalizes the standard RMAB: each pulling action requires solving a matching
problem to assign workers to each action. The standard RMAB problem would correspond to the
setting where all workers and all patients are available for all timeslots (for simplicity, there can
be just a single timeslot during which all workers and all patients are available), and each patient
must be intervened on by just one worker. In this case, the number of workers simply represents the
budget constraint.


Implementation We use K = 5 timeslots in all problem settings. We randomly select 2 timeslots
for each arm and 3 timeslots for each worker.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: A visualization of sigmoid functions used for the Multiple Interventions setting, where
values of a, b, and x0 are randomly generated. We consider actions with ω = 2. In this setting,
for the arms with reward shown in dashed blue, ω = 2 would have stronger effect for the first two
actions deployed, but their impact would be relatively limited. In contrast, for arms with transition
probability shown in solid green, the first two actions applied to an arm would lead to relatively low
transition probability, but the third actions would lead to a significant increase, and in all cases an
increase greater than three actions applied to any of the blue arms.


C.3   C APACITY- CONSTRAINED

We have a decision variable xij for all i and j, indicating whether worker i gets assigned to arm j.

                max Q(s, a)                                                                          (9)
                x,a
                      X
                 s.t.    cj xij ≤ bi                    ∀i ∈ [N ]
                       j∈[J]
                               X
                      aj ≤              xij             ∀j ∈ [J]
                               i∈[N ]

                      xij ∈ {0, 1}                      ∀i ∈ [N ], j ∈ [J]
                      aj ≥ xij                          ∀i ∈ [N ], j ∈ [J]
                      aj ∈ {0, 1}                       ∀j ∈ [J]

The standard RMAB setting would correspond to a single worker (N = 1) with a budget bi = B.

Implementation We generate constraints by selecting random costs for each arm (cj ∈ {2, . . . , 6}
and random capacity for each worker (cj ∈ {2, 7}.

C.4   M ULTIPLE INTERVENTIONS

In the public health literature, these link functions have often been described as S-shaped, such as in
a widely used model of smoking cessation (Levy et al., 2006) The S-shape implies that as individuals
are impacted by more actions, they first experience increasing returns in their probability of transi-
tion to an improved state (the first part of the S) before plateauing as the effect saturates (the second
part). While realistic, S-shaped curves are often NP-hard to approximately optimize because they
violate the diminishing returns assumptions required for submodular optimization (Schoenebeck &
Tao, 2019). As we are motivated by public health interventions, we use these as motivating descrip-
tions in the descriptions, but these problem structures exist in many other applications. Importantly
for public health and other applications, these constraints could be further specified incorporate
additional desiderata, such as fairness constraints. For example, if we had demographic features
associated with each patient, we could encode a requirement to visit at minimum some fraction of
each subgroup, such as the most elderly.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The sigmoid curve we use is of the form:
                                                       1
                                 ϕ(x) = a ·                                                          (10)
                                              1 + exp(−b · x − x0 )

where values of a ∈ (0, 1], b ∈ [1.4, 2], and x0 ∈ {0, . . . , 10} are randomly generated for each arm.
Instantiations of the sigmoid curves we use in the simulation is visualized in Figure 6.
Note that the implemented class here is designed to also adapt to a linear link function, which could
be a useful model for some problems. The setting with a linear link function would be simpler
to solve; it would not require solving for combinatorial actions as an iterative approach would be
sufficient.

Implementation We consider N = 2 · B actions, of which only B can be pulled in each timestep.
For the purposes of evaluation in this setting, we considered a relatively simple setting where each
action is connected to up to 3 arms. More intricate configurations could benefit from more sophisti-
cated learning approaches that incorporate the structure of the problem setting, such as graph neural
networks (GNNs).


D     BASELINES

D.1   N O ACTION BASELINE

At every timestep, the action taken is the null action (aj = 0) on every arm.
Since we impose the assumption that actions only have positive impact on reward, this baseline
serves as a lower bound on the possible reward in each setting.

D.2   R ANDOM BASELINE

At every timestep, we take one random valid action. Thus the action we take at every step is inde-
pendent of the current state of the RMAB.
The random actions selected are:
                                                             N

       • Multiple interventions: Select a random subset      B       of the actions, according to our bud-
         get.
       • Capacity constrained: Randomize the order of workers and arms (patients). For each
         worker, go through the list of arms and greedily select each one, while that worker has
         remaining capacity. Continue until either the worker’s capacity is exhausted or we have
         iterated through all arms.
       • Scheduling: Randomize the order of workers and patients. Iterate through patient, and
         find the first two compatible workers that have not yet been assigned, if any exist. If such
         workers exists, assign those workers to the patient, then continue on to the next patient.
       • Routing: Generate all the simple random paths within the path constraint T = 2 · B, using
         the simple cycles function of the networkx             package. Pick one of these paths at
                                                T

         random. Then select a random subset B      of the nodes within that path to act on.
         Note that, because we are limiting ourselves to all simple paths (no repeating vertices), this
         approach is weaker than picking at random from among all the valid actions. A stronger
         approach would require significantly more complexity, as finding a loop of at most length T
         is by itself an NP-hard problem.

D.3   S AMPLING BASELINE

Sample K random actions (K = 100 by default), evaluate a few rollouts with that action, and select
the action that induces the great observed reward.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4      M YOPIC BASELINE

Solves the MILP using expected value (based on the true transition probabilities) from the immediate
next timestep, without doing any long-term planning. Otherwise, we precisely solve the MILP to
get an optimal myopic action.

         • Multiple interventions: For the MILP myopic solver, we encode the sigmoid curve with
           a piecewise-linear approximation, which can be represented as a constraint. In the general
           case, PWLs can approximate continuous functions well2 , and can be directly resolved in
           Gurobi3 .
         • The other settings use the same MILP as described above, using the expected value of the
           next immediate timestep using true transition probabilities.

D.5      I TERATIVE MYOPIC BASELINE
         • Multiple interventions: Evaluate each action, and pick the action that brings the biggest
           increase in reward.
         • Capacity constrained: Go through the workers in ascending order of their capacity. For
           each worker, pick from among the arms that we can afford the arm that yields the best ratio
           in terms of relative increase in value. Continue until the workers’ capacity is lower than the
           cost of any available arm.
         • Scheduling: Organize workers by descending order of the number of available slots. For
           each worker, evaluate the value of adding each arm, if the worker and that arm have a
           compatible timeslot.
         • Routing: No computationally efficient solution that is iterative; not implemented.

D.6      I TERATIVE DQN

Same as the iterative myopic baseline, but instead of using the expected value of the one-step next
state, we use the Q-network estimates to estimate the long-run value.

E       E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
E.1     DATA GENERATION

Across all experimental settings, the base MDP used to represent each arm is the 4-state MDP
described in Appendix B.2. We randomly generate transition probabilities. The constraints on the
actions are generated for each problem setting as described in Appendix C.

F       I MPLEMENTATION
Our implementation uses PyTorch and TorchRL (Bou et al., 2024) libraries. We build off code from
Dumouchelle et al. (2022) to embed a neural network with single-layer ReLU activations as a MILP
(Fischetti & Jo, 2018).
For consistency in results, the random seeds are set between 1 and 30 for the results.
To train the Q-network, we use the hyperparameters specified in Table 2.

G       RUNTIME
Experiments are run on a cluster running CentOS with Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2683 v4 @ 2.1
GHz with 8GB of RAM using Python 3.9.12. The MIP was solved using Gurobi optimizer 10.0.2.
    2
    Francis J. Narcowich notes https://www.math.tamu.edu/˜fnarc/m641/m641_notes/
continuous2014.pdf
  3
    https://www.gurobi.com/documentation/current/refman/cs_model_agc_pwl.
html


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Table 2: Hyperparameters used in implementation to train SEQUOIA

      Hyperparameter                 Setting
      Discount factor γ              0.99
      Epsilon greedy ϵ               0.9 starting; final 0.05; 1000 rate of exponential decay
      Learning rate                  2.5 × 10−4
      Adam ϵ                         1.5 × 10−4
      Target update rate τ           1 × 10−6
      Minibatch size                 32
      Replay memory size             10,000
      Number of training episodes    100
      Network architecture           Two hidden layers of size 32 each


Empirically, we noticed that a major computational bottleneck was the size of the Q-network. Even
with only two hidden layers, training a network with 128 hidden units took an order of magnitude
longer than with 32 hidden units, underlining the tradeoff between expressivity of the Q-network
and runtime.
The average running time of the training procedure of SEQUOIA is listed in Table 3.

                               Table 3: Total runtime (in minutes)

                                  J = 20    J = 40     J = 100
                                    25.5       76.7     475.2


                                                22
