Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F INE -T UNING ATTENTION M ODULES O NLY:
E NHANCING W EIGHT D ISENTANGLEMENT IN TASK
A RITHMETIC
 Ruochen Jin∗ ,1,2 , Bojian Hou∗,2 , Jiancong Xiao∗,2 , Weijie J. Su2 , and Li Shen2
 1
   East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
 2
   University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
 {ruochenj,bojianh,jcxiao}@upenn.edu,suw@wharton.upenn.edu,
 lishen@upenn.edu



                                               A BSTRACT

             In recent years, task arithmetic has garnered increasing attention. This approach
             edits pre-trained models directly in weight space by combining the fine-tuned
             weights of various tasks into a unified model. Its efficiency and cost-effectiveness
             stem from its training-free combination, contrasting with traditional methods that
             require model training on large datasets for multiple tasks. However, applying
             such a unified model to individual tasks can lead to interference from other tasks
             (lack of weight disentanglement). To address this issue, Neural Tangent Kernel
             (NTK) linearization has been employed to leverage a “kernel behavior”, facilitat-
             ing weight disentanglement and mitigating adverse effects from unrelated tasks.
             Despite its benefits, NTK linearization presents drawbacks, including doubled
             training costs, as well as reduced performance of individual models. To tackle
             this problem, we propose a simple yet effective and efficient method that is to
             finetune the attention modules only in the Transformer. Our study reveals that the
             attention modules exhibit kernel behavior, and fine-tuning the attention modules
             only significantly improves weight disentanglement. To further understand how
             our method improves the weight disentanglement of task arithmetic, we present
             a comprehensive study of task arithmetic by differentiating the role of the rep-
             resentation module and task-specific module. In particular, we find that the rep-
             resentation module plays an important role in improving weight disentanglement
             whereas the task-specific modules such as the classification heads can degrade the
             weight disentanglement performance. 1


1        I NTRODUCTION
The emergence of large pre-trained models in the open-source community has significantly ex-
panded the potential to enhance performance on downstream tasks (Ilharco et al., 2023; 2022;
Zhuang et al., 2020), align with human preferences (Lu et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022; Xiao et al.,
2024; Li et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025), and improve robustness (Hou et al., 2017; Ortiz-Jiménez
et al., 2021; Santurkar et al., 2021; Tancik et al., 2020). However, traditional methods often in-
volve expensive joint fine-tuning across multiple tasks (Zhuang et al., 2020) and rely heavily on
human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022), which limits their scalability and broad adoption. Moreover,
optimizing performance for specific downstream tasks usually compromises the model’s initial pre-
training performance or zero-shot accuracy (French, 1999; McCloskey & Cohen, 1989).
In light of these challenges, the necessity of task arithmetic in multitask learning has become increas-
ingly evident. Task arithmetic offers a cost-effective and efficient alternative by enabling training-
free combinations in the weight space of pre-trained models without sacrificing the model’s original
capabilities (Ilharco et al., 2023). Central to this approach is the concept of a task vector, which
represents a set of weight adjustments specifically calibrated for a given task through fine-tuning,
     ∗
         Equal Contribution
     1
         The code is available at https://github.com/kyrie-23/task_arithmetic_tangent.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Task arithmetic performance comparison between different methods. The task arith-
metic performance (the average accuracy of the unified model over all the tasks) of our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art due to both good performance of individual models and good kernel
behavior (weight disentanglement).

                                           Performance of       Kernel Behavior      Task Arithmetic
                                          Individual Models (Weight Disentanglement)  Performance
       Ilharco et al. (2023)                     ✓                     -                     70.00%
       Ortiz-Jimenez et al. (2024)               -                     ✓                     76.26%
       Ours                                      ✓                     ✓                     78.37%



                           Task Arithmetic                             Weight Disentanglement

                              Individual Model                    Nearly Equal Performance


                    Finetuning
                                                                           Task 1

       Pre-trained Model                          Unified Model


                                                                           Task 2
                                    ...                                     ...


                                                                           Task T



Figure 1: Illustration of the concepts of task arithmetic and weight disentanglement. On the
left-hand side, in task arithmetic, we first finetune the pre-trained model θ0 and get the finetuned
individual model θ0 + αt τt where τt is the tth task vector. We eventually obtain the unified model
                                                                  PT
by adding all the task vectors to the pre-trained model: θ0 + t=1 αt τt . On the right-hand side,
weight disentanglement means that the prediction of the unified model on a specific task will not be
affected by other tasks.


obtained by subtracting the task-specific weights from the original pre-trained weights (Ilharco et al.,
2023). Each task vector encodes a unique representational signature tailored to a particular task.
As illustrated in Figure 1 (left), θ0 is the pretrained model and τt , t = 1, · · · , T is the tth task
vector. The individual model on each task is derived by θ0 + αt τt . Task arithmetic is to add all
                                                                          PT
the task vectors to the pre-trained model to obtain the unified model θ0 + t=1 αt τt . A main goal
in task arithmetic is to achieve weight disentanglement as shown in Figure 1 (right) which means
the prediction performance of the unified model such as the accuracy on a specific task will not be
affected by other tasks. In other words, the unified model has nearly equal performance with the
individual model.
The reason that we aim to achieve weight disentanglement is because task arithmetic primarily
focuses on competing tasks rather than synergistic ones (Ilharco et al., 2023), as the challenge lies
in balancing and optimizing performance across tasks that may have conflicts or require different
model behaviors. This emphasis on competing tasks is crucial for developing robust multi-task
models that can effectively handle a diverse range of applications without performance degradation.
However, weight disentanglement remains the most formidable challenge in task arithmetic. Recent
research (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2024) has shown that constraining models to fine-tune within the tan-
gent space significantly improves weight disentanglement, thanks to the inherent kernel behavior of
models during early fine-tuning stages. This kernel behavior, formalized by the Neural Tangent Ker-
nel (NTK) theory (Jacot et al., 2018), refers to neural networks updating primarily around pre-trained
parameter initializations. While NTK linearization is effective, it compromises the performance of


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 NTK linearization
 (Ortiz-Jimenez et                                                                                          Better task arithmetic
      al. 2024)
                                                                                                              Better performance of
                                                   Attention module                  Fine-tuning                individual model
     Proves
                     Inspires   Our work   Shows    exhibits kernel        Shows
                                                                          Enables     attention   Showsin
                                                                                                 Result
                                                       behavior                     modules only
 Kernel behavior                                                                                             Greater weight    More
  leads to weight                                                                                           disentanglement   efficient
 disentanglement


                                             Figure 2: Logic flow of our work.


individual models and demands two to three times more computational resources, conflicting with
task arithmetic’s original efficiency goals.
To tackle this problem, we hypothesize that a combination of non-linear fine-tuning and weight dis-
entanglement is necessary. This hypothesis motivates us to investigate the following question: Does
there exist a sub-module within neural networks where non-linear fine-tuning can exhibit weight dis-
entanglement? We demonstrate that attention modules in transformer models exhibit kernel behavior
(see Figure 3) which is crucial for weight disentanglement. This finding is supported by empirical
evidence using post-hoc linearization (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2024), a technique that approximates
the change in network output after training using a first-order Taylor expansion. Building upon the
insights above, we propose to fine-tune the attention modules only, which will improve the per-
formance of individual models and efficiency while maintaining the weight disentanglement. This
logic flow is illustrated in Figure 2.
By focusing on fine-tuning only the attention modules, our approach significantly improves weight
disentanglement and accuracy of the unified model compared to non-linear fine-tuning and NTK
linearization (see Table 2), while substantially reducing computational burden and memory usage.
This method offers a balanced alternative that maintains strong performance of individual models
while enhancing weight disentanglement capabilities, providing a practical solution for improving
task arithmetic performance without sacrificing efficiency or accuracy.
To further understand how our method improves the weight disentanglement of task arithmetic, we
present a study by differentiating the role of the representation module and task-specific module,
while existing literature (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2024) formulated task arithmetic using a single model
without clearly differentiating them. We conduct a comprehensive study of task arithmetic on pre-
trained Vision Transformer (ViT) models like the Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP)
(Radford et al., 2021), providing new insights into its fundamental mechanisms and proposing novel
methods to improve the performance of pre-trained models through task arithmetic. Specifically, we
illustrate that the representation module plays an important role in improving weight disentangle-
ment whereas this has been constrained by task-specific modules, such as classification heads.
In particular, our main contributions are as follows:
         • We propose a simple yet effective and efficient method that only fine-tunes attention mod-
           ules, which improves weight disentanglement and the average accuracy of the unified
           model on all the tasks up to 2.38% improvement compared to the state-of-the-art meth-
           ods and 8.37% over the non-linear baseline on several vision-language benchmarks.
         • We demonstrate that the attention module exhibits kernel behavior, suggesting that focusing
           on fine-tuning these modules could enhance the weight disentanglement capabilities in task
           arithmetic while maintaining efficiency.
         • We reformulate the architecture of task arithmetic by separating the representation module
           from task-specific modules, revealing that while weight disentanglement mostly comes
           from the representation module, the effectiveness of task arithmetic is constrained by task-
           specific components like classification heads.

2     P RELIMINARIES : TASK A RITHMETIC AND W EIGHT D ISENTANGLEMENT

We begin by introducing the necessary mathematical notations. Let F : X × Θ → Y be a neural
network taking inputs x ∈ X and parameterized by a set of weights ϑ ∈ Θ, which consists of a


                                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


representation module f (·; θ) and a task-specific module g(·; ω) where ϑ = {θ, ω}. We assume X ⊆
Rd , Θ ⊆ Rm and Y ⊆ Rc . Consider T tasks, with every task t consisting of a triplet (Dt , µt , Ft∗ ),
where Dt ⊆ X is a data support (e.g., ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) images), µt an input distribution
such that supp(µt ) = Dt , and Ft∗ : Dt → Y a target function (e.g., labels). In practice, each task is
identified with a training set {(xv , Ft∗ (xv ))}v∈[n] where Ft∗ (xv ) = g(f (xv ; θt∗ ); ωt ) with x ∼ µt ,
that is used to fine-tune the representation modules starting from the pre-trained weights θ0 and to
obtain the fine-tuned weights θt∗ , while the task-specific modules are fixed at ωt .
Having established this context, we can now introduce the key concepts of this work: task vectors
and task arithmetic.

Definition 1 (Task Vector and Task Arithmetic) Let θ0 denote the parameters of the pre-trained
representation modules and θt denote the parameters after fine-tuning on task t. The task vector τt
for task t is defined as: τt = θt −θ0 . Task arithmetic is an operation of adapting a pre-trained model
to T different tasks by modifying the pre-trained parameters θ0 to the unified parameters θunified as
follows:
                                                         XT
                                         θunified = θ0 +     αt τt ,
                                                         t=1
where αt are scalar coefficients.

To distinguish from the concept of a unified model, we refer to the model fθt fine-tuned on a specific
task T as an individual model. It is worth noting that adding a single task vector τt to a pre-trained
model with a coefficient α = 1 yields a model equivalent to this individual model fθt .

Non-linear Fine-Tuning. The initial idea of task arithmetic was introduced by Ilharco et al.
(2023). They demonstrated that performance of the unified model on multiple tasks could be im-
proved simultaneously through task arithmetic. However, the performance of the model still lagged
behind that of individual models specifically fine-tuned for particular tasks. In the remainder of this
paper, we refer to this baseline method as non-linear fine-tuning, as the task vectors τt are obtained
through this approach.

Accuracy Gap. We define the accuracy gap as the difference in accuracy on task t between the
unified model and the corresponding individual model. A plausible hypothesis for this accuracy gap
is that the task vectors for different tasks exhibit implicit conflicts with one another. To address the
limitations of non-linear fine-tuning, Ortiz-Jimenez et al. (2024) proposed that weight disentangle-
ment is an important and potentially necessary condition for effective task arithmetic.

Definition 2 (Weight disentanglement) Given T different tasks and their corresponding supports
D = {Dt }t∈[T ] . We say a set of task vectors T = {τt }t∈[T ] is weight disentangled with respect to a
parametric function f : X × Θ → Y and the initial weights θ0 , if
                           !                                                                
                  XT             X T                                                  [
      f x; θ0 +       αt τt =        f (x; θ0 + αt τt )1(x ∈ Dt ) + f (x; θ0 )1 x ∈
                                                                                   /      Dt  . (1)
                   t=1            t=1                                                    t∈[T ]

where f is the representation module.

Remark. Although the concept of weight disentanglement was originally proposed by Ortiz-
Jimenez et al. (2024), our Definition 2 differs from theirs in several key aspects.
Firstly, our definition characterizes weight disentanglement as a property of a set of task vectors
w.r.t. the function f , whereas it was originally defined as a property of the function f w.r.t. the task
vectors. There are two reasons for our reversed formulation. 1) The term “weight disentanglement”
corresponds to T different weights (i.e., task vectors), rather than f . 2) Both Ortiz-Jimenez et al.
(2024)’s and our approach aim to find better task vectors T , rather than finding better f .
Secondly, our definition applies specifically to the representation module, whereas the original def-
inition encompasses the entire neural network. This is primarily motivated by the fact that task
arithmetic is performed exclusively on the representation module. We will show later in Section 4
that this definition is well-defined: weight disentanglement emerges from the representation module.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


NTK Linearization Fine-tuning. Inspired by studies of NTK showing that very wide neural net-
works behave similarly to linear functions around their initialization θ0 , Ortiz-Jiménez et al. (2021)
proposed fine-tuning the task vectors τ on a post-hoc linear function, denoted as flin , of f at θ0 :
                             flin (x; θ0 + τ ) = f (x; θ0 ) + τ ⊤ ∇θ f (x; θ0 ).
The obtained task vectors are denoted as Tlin . The authors further demonstrated empirically that this
approach yields an important property: Tlin is weight disentangled w.r.t. flin at θ0 .
To conclude this section, we define good task arithmetic performance as characterized by three key
factors: high accuracy, computational efficiency, and good weight disentanglement.

3     TASK A RITHMETIC IN ATTENTION M ODULES
3.1   M AIN C HALLENGE OF TASK A RITHMETIC

Based on our previous definition, the performance of the unified model on each task t can be simply
decomposed as follows:

           Accuracy of unified models = Accuracy of individual models - Accuracy Gap.

Unfortunately, existing studies reveal a trade-off between these factors. Non-linear fine-tuning can
achieve high accuracy for individual models, but the resulting task vectors are less weight disentan-
gled, leading to a larger accuracy gap in the unified model. Conversely, linear fine-tuning guarantees
weight disentanglement and thus a lower accuracy gap, but the linearly fine-tuned individual models
tend to be less accurate, as linear approximation brings error to the models. This trade-off presents
a significant challenge in task arithmetic.
To this aim, we hypothesize that a combination of non-linear fine-tuning and weight disentangle-
ment is necessary. This hypothesis motivates us to investigate the following question: Does there
exist a sub-module within neural networks where non-linear fine-tuning can exhibit weight disen-
tanglement? Our investigation reveals that the attention module is a promising candidate.

3.2   ACCURACY G AP : K ERNEL B EHAVIOR AND W EIGHT D ISENTANGLEMENT OF
      ATTENTION M ODULE

As per the study of NTK studies and the dis-
cussion in Ortiz-Jimenez et al. (2024), if a pre-                                   1.0
                                                      Post-hoc Finetuning Accuracy(%)


trained network f (·; θ0 ) exhibits kernel behav-                                   0.9
ior during fine-tuning – that is, if the neu-
ral network updates primarily around its pre-                                       0.8
trained parameter initialization and can be ap-                                     0.7
proximated by its first-order Taylor expansion
– then the resulting task vectors are weight dis-                                   0.6
entangled. Directly examining whether kernel
behavior can be challenging; however, it can be                                     0.5         Post-hoc vs. Non-linear (ViT)
                                                                                                Post-hoc vs. Non-linear (Attention)
approximated by the following test.                                                 0.4         Equal Accuracy Line
                                                                                        0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Kernel Behavior Test. Given a function f                                                    Non-linear Finetuning Accuracy(%)
with initial parameters θ0 , and a task t with task
vector τt , we define the Kernel Behavior Test as Figure 3: Accuracy of non-linear and post-hoc
follows. If the equation                            models by tasks. The diagonal dashed line indi-
                                                    cates post-hoc performance meets non-linear.
        f (x; θ0 + τt ) = flin (x; θ0 + τt ),
holds for all x in the dataset of task t, we say that f (·; θ) exhibits kernel behavior during fine-tuning
using the given approach on task t, or more simply, that the given approach exhibits kernel behavior.
In our experiments, we compare the average accuracy across T tasks of the non-linear function
(f (·)) and the post-hoc linear function (flin ), fune-tuning on (1) all the parameters and (2) only on
the attention modules. Specifically, we fine-tune several CLIP pre-trained ViTs (Dosovitskiy et al.,


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Trainable                Fixed           Linearized
                                    Parameters              Parameters           Part



                       Layer Norm                Layer Norm              Layer Norm

                      Feed Forward               Feed Forward            Feed Forward


                       Layer Norm                Layer Norm              Layer Norm


                        Attention                  Attention               Attention


                           (a)                        (b)                     (c)
Figure 4: Three types of fine-tuning paradigms. (a) Non-linear fine-tuning where all the parame-
ters will be updated. (b) Full-model linearization. (c) Attention modules only fine-tuning where only
Wq , Wv , Wk and Wo will be updated. In this paper, we explore attention modules only fine-tuning.

2021) of different sizes following the same setup as Ilharco et al. (2023) on 8 tasks: Cars (Krause
et al., 2013), DTD (Cimpoi et al., 2014), SUN397 (Xiao et al., 2016), EuroSAT (Helber et al., 2019),
GTSRB (Stallkamp et al., 2011), MNIST (LeCun, 1998), SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011) and RESISC45
(Cheng et al., 2017).
The results in Figure 3 indicate that the attention module demonstrates kernel behavior. The triangle
dots show the comparison of the kernel behavior test between the attention modules (yellow) and
the whole models (blue), respectively. The proximity of dots to the diagonal dashed line indicates
kernel behavior. The post-hoc of attention module, represented by yellow dots, consistently appears
closer to the diagonal dashed line than the whole ViT (blue dots), suggesting superior performance.
This indicates that attention modules demonstrate stronger kernel behavior compared to the full
model, suggesting that focusing on fine-tuning these modules could enhance the weight disentan-
glement, finally resulting in a low accuracy gap.

3.3      ACCURACY OF I NDIVIDUAL M ODELS WITH F INE -T UNING ATTENTION M ODULES

Based on the kernel behavior of attention modules, we propose focusing on fine-tuning only the
attention modules. The comparison of our fine-tuning paradigms with the non-linear fine-tuning
paradigm and the NTK linearization fine-tuning paradigm is demonstrated in Figure 4. Next, we
will show that fine-tuning attention modules also achieves high accuracy for individual models.
Non-Linear Advantage. We will first introduce a crucial concept referred to as non-linear advan-
tage. For a given approach, the non-linear advantage is defined as the difference in accuracy of
individual models between non-linear fine-tuning and the approach in question. Since non-linear
fine-tuning typically achieves the highest accuracy for individual models, the non-linear advantage
is always non-negative, i.e., non-linear advantage ≥ 0.
Accuracy of Individual Models. In Figure 5, we demonstrate that fine-tuning attention mod-
ules can reduce the non-linear advantage—essentially improving the accuracy of individual mod-
els—compared to NTK linearization fine-tuning2 . The figure presents two comparisons: 1) Round
markers represent the comparison between our method and non-linear fine-tuning. 2) Triangular
markers show the comparison between NTK linearization and non-linear fine-tuning.
The proximity of markers to the diagonal dashed line indicates a non-linear advantage equal to zero.
Our method, represented by round markers, consistently appears closer to the diagonal dashed line
than the NTK linearization (triangular markers), indicating a smaller non-linear advantage. This
visual representation demonstrates that our approach of fine-tuning attention modules achieves per-
   2
       Please see Appendix B for performance on each task.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Comparison of performance for task arithmetic across various visual models. This
table presents the average accuracy (%) and normalized accuracy (%) of various ViTs after incor-
porating the sum of task vectors from eight different tasks. We report results for the non-linear
fine-tuning and NTK linearized models normalizing performance by their single-task accuracy.

                                   ViT-B-32                 ViT-B-16                                                              ViT-L-14
   Method
                              Abs.(↑) Norm.(↑)         Abs.(↑) Norm.(↑)                                                      Abs.(↑) Norm.(↑)
   Pre-trained                48.40      -             55.25                                                -                66.40         -
   Non-linear Fine-tuning     70.00      77.04         74.75                                                80.59            84.40         89.47
   NTK Linearization          76.26      85.82         79.01                                                86.32            85.53         91.44
   Ours                       78.37      87.42         80.44                                                87.25            87.91         93.66

Table 3: Comparison of performance for task arithmetic across different language models.
This table presents the average accuracy (%) of Flan-T5-base models on GLUE benchmark.

                         glue-cola glue-mnli glue-mrpc glue-qqp glue-rte glue-sst2 glue-stsb avg
Non-linear Fine-tuning    79.87       80.94      59.31                                                  82.19    50.54       89.33        70.55 73.25
NTK Linearization         75.93       83.19      76.72                                                  87.88    62.09       92.09        66.51 77.77
Ours                      80.63       86.25      86.76                                                  89.69    72.20       93.92        87.67 85.30


formance closer to that of non-linear fine-tuning compared to NTK linearization, thus reducing the
non-linear advantage more effectively.

3.4    ACCURACY OF U NIFIED M ODELS WITH F INE - TUNING ATTENTION M ODULES

We have demonstrated that our method has achieved both high accuracy for individual models and
solved the accuracy gap. Then we will validate that our method has achieved high accuracy for
unified models in terms of average accuracy and normalized accuracy.
To obtain the task vectors, we use the fine-tuned weights of different ViTs from before and use the
same mixing coefficient for all tasks, i.e., α = α1 = · · · = αT to ensure a fair comparison with
Ortiz-Jimenez et al. (2024). We provide all the details of this experiment in Appendix A.
                                                         Our/NTK linearization Finetuning Accuracy(%)


Normalized Accuracy. The normalized accuracy
is calculated by the individual accuracy achieved by                                                1.00
the model fine-tuned on each task. Mathematically,                                                  0.95
                     T
                                                                                                    0.90
                                         P
                   1 X  [acc (f (x; θ0 + t αt τt ))]
Normalized Acc =                                     .                                                         Ours vs. Non-linear (ViT-B-32)
                   T t=1 [acc (f (x; θ0 + αt τt ))]                                                 0.85       Ours vs. Non-linear (ViT-B-16)
                                                                                                               Ours vs. Non-linear (ViT-L-14)
Accuracy of Unified Models. We employ the                                                           0.80       NTK Linearization vs. Non-linear (ViT-B-32)
benchmark proposed by Ilharco et al. (2023) to                                                      0.75       NTK Linearization vs. Non-linear (ViT-B-16)
evaluate the task arithmetic ability of a pre-trained                                                          NTK Linearization vs. Non-linear (ViT-L-14)
                                                                                                    0.70       Equal Accuracy Line
model, which consists of the 8 tasks described in
                                                                                                         0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
Section 3.2. In particular, Table 2 shows that                                                                Non-linear Finetuning Accuracy(%)
our method significantly outperforms its non-linear
counterparts (Ilharco et al., 2023) and achieves state- Figure 5: Averaged accuracy of non-linear
of-the-art results on the task addition benchmarks. and linear models. The diagonal dashed
Our model achieves higher accuracy of the unified line indicates linear fine-tuning performance
model through task addition (up to 2.38%). Addi- meets non-linear.
tionally, our method not only outperforms on averaged accuracy but also on normalization accuracy.
For Natual Language Processing (NLP) tasks, we utilize the Flan-T5 (Chung et al., 2022) as our
pre-trained language model. For fine-tuning, we employ the Flan-T5-base models on seven tasks
derived from the General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark (Wang et al.,
2018) with the same random seed 42 to initialize the models. These tasks are CoLA, MNLI, MRPC,


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Efficiency comparison in terms of parameters, size, and training time. The NTK
linearization requires two to three times more computational resources and doubles the memory
footprint compared to its non-linear counterpart. Our method outperforms NTK linearization in
accuracy with only a quarter of the costs.

                                                             Computational
                             Total Params Trainable Params                 Training Time (Min)
                                                              Cost (MB)
    Non-linear Fine-tuning     222 M          222 M             891.614             17:38
    NTK Linearization          470 M          222 M            1,881.926            40:59
    Ours                       222 M          63.7 M            891.614             10:15



QQP, RTE, SST2, and STSB. We report accuracy for all tasks and an average accuracy in Table 3,
our method outperforms both non-linear fine-tuning and NTK linearization in vision and NLP tasks.
Ablation Study. To investigate whether we
can enhance weight disentanglement perfor- Table 5: Ablation study. Single-task and perfor-
mance by fine-tuning the Multiple-Layer Per- mance of unified model (%) on 4 different settings.
ceptron (MLP) modules in addition to atten-
tion modules, we conduct an ablation exper-                    Single-task       Multi-task
iment with four paradigms: (1) fine-tuning        Paradigm
                                                               Accuracy(↑) Abs.(↑) Norm.(↑)
only attention weights (Q, K, V , and O
projections) (ours), (2) fine-tuning attention        (1)         89.55      78.37       87.42
weights and biases, (3) fine-tuning both at-          (2)         89.48      77.71       86.79
tention and MLP weights, and (4) fine-tuning          (3)         88.95      76.52       86.11
attention and MLP weights along with bi-              (4)         89.43      77.80       86.93
ases. Remarkably, all four paradigms outper-
formed NTK linearization in terms of both performance and weight disentanglement, indicating that
ViT models exhibit strong kernel behavior within the attention modules and MLP. However, per-
formance varied based on whether bias parameters were fine-tuned, with the best results aligning
closely with settings used in LoRA. This suggests that further exploration of these configurations
could yield valuable insights into optimizing task arithmetic.
Efficiency Comparison. Besides superior accuracy, our method is much more efficient than non-
linear fine-tuning and NTK linearization as shown in Table 4 due to fine-tuning fewer parameters.
Our fine-tuning method significantly enhances the appeal of task arithmetic for practical applica-
tions. By improving the performance of individual models, our approach demonstrates the superior-
ity of task arithmetic in achieving good accuracy of the unified model efficiently. Additionally, we
have observed that kernel behavior within attention modules fosters greater task disentanglement.
In the subsequent section, we will delve deeper into this concept, exploring its implications and
potential for future advancements.

4     ROBUSTNESS OF TASK A RITHMETIC WITH R ESPECT TO C OEFFICIENT α
In previous sections, we discuss how to find a good T in task arithmetic. Yet the robustness of task
arithmetic (i.e., the effect of α) on weight disentanglement has not been explored. To this end, in
the following section, we first propose a metric to evaluate the weight disentanglement performance
called “disentanglement error” on the representation module and prove that weight disentanglement
emerges from the representation module. Then, we illustrate that our method has great weight
disentanglement for a wider choice of α for both representation and classification modules, which
demonstrates the robustness of the task arithmetic of our method.

4.1     W EIGHT D ISENTANGLEMENT E MERGES F ROM R EPRESENTATION M ODULE

To explore the robustness of task arithmetic and its effect on weight disentanglement, we propose a
metric called “disentanglement error” to evaluate weight disentanglement performance. Unlike pre-
vious work that focused on task-specific modules, we investigate whether the representation module
can satisfy Definition 2 (Weight Disentanglement) without relying on task-specific components.


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Non-linear Fine-tuning                NTK Linearization                      Ours


Representation
Classification


Figure 6: Visualization of weight disentanglement. The heatmaps show the disentanglement error
ξ(α1 , α2 ) (see Eq. (2)) of a single representation module CLIP ViT-B/32 (top) and a combination
of representation module and classification module on DTD - SUN397 task pair. We use prediction
error for classification task as Ortiz-Jimenez did (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2024). Three fine-tuning
paradigms are used from left to right: non-linear fine-tuning, NTK linearization, and ours. The blue
regions denote areas of the weight space where weight disentanglement is stronger.

Our hypothesis is that pre-trained models can demonstrate task arithmetic properties independently
of downstream tasks, maintaining consistent representations through task arithmetic. By focusing
on the representation module alone, we aim to show that the inherent properties of pre-trained mod-
els are sufficient to support task arithmetic, potentially simplifying the process and broadening its
applicability.
To visualize the level of weight disentanglement, we measure the discrepancy with Eq. (1) using the
disentanglement error (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2024):
                                       2
                                       X
                      ξ(α1 , α2 ) =          Ex∼µt [dist (f (x; θ0 + αt τt ), f (x; θ0 + α1 τ1 + α2 τ2 ))] ,   (2)
                                       t=1

where “dist” denotes any distance metric between output vectors. As we are dealing with represen-
tation distributions, in what follows we use the Kullback–Leibler divergence as the distance metric.
In general, the smaller the value of ξ(α1 , α2 ) the more weight disentangled a model is at (α1 , α2 ).

4.2              W EIGHT D ISENTANGLEMENT R ESULTS

Figure 6 displays the disentanglement error of a CLIP ViT-B/32 model concerning several task
vector pairs from different fine-tuning paradigms. We observe a minimal disentanglement error
within a small region surrounding θ0 , which enables task arithmetic. Different from disentanglement
error at downstream tasks, it remains relatively small even for α1 , α2 > 1, which indicates the power
of task arithmetic has been limited by the performance of task-specific modules (classification head).
Disentanglement Error Comparison. Our method demonstrates greater weight disentanglement
than its counterparts, as evidenced by the more extensive regions with low disentanglement errors
in Figure 6 (right). This explains the higher normalized accuracy achieved (cf. Table 2) when
fine-tuning attention modules only. The combination of greater weight disentanglement and better
performance of individual models results in higher performance of the unified model.


                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These results demonstrate that our method achieves great weight disentanglement for a wider choice
of α for both representation and classification modules, illustrating the robustness of task arithmetic
in our approach.

5   R ELATED W ORK
Existing model merging techniques can be broadly categorized into two main types (Yang et al.,
2024): (i) Pre-Merging Methods: These methods focus on enhancing the conditions necessary for
effective model merging by optimizing the fine-tuning process of individual models. (ii) During
Merging Methods: These approaches address task conflicts and interference through various strate-
gies before executing the parameter merging operations.
Pre-Merging Methods. To establish better conditions for model merging, a significant body of
work has focused on the fine-tuning processes of independent models. For instance, Ortiz-Jimenez
et al. (2024) propose fine-tuning within the tangent space of the pre-trained model, leveraging the
NTK framework to enhance performance during the fine-tuning stage. However, fine-tuning all
parameters in the linearized model can be computationally intensive compared to nonlinear fine-
tuning. To mitigate this issue, some studies advocate for selectively linearizing only certain layers;
for example, Tang et al. (2023) suggest partially linearizing Adapter modules prior to merging them.
Additionally, TAFT (Liu et al., 2024) introduces an efficient linearization method specifically for
Transformer architectures, deriving closed-form linearized solutions that facilitate smoother inte-
gration of models. Overall, fine-tuning in the tangent space aids in disentangling both input and
weight spaces, thereby reducing potential interference during subsequent model merging.
During Merging Methods. In the context of multi-task learning (MTL), model merging can be
effectively achieved by employing various strategies to resolve task conflicts and perform parameter
merging operations. Traditional methods often involve averaging or combining weights from multi-
ple models to create a unified system, as demonstrated in prior works (Garipov et al., 2018; Ilharco
et al., 2023; Wortsman et al., 2022). However, these basic merging techniques frequently underper-
form, particularly when tasks interfere with one another. Advanced methods have been developed to
address this challenge by incorporating weighted-based strategies that assign different importance
levels to task vectors during merging (Matena & Raffel, 2021; Ainsworth et al., 2023; Stoica et al.,
2023; Yang et al., 2023). Furthermore, some approaches transform models into sparse subspaces be-
fore merging, effectively mitigating task interference and allowing for the removal of insignificant
neurons from individual models while enabling the combination of multiple sparse models within a
parameter subspace (Yadav et al., 2023; Tam et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Huh
et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024). This innovative perspective opens new avenues for model merging,
enhancing overall performance and flexibility in multi-task applications.
Our method falls into the Pre-Merging category, focusing on the fine-tuning process and achieving
superior performance in task arithmetic with high efficiency.

6   D ISCUSSION
In this work, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of task arithmetic in deep neural networks, un-
covering its fundamental mechanisms and enhancing its performance. Our findings reveal that atten-
tion modules exhibit kernel behavior, leading to improved weight disentanglement when fine-tuned
exclusively, without compromising individual accuracy or efficiency. Crucially, we demonstrated
that weight disentanglement emerges primarily from the representation module, while task-specific
modules can limit the effectiveness of task arithmetic. This insight opens up new possibilities for
applying task arithmetic in unsupervised learning scenarios and broadens its potential applications.
While our approach significantly advances the field of task arithmetic, several limitations and op-
portunities for future research remain. Current task vectors are constrained to models with identical
architectures and initializations due to their reliance on element-wise weight operations. Future stud-
ies could explore integrating task arithmetic with partial fine-tuning techniques, focusing on varying
numbers of attention blocks. Additionally, investigating the relationship between the sparsity of
attention modules and their kernel behavior may provide insights into learnable tasks. Understand-
ing the nuanced impact of fine-tuning bias on model performance and weight disentanglement also
presents an important avenue for future research. These investigations could lead to more robust
and efficient methods for adapting pre-trained models to various tasks, significantly enhancing their
applicability and effectiveness in real-world scenarios.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Samuel K Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging mod-
  els modulo permutation symmetries. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.04836.

Gong Cheng, Junwei Han, and Xiaoqiang Lu. Remote sensing image scene classification: Bench-
  mark and state of the art. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2017. URL https://ieeexplore.
  ieee.org/document/7891544.

Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gor-
 don, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for
 contrastive language-image learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2818–2829, June 2023.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,
  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pel-
  lat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao,
  Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin,
  Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, December 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2210.11416.

Mircea Cimpoi, Subhransu Maji, Iasonas Kokkinos, Sammy Mohamed, and Andrea Vedaldi. De-
 scribing textures in the wild. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
 (CVPR), 2014. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2014/
 html/Cimpoi_Describing_Textures_in_2014_CVPR_paper.html.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
   tion (CVPR), 2009. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/
   5206848.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recogni-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.

Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
  ences, 1999. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S1364661399012942.

Timur Garipov, Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
  Loss surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns. In Conference on Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.10026.

Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Trebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Mari-
 beth Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham,
 Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Ramona Comanescu, Fan Yang, Abigail See, Sumanth
 Dathathri, Rory Greig, Charlie Chen, Doug Fritz, Jaume Sanchez Elias, Richard Green, Sona
 Mokra, Nicholas Fernando, Boxi Wu, Rachel Foley, Susannah Young, Iason Gabriel, William
 Isaac, John Mellor, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Lisa Anne Hendricks, and Geoffrey
 Irving. Improving alignment of dialogue agents via targeted human judgements. https:
 //www.deepmind.com/blog/building-safer-dialogue-agents, 2022.

Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. Journal of Selected Topics
  in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1709.00029.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bo-Jian Hou, Lijun Zhang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Learning with feature evolvable streams. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Chenyu Huang, Peng Ye, Tao Chen, Tong He, Xiangyu Yue, and Wanli Ouyang. Emr-merging:
  Tuning-free high-performance model merging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17461, May 2024.
Minyoung Huh, Brian Cheung, Jeremy Bernstein, Phillip Isola, and Pulkit Agrawal. Training neural
 networks from scratch with parallel low-rank adapters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16828, Febru-
 ary 2024. Submitted on 26 Feb 2024, last revised 26 Jul 2024.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Shuran Song, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Si-
  mon Kornblith, Ali Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Patching open-vocabulary models by interpo-
  lating weights. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05592.
Gabriel Ilharco, Marco Túlio Ribeiro, Mitchell Wortsman, Suchin Gururangan, Ludwig Schmidt,
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi. Editing models with task arithmetic. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2110.08207.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2018/file/5a4be1fa34e62bb8a6ec6b91d2462f5a-Paper.pdf.
Jonathan Krause, Michael Stark, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for fine-grained
  categorization. In International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVw), 2013. URL
  https://www.cv-foundation.org/openaccess/content_iccv_workshops_
  2013/W19/html/Krause_3D_Object_Representations_2013_ICCV_paper.
  html.
Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits, 1998. URL http://yann.lecun.
  com/exdb/mnist/.
Weishi Li, Yong Peng, Miao Zhang, Liang Ding, Han Hu, and Li Shen. Deep model fusion: A
 survey, 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15698.
Ziniu Li, Congliang Chen, Tian Xu, Zeyu Qin, Jiancong Xiao, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo.
  Entropic distribution matching for supervised fine-tuning of LLMs: Less overfitting and better
  diversity. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=NQEe7B7bSw.
Tian Yu Liu, Aditya Golatkar, and Stefano Soatto. Tangent transformers for composition, pri-
  vacy and removal. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2024.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Con-
   ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019. URL https://openreview.net/
   forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7.
Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Liwei Jiang, Jack Hessel, Lianhui Qin, Peter West, Prithviraj Am-
  manabrolu, and Yejin Choi. Quark: Controllable text generation with reinforced unlearn-
  ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2205.13636.
Michael Matena and Colin Raffel. Merging models with fisher-weighted averaging. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2111.09832.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks:
 The sequential learning problem. In Psychology of Learning and Motivation. Elsevier,
 1989. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
 S0079742108605368.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Workshops, 2011. URL https://storage.googleapis.
  com/pub-tools-public-publication-data/pdf/37648.pdf.

G. Ortiz-Jimenez, A. Favero, and P. Frossard. Task arithmetic in the tangent space: Improved editing
  of pre-trained models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, 2024.

Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez, Apostolos Modas, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, and Pascal
  Frossard. Optimism in the face of adversity: Understanding and improving deep learning through
  adversarial robustness. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2021. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.
  org/document/9348948.

Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2103.00020.

Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Mahalaxmi Elango, David Bau, Antonio Tor-
  ralba, and Aleksander Madry.    Editing a classifier by rewriting its prediction rules.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.             URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
  c46489a2d5a9a9ecfc53b17610926ddd-Paper.pdf.

Johannes Stallkamp, Marc Schlipsing, Jan Salmen, and Christian Igel. The german traffic sign recog-
  nition benchmark: A multi-class classification competition. In International Joint Conference on
  Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2011. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
  6033395.

George Stoica, Daniel Bolya, Jakob Bjorner, Taylor Hearn, and Judy Hoffman. Zipit! merging
  models from different tasks without training. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03053.

Derek Tam, Mohit Bansal, and Colin Raffel. Merging by matching models in task subspaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.04339, December 2023.

Matthew Tancik, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan,
 Utkarsh Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let net-
 works learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains. In Advances in Neural In-
 formation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
 cc/paper/2020/file/55053683268957697aa39fba6f231c68-Paper.pdf.

A. Tang, L. Shen, Y. Luo, Y. Zhan, H. Hu, B. Du, and D. Tao. Parameter-efficient multi-task
  model fusion with partial linearizeation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, October 2023.

Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. Glue:
  A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In Proceedings
  of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
  NLP, pp. 353–355, Brussels, Belgium, 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/W18-5446. URL http://aclweb.org/anthology/W18-5446.

Mingzhi Wang, Chengdong Ma, Qizhi Chen, Linjian Meng, Yang Han, Jiancong Xiao, Zhaowei
 Zhang, Jing Huo, Weijie J Su, and Yaodong Yang. Magnetic mirror descent self-play preference
 optimization. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
 URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PDnEDS244P.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo-
 Lopes, Ari S Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, et al.
 Model soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without in-
 creasing inference time. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.05482.
Jiancong Xiao, Ziniu Li, Xingyu Xie, Emily Getzen, Cong Fang, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. On the
   algorithmic bias of aligning large language models with rlhf: Preference collapse and matching
   regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16455, 2024.
Jianxiong Xiao, Krista A Ehinger, James Hays, Antonio Torralba, and Aude Oliva. Sun
   database: Exploring a large collection of scene categories. International Journal of Com-
   puter Vision (IJCV), 2016. URL https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
   s11263-014-0748-y.
Prateek Yadav, Derek Tam, Leshem Choshen, Colin Raffel, and Mohit Bansal. Resolving interfer-
  ence when merging models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01708.
E. Yang, Z. Wang, L. Shen, S. Liu, G. Guo, X. Wang, and D. Tao. Adamerging: Adaptive model
  merging for multi-task learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, October 2023.
Enneng Yang, Li Shen, Guibing Guo, Xingwei Wang, Xiaochun Cao, Jie Zhang, and Dacheng Tao.
  Model merging in llms, mllms, and beyond: Methods, theories, applications and opportunities.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17461, May 2024.
Jinghan Zhang, Shiqi Chen, Junteng Liu, and Junxian He. Composing parameter-efficient modules
   with arithmetic operations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
   2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.14870.
Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiyuan Qi, Keyu Duan, Dongbo Xi, Yongchun Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, Hui Xiong,
  and Qing He. A comprehensive survey on transfer learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2020. URL
  https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9134370.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS



All our experiments are performed using the same hardware consisting of four 3090 NVIDIA GPUs
with 24GB of memory each, which can be reproduced in less than 150 GPU hours. The details of
each experiment are the following.
Datasets. We evaluate task arithmetic on a set of popular benchmark datasets from various domains.
The dataset collection includes:
       • SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011): The Street View House Numbers dataset is a real-world image
         dataset for developing machine learning and object recognition algorithms with minimal
         requirements on data preprocessing and formatting.
       • MNIST (LeCun, 1998): A database of handwritten digits, with 60,000 training images and
         10,000 testing images.
       • EuroSAT (Helber et al., 2019): A dataset based on Sentinel-2 satellite images covering 13
         spectral bands, with 10 classes and a total of 27,000 labeled and geo-referenced images.
       • RESISC45 (Cheng et al., 2017): The remote sensing image scene classification dataset,
         consisting of 31,500 images in 45 scene classes.
       • Cars (Krause et al., 2013): This dataset contains images of cars categorized into various
         fine-grained classes. It is widely used for fine-grained image classification tasks, providing
         a rich set of vehicle images for training and evaluation.
       • DTD (Describable Textures Dataset) (Cimpoi et al., 2014): This dataset is designed for
         texture recognition and categorization. It consists of texture images organized into 47 cate-
         gories, each labeled with attributes describing the texture patterns. It is commonly used to
         evaluate texture recognition algorithms.
       • SUN397 (Xiao et al., 2016): The Scene UNderstanding (SUN) dataset is a large-scale
         dataset for scene recognition, containing 397 categories with a total of over 100,000 images.
         It is used to evaluate scene understanding models and to benchmark scene classification
         algorithms.
       • GTSRB (German Traffic Sign Recognition Benchmark) (Stallkamp et al., 2011): This
         dataset comprises images of German traffic signs, classified into over 40 categories. It is
         used to develop and evaluate traffic sign recognition systems, particularly in the context of
         autonomous driving and intelligent transportation systems.
Fine-tuning. All the fine-tuning experiments follow the same training protocol specified in Ilharco
et al. (Ilharco et al., 2022) with minor modifications to the training code to use linearized models
when needed. In particular, we fine-tune all datasets starting from the same CLIP pre-trained check-
point downloaded from the open clip repository (Cherti et al., 2023). We fine-tune for 2,000 iter-
ations with a batch size of 128, a learning rate of 10−5 and a cosine annealing learning rate schedule
with 200 warm-up steps and the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019). As introduced in
Ilharco et al. (Ilharco et al., 2022), during fine-tuning, we freeze the weights of the classification
layer obtained by encoding a standard set of zero-shot template prompts for each dataset. Freezing
this layer does not harm accuracy and ensures that no additional learnable parameters are introduced
during fine-tuning (Ilharco et al., 2022). We use this exact same protocol to fine-tune the non-linear
and linearized models.
Tuning of α in Task Arithmetic Benchmarks. As in Ilharco et al. (Ilharco et al., 2022), we use
a single coefficient α to tune the size of the task vectors used to modify the pre-trained models.
This is equivalent to setting α = α1 = . . . = αT in Eq. 1. In the task addition benchmarks, after
fine-tuning, we evaluate different scaling coefficients α ∈ {0.0, 0.05, 0.1, . . . , 1.0} and choose the
value that achieves the highest target metric on a small held-out proportion of the training set as
specified in Ilharco et al. (Ilharco et al., 2022). Namely, maximum normalized average accuracy,
and minimum target accuracy on each dataset that still retains at least 95% of the accuracy of the pre-
trained model on the control task. The tuning of α is done independently for non-linear fine-tuning,
linearized fine-tuning, and post-hoc linearization.
Disentanglement Error. To produce the weight disentanglement visualizations of Figure 6, we
compute the value of ξ(α1 , α2 ) on a 15 × 15 grid of equispaced values in [−2, 2] × [−2, 2]. To
estimate the disentanglement error, we use a random subset of 2,048 test points for each dataset.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B                F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

We now present additional experiments that expand the findings discussed in the main text.


Fine-tuning Accuracy. In Figure 7, we report the single-task accuracy achieved by different CLIP
models after fine-tuning with different approaches (referred to as non-linear, NTK linearization, and
our method).


Weight Disentanglement on Different Task Pairs.             In Figure 8, we illustrate weight disentangle-
ment on different task pairs.

                    Non-linear Fine-tuning   NTK Linearization                     Ours
Representation
Classification


Figure 8: Visualization of weight disentanglement. The heatmaps show the disentanglement error
ξ(α1 , α2 ) of a single representation module of CLIP ViT-B/32 (top) and a combination of represen-
tation module and classification module (bottom) on Cars - RESISC45 task pair. Three fine-tuning
paradigms are used from left to right: non-linear fine-tuning, NTK linearization, and ours. The light
regions denote areas of the weight space where weight disentanglement is stronger.


Parameter Sensitivity Analysis. In our experiments, we replicate the experimental setup used by
Ortiz-Jimenez et al. (2024) to evaluate the impact of varying α coefficients on model performance.
The results are summarized in Figure 9, which demonstrates that our method exhibits greater robust-
ness across different choices of α compared to both non-linear fine-tuning and NTK linearization.
As illustrated, our method consistently outperforms both non-linear fine-tuning and NTK lineariza-
tion across a wide range of α values, indicating its robustness in maintaining performance even with
varying coefficients.


Similarity between Task Vectors. Figure 10 shows the cosine similarity between task vectors
from ViT for three types of fine-tuning (cf. Figure 4) on image classification tasks. Vectors from at-
tention modules only fine-tuning are closer to orthogonal than those from both non-linear fine-tuning
and NTK linearization, indicating that models fine-tuned with full parameters are more independent.
This finding aligns with discussions in (Ilharco et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023) and is supported by
the experimental results in Table 2. The experimental details are described in Appendix A.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            (a) ViT-B/32


                                            (b) ViT-B/16


                                            (c) ViT-L/14

Figure 7: Single-task accuracy of different models obtained using different strategies on each of the
tasks.



                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Figure 9: Performance comparison across different methods with varying α values.


         Non-linear Fine-tuning          NTK Linearization                   Ours


Figure 10: Similarity heatmaps. These figures show heatmaps of the cosine similarity between task
vectors from task-specific CLIP models (Radford et al., 2021) fine-tuned on different tasks. Three
fine-tuning paradigms from left to right: non-linear fine-tuning, NTK linearization, and Attention
modules only fine-tuning (Ours).


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    I MPACT S TATEMENT
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many
potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted
here.


                                                19
