Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DAPTIVE V IDEO U NDERSTANDING AGENT:
E NHANCING E FFICIENCY WITH DYNAMIC F RAME S AM -
PLING AND F EEDBACK - DRIVEN R EASONING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Understanding long-form video content presents significant challenges due to its
         temporal complexity and the substantial computational resources required. In this
         work, we propose an agent-based approach to enhance both the efficiency and
         effectiveness of long-form video understanding by utilizing large language models
         (LLMs) and their tool-harnessing ability. A key aspect of our method is query-
         adaptive frame sampling, which leverages the reasoning capabilities of LLMs to
         process only the most relevant frames in real-time, and addresses an important limi-
         tation of existing methods which typically involve sampling redundant or irrelevant
         frames. To enhance the reasoning abilities of our video-understanding agent, we
         leverage the self-reflective capabilities of LLMs to provide verbal reinforcement
         to the agent, which leads to improved performance while minimizing the number
         of frames accessed. We evaluate our method across several video understanding
         benchmarks and demonstrate that not only it enhances state-of-the-art performance
         but also improves efficiency by reducing the number of frames sampled.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in video understanding have been significantly driven by end-to-end pretrained
large transformer models, particularly those built upon large language models (LLMs) Liu et al.
(2023; 2024), known as multimodal LLMs. Despite these advancements, comprehending long form
videos remains a considerable challenge due to prohibitive computational costs and suboptimal
performance Dao et al. (2022). Various approaches have been proposed to extend the temporal
context of video transformers, including techniques such as masking, attention approximations, and
parametric memory modules (e.g. Wu et al. (2022), Piergiovanni et al. (2024)). However, these
methods often add complexity by necessitating specialized architectures and training paradigms Song
et al. (2024).
Efficient video processing requires strategic selection of relevant frames from the total video sequence
Gao et al. (2023b); Li et al. (2024). Traditionally, methods in this domain mostly rely on uniform
sampling Zhang et al. (2023a); Song et al. (2024) or selective retrieval from a subset of sampled
frames Fan et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2023b). While these techniques improve processing efficiency
by reducing the number of frames, they often lack adaptability, leading to potential redundancy.
To address the above shortcomings, here we propose a novel approach that leverages LLMs as
adaptive agents for video understanding tasks. Our method utilizes the advanced reasoning, planning,
and tool-use capabilities of LLMs (Pallagani et al. (2023); Zhao et al. (2024b); Schick et al. (2024))
to enhance sampling efficiency while maintaining robust performance in video understanding tasks.
Specifically, our approach leverages a LLM-based agent that dynamically determines which frames
to sample based on the specific context and query. This method ensures that frame selection is both
relevant and efficient, effectively mitigating the limitations of static sampling methods.
Our approach draws inspiration from research indicating that humans strategically allocate attention
and filter out irrelevant details based on the task at hand Lang et al. (2013); Heim & Keil (2012);
Raymond et al. (1992). For example, when asked "What is the main goal of the camera wearer in this
video?" versus "What is the color of the bird that appears at the beginning?", humans deploy distinct
strategies: the former may necessitate a review of the entire video to understand its context, whereas
the latter would involve focusing solely on the video’s initial segment to identify the bird’s color.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   n Video Caption ---
                                                                   [00:00-00:02]’C’ is washing dishes                         User Prompt: What can you
                                                                   [00:00-00:03]’C’ wipes of the table                        deduce about the primary
                                                                   …                                                          objective and focus within
                                                                   n Object identify –                                        the video content?
                                                    Video
                                                                   Frame 0: {dish:1}..
                                                    Input          Frame 10: {cloth:1}


                                                                                                         Dynamic Memory
                                                                                                                                     Agent
                  User Prompt: What can you                           User Prompt: What can you          Construction
                  deduce about the primary          Memory            deduce about the primary                                      I should first get a high-
                  objective and focus within        Construction      objective and focus within         [ Short term,              level overview of what is
                  the video content?                                  the video content?                   Long term ]              happening in the video..
                                                                                                                                    Tools: get video description
                                                                                                                                    Frame No: 1000



                                                                                                                                    C washes the plate


      Toolkit                Agent                 Toolkit                   Agent
                                                                                                                                         Toolkit
                                                                                                                Video Input

          (a) Naïve Agent                      (b) Agent with Pre-constructed Memory                     (c)Agent with dynamic memory (Ours)



Figure 1: Comparison of methods: Our proposed method (c) is query adaptive, dynamically selecting frames
based on query and video input to construct a responsive memory. In contrast, previous methods, including (a)
Naïve agents and (b) Agents with pre-constructed memory, do not adapt to specific queries or utilize memory
dynamically. We demonstrate that dynamically sampling frames have advantage over different set of benchmarks.


Our proposed framework adaptively samples and processes video frames in response to specific
queries (see Figure 1 c). While previous approaches rely on static process which is independent of the
query in extracting information such as captions Fan et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2023b), our approach
attends to the given query and reasons strategically which frames to process during inference time
without having to go through whole set of frames.
Our findings indicate that LLM agents, when used without guidance, exhibit suboptimal reasoning
performance in terms of selecting the most informative frames. To enhance the reasoning ability of
LLMs, we leverage the self-reflective capabilities of LLMs to provide insightful feedback Shinn et al.
(2024); Pan et al. (2023a). Specifically, reflective statements serve as a form of verbal reinforcement,
enabling the agents to develop an updated policy that facilitates more nuanced and sophisticated
reasoning. Furthermore, our framework integrates long-term memory to store and utilize past
experiences. The reasoning trajectories and the refinement is stored in the memory per instance. The
key rationale behind adopting the memory is that retrieving past experiences that are relevant and
semantically similar to a given query can significantly enhance the reasoning behavior of the LLM.
We validate the generalizability of our framework by evaluating it across a range of benchmarks,
demonstrating its effectiveness and adaptability in various video understanding tasks. The results
indicate that the proposed method outperforms existing approaches, achieving higher accuracy while
maintaining a lowest number of frames accessed.

2      R ELATED W ORK
2.1      L ONG C ONTEXT M ULTIMODAL AGENTS
Several approaches have been developed to handle multimodal inputs through agent-based reasoning
Gao et al. (2023a); Yang et al. (2024); Fan et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2023b). These methods leverage
agents’ reasoning abilities along with their tool-calling capabilities. For instance, Yang et al. (2024)
employs Monte Carlo Tree Search for reasoning combined with tool-calling techniques, while Gao
et al. (2023a) utilizes ReAct Yao et al. (2022) for flexible video input processing.
Recent advancements have also focused on long-context videos Fan et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2023b).
For example, Fan et al. (2024) uses memory retrieval during inference to address specific queries,
which can be effective for localizing detailed information but may become redundant depending on
the query type. Similarly, Wang et al. (2023b) relies on predefined sampling methods, necessitating
extensive frame access for caption generation. Wang et al. (2024a) aims to reduce frame access by
using a predefined number of frames and dynamic sampling, but primarily addresses short-form
videos and straightforward question-answering scenarios.
Existing methods for addressing long-context processing using agent based approach (see Fig 1, b)
involves preprocessing and extracting relevant information from frames during a pre-processing stage,
with the agent retrieving memory dynamically based on the question during runtime Fan et al. (2024);
Wang et al. (2023b). Although this approach can be effective, it is resource-intensive in terms of


                                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


memory and processing time. Additionally, it operates in a static manner, irrespective of the specific
question, which can be redundant.

2.2   F RAME S AMPLING M ETHODS
Several methods have been proposed to enhance the efficiency of video frame handling by selectively
subsampling relevant frames based on the content of the question or text, rather than using uniform
sampling Gao et al. (2023b); Li et al. (2024); Yu et al. (2024); Pan et al. (2023a). For example,
Romero & Solorio (2024) use CLIP model to retrieve pertinent frames through text prompts, while
Han et al. (2023) propose a sampling technique that selects the most significant frames based on
learned patterns. Although these approaches are effective, they often require pre-defined number
of frames to sample or accessing to near all video frames to identify the relevant ones. These static
ways of sampling frames may induce inefficiency as the video length becomes longer with exhaustive
number of frames.
In contrast, our approach is inspired by human cognitive processes, which adaptively focus on
information pertinent to the task at hand Lang et al. (2013); Heim & Keil (2012); Raymond et al.
(1992); Heim & Keil (2017). We propose an agent that reasons about which frames to select based
on the information from the question or previously extracted information, thereby improving the
efficiency of information processing. While our method is similar to Wang et al. (2024b) in its
query-adaptive nature, our method avoids the need for preprocessing (e.g., KNN clustering), thereby
mitigating time-consuming operations.


              Model                   Long-Context   Query Adaptive Sampling   Long-term Memory        Reasoning
     AssistGPT Gao et al. (2023a)          ✗                   ✗                      ✗                   ReAct
   DoraemonGPT Yang et al. (2024)          ✗                   ✗                      ✗                   MCTS
     VideoAgent Fan et al. (2024)          ✓                   ✗                      ✗                   ReAct
 LifelongMemory Wang et al. (2023b)        ✓                   ✗                      ✗           Prediction Ensemble
               Ours                        ✓                   ✓                      ✓           Refinement + ReAct


Table 1: Comparison of existing methods. Previous approaches attempted to handle long-form video agents,
however, our approach focuses on addressing long-context videos, adopting query adaptive sampling and
long-term memory.


3     A DAPTIVE V IDEO U NDERSTANDING AGENT
We propose Adaptive Video Understanding Agent, which reasons about which frames to process
based on the observations and interactions made between the tools. Inspired by recent advancements
in self-reflective ability of LLMs Jang (2023); Pan et al. (2023b); Shinn et al. (2024), we utilize the
error feedback of LLMs to enhance the reasoning of the agent. We formulate the task likewise: The
dataset D = (Q, A, V ) consists of question Q, answer A, and corresponding V . The agent L is
equipped with available actions A. The agent L has only access to the meta-data of the video V ′ (e.g.
the total number of frames).
Generating Policy As illustrated in Figure 2, the initial step involves generating a policy π based on
the question and the details of the video. This policy encompasses an analysis of the question type and
a detailed question analysis, which includes a sampling strategy and identification of key elements
that the agent should focus on during the reasoning process. The policy serves a dual purpose: it
guides the agent in planning and reasoning, and it can be abstracted and utilized in long-term memory.
The rationale behind this approach is that, while the specifics of the question may vary, the abstracted
high-level question type can be retained and leveraged in a manner similar to how humans utilize
their generalized experiences.
Planning/tool invoking At time step t, the agent L selects an action at and action input xt based
on policy π in solving problem D. The actions A are the invokable tools, which are pre-defined
and callable functions from the agent. The action input xt is typically the frame number, indicating
which frames the tools should access. The input often includes extra arguments, for example the
question to query the tools (e.g. Frame index 0, what is happening in the frame?). Once the tools
are invoked, it returns a observation O which is the extracted information of the selected frame. The
agent L considers the previous observation-action trajectory τt = [a1 , o1 , . . . , ot−1 ] : in choosing


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                              Short-term memory


                                                                                                               Frame          Desc.
                                                                                                               no.
                                                                                                                        ['#C C takes the thread
                                                                                                                0       with her right
                                                                                                                        hand.’,'#C C looks at
                                                                                                                        the cloths’..]


                                                                                                                        ..
                                                                                                                        ..
             Question
                                                         Generate policy                                  Planner/ Tool Executor                                    Sampler
 In the video, what actions were
 repetitive (performed more than once)
 and why were these actions important in                                                             <Action>: get_video_description <Input>               Given the sampling strategy
 achieving the final outcome?                                                                        frame 0                                               and the trajectory, which               Evaluate
                                                                                                     <Observation>:['#C C takes the thread                 frame to access?
 option 0: Carefully, c aligned the cloth   <Question Type>: action sequence analysis                with her right hand.’,'#C C looks at the
 accurately with the sewing machine for     <Question_Analysis>: To answer this                      cloths’..]                                            <Input> frame 0                 Given the question,
 stitching.                                 question.. I need to identify…                                                                                 <Reason> To identify overall    trajectory, and prediction,
                                            - Repetitive actions performed more than                                                                       understanding
 option 1: C folded the cloth.                 once                                                                                                                                        evaluate the D
                                                                                                                                                                                                        prediction,


                                                                                                                          …
                                            - A sampling strategy could be…                                                                                                                with the confidence (0-


                                                                                                                                                                         …
 option 2: Carefully, c ironed the fabric   - Do a uniform sampling of frames with                                                                                                         100)..
 cloth, ensuring its smoothness.               large timesteps. Once the relevant                                                                          Given the sampling strategy
                                                                                                     <Action>: get_video_description <Input>
                                               range is identified, do a more dense..                                                                      and the trajectory, which
 option 3: Carefully, c washed the cloth
                                                                                                     frame 30
                                                                                                                                                           frame to access?
 with utmost diligence.                                                                              <Observation>:['#C C takes the thread
                                                                                                     with her right hand.’,'#C C looks at the
                                                                                                                                                           <Input> frame 30
 option 4: C sewed the cloth together and                                                            cloths’..]
                                                                                                                                                           <Reason> To identify relevant
 cut the excess fabric.
                                                                                                                                                           frames, uniform sample..


          Video Details                       Long-term memory

 <Video Details>:                                                                                                                                 Refine
 - Duration: {duration_min} minutes           Question       Question          Trajectories
 ({duration_sec} seconds)                     Type           Analysis
 - Frame Rate: {frame_rate} frame per
 second                                      Action      [‘Repetitive action    [ThoughtsAction                     Given the trajectory and the evaluation refine..
                                                         performed more than    (Thought:..Acti
 - Total Frames: {total_frames} frames.      sequence    once                   on: Action
                                             analysis
                                                                                                                                               D
                                                         Importance purpose
                                                         of those repetitive
                                                                                Input..
                                                                                Final Answer]
                                                                                                                    Q. What is the redundant step?
                                                         actions]
                                                                                                                    Q. Among the trajectories, what is the tool and tool-
                                                                                                                    action that can be refined?


Figure 2: Overall Framework. The video metadata and question are provided to the agent to
generate policy, which includes analyzing the question type and determining the task-solving
strategy, including the sampling strategy. Planner/Tool Executor, based on the ReAct-style reasoning,
generates thought processes, actions, and action inputs, and receives observations from the tools.
During this stage, the sampler may suggest improved frames. After formulating the final answer, the
evaluator and refiner are applied. The final result is then stored in long-term memory.


which actions to call.
                                                                                                  at = L(π, D, τt−1 )


Specifically, the agent L navigates search space, F × A, where F represents the set of frames
within V(|V | = |F | = n). The main goal of the agent L is to effectively prune the search space
(i.e., minimize the number of the frames access) while ensuring performance (i.e., maximizing the
reward r). While making a decision of which action at to take along with the action inputs, the agent
collaborates with the Sampler, another instantiated LLM, which is responsible for suggesting which
frames to select. The sampler suggestions are based on the previous action-observation trajectory.

Evaluator We introduce an evaluator E, which assesses the correctness of the prediction based on the
question and the trajectory. It employs an error-feedback mechanism, iterating through trial-and-error
to identify model errors. The evaluator E receives the question Qi , policy πi and the trajectory Ti
and makes an judgment whether the final answer made by the planner is valid or not. The evaluation
is made in a binary style True or False with a confidence ranging from 0 to 100.

Refiner Once the evaluation is done, the refiner is given a question, policy, and the trajectory from
the agent, and the evaluation to generate the refinement of the trajectory. Specifically, the refiner first
generates diagnosis of the trajectory (e.g., if there is any redundant steps, or any actions or action
input that can be refined). Then, it generates a refined plan. The refinement is generated regardless
of the evaluation result. The reason behind this is that if the evaluation is correct, the refinement is
stored along with the trajectory in the long-term memory to enhance the reasoning of future trials and
if the evaluation if false, the refinement have direct purpose of refining the reasoning of the agent for
the next trial.

Long/Short Memory We maintain the memory with Long-term memory Mlong to store experiences,
short-term memory Mshort to store accessed frame information. This format allows us to utilize the
long-term memory. When the The long-term memory Mlong is present, it is indexed by the question
type based on their semantic similarity, retrieving the semantically similar experiences (question type,
and the trajectories). We append those memory in-context as a chat-history to let the agent be aware
of previous experiences.


                                                                                                                4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    User Prompt                The details of the video:
                               -Duration:480.0 sec.              Task: Please provide the [start frame number, end frame number] range that contains the
                               -Frames: 0 to 14400               relevant information to answer the following question: What chopping board did I wash?
                               -Total Frames: 14400

    Policy Generation
    Tactics: The question type is Objects: What X did I Y?. - The question is asking about a specific
    object (chopping board) and an action performed on it (washing).

    - To answer this, we need to find the frames where a chopping board is present and being washed.
    - Potential relevant frame ranges:[0, 14400]
    - The entire video could potentially contain the relevant information, so we should start with a broad
    uniform sampling.
    - If a chopping board is detected, we should narrow down to frames around when it appears and is being
    washed with a denser sampling..
                                                                                                                 Frame 7200                Frame 0                          Frame 50           Frame 100


   Thought To answer this question, I first need to confirm if the video contains a chopping board, since         Thought The video agent has confirmed that a chopping board is present in the video. To
 that is the key object referenced in the question. If a chopping board is present, I can then try to             locate the specific frames where the chopping board is being washed, I will try sampling
 locate the frames where it is being washed.                                                                      different sections of the video to see if I can identify that action occurring.
 Action      ask_video_agent          Action Input   Frame 7200, “Does this video show a chopping board?          Action get_video_description       Action Input    Frame 7200


 Observation        Yes, the video shows a chopping board on the counter.                                         Observation ['#C C puts the green pepper on the cutting board', '#C C puts the
                                                                                                                                piece of tomato on the chopping', '#C C picks the tomato', '#C C puts
                                                                                                                                the piece of meat on the cutting', '#C C picks a piece of tomato']

  Thought The descriptions for frame 0 indicate that the chopping board is being washed at the beginning
    of the video. To get a more precise frame range, I will check some frames before and after frame 0.

    Action get_video_description      Action Input   Frame 50                                                      Thought The description indicates that around frame 7200, the chopping board is being
                                                                                                                   used for cutting vegetables and meat, but not being washed. I should try sampling a
                                                                                                                   different section of the video to see if I can find the washing action.
 Observation ['#C C opens the tap', '#C C turns on the tap', '#C C rinses the chopping', '#C C washes              Action get_video_description      Action Input Frame 0
             chopping board', '#C C washes the chopping board']


                                                                                                                  Observation ['#C C rinses the chopping board', '#C C cleans the chopping board with
                                                                                                                                the', '#C C washes chopping board', '#C C washes the cutting board ', '#C
    Thought The descriptions around frames 0-50 confirm that the chopping board washing occurs in this                          C washes chopping board']
    early part of the video. To provide the most precise frame range, I will check one more time around
    frame 100 to see if the washing action continues that far.
    Action   get_video_description    Action Input   Frame 100                                                   Final Answer [0,100]

 Observation ['#C C closes the kitchen cabinet door with her left', '#C C drops the cutting board on the          Evaluation True, Confidence 95
                 cabinet', '#C C cleans the chopping board with the towel', '#C C drops the chopping board on
                 the kitchen sink', '#C C opens the cabinet']

                                                                                                                                                                            Ground Truth   [0,120]


                                           Refinement: Diagnosis The reasoning trajectory was effective in identifying the relevant frame range for washing the chopping board. By
                                        systematically sampling different sections of the video and analyzing the descriptions, I was able to narrow down to the precise range of [0, 100]
                                        where the chopping board washing occurred. The trajectory made use of the available actions in an efficient manner without redundant steps.

                                           Refined plan 1. Since the previous reasoning trajectory was concise and effective, I would follow a similar approach:
                                                         2. Confirm if the key object (chopping board) is present in the video using ask_video_agent.

                                                         3. If present, sample different sections of the video using get_video_description to locate frames where the chopping board washing action
                                                            is occurring. Start with a broad range like [0, 14400] and narrow down based on the descriptions.

                                                         4. Once the washing action is detected, check surrounding frames to identify the precise start and end of the relevant range.

                                                         5. Provide the final [start, end] frame range as the answer.

                                                         6. This systematic approach allows efficiently locating the relevant information without redundant steps, while ensuring the answer is as
                                                            precise as possible based on the available information.


Figure 3: Example of Ego4d NLQ Instance. The User Prompt includes the video’s metadata and
the question for the Agent to address. (1) Policy Generation: the agent generates an analysis of the
question and a sampling strategy (2) Thoughts, Actions and Observation: The agent formulates a
Thought based on current state, executes an Action A, with Action Input, and uses tools to obtain an
Observation O. This process iterates until the agent comes up with the final answer. (3) Evaluation:
the Final Answer is assessed. (4) Refinement: The trajectory T is refined, and the results are stored
in Long-term Memory MLong .


                       Task                                                                          Source                                                                       Function
    Video Caption Generation                           LaViLa Zhao et al. (2023)                                                                                    Detect actions, and objects
    Video QA                                           Video-LlaVa Lin et al. (2023)                                                                                Extract Information
    Image QA                                           Claude 3 Sonnet Anthropic (2024)                                                                             Image description
    Object Tracking                                    RT-DETR Zhao et al. (2024a) ByteTrack Zhang et al. (2022)                                                    Object detection
    Text Caption                                       PaddleOCR PaddleOCR (2024)                                                                                   Text caption Capture
    Audio Transcription                                Whisper Radford et al. (2023)                                                                                Audio capturing

Table 2: List of Invokable Tools. This includes multi-modal tools, video-based tools (e.g., LaViLa,
Video-LLaVa), image-based tools (e.g., Claude-3-Sonnet, PaddleOCR), and audio-based tools (e.g.,
Whisper)


4         E XPERIMENTS
4.1           T OOLS
In the experiments, the LLM used for reasoning and tool invocation is Claude-3-Sonnet Anthropic
(2024). The tools used in the framework are detailed in Table 2. The tools are chosen to support multi-
modalities, such as video, image, or audio. The Video Caption Generation model, LaViLa Zhao
et al. (2023), generates descriptions for selected frames. To accommodate the model’s requirement
for frame sequences, we sample 3 additional frames (for a total of 4) for information extraction.
Similarly, the VideoQA model, Video-LlaVa Lin et al. (2023), samples 3 additional frames (totaling
4) for video frame analysis. The Object Tracking model, RT-DETR Zhao et al. (2024a), identifies


                                                                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


objects with a confidence level above 0.6. The text caption tool PaddleOCR (2024) outputs text only
if it is present in the frame.

4.2   E VALUATION DATASETS
   Dataset              Task                                       Example                             Avg duration   # Instances
 Egoschema   Action and scene understand-                                                                 3mins          0.5k
             ing, abstract reasoning        Q: What is the overarching behavior of C and the
                                            man in the video?
                                            Option 0: C teaches the man game rules but the man seems
                                            distracted and is not paying attention
                                            ....
                                            Option 5: The man shows C a new card game while C takes
                                            notes for future references
                                            A: Option 3
 Ego4d NLQ   Temporal Localization                                                                       8.7mins         3.9k
                                            Q: "What did I pick up before leaving the party?"
                                            A: [3410,4000]
 MovieChat   Long-term video understand-                                                                 9.4mins         0.5k
             ing                            Q: "When does the things in the video happens,
                                            ancient age, modern age or future?"
                                            A: "modern age"
 NextQA      Causal and temporal action                                                                   44secs         8.5k
             Reasoning                      Q:"Why was the toddler in red crying at the end of
                                            the video?"
                                            A: Fell backwards



Table 3: Overview of the evaluation Datasets.These benchmarks evaluate video understanding through
a video question answering format, focusing on specific focus (denoted as Task).The average video
duration varies from short form (<1min) to long form (<10min).


EgoSchema Mangalam et al. (2024) comprises broad spectrum videos of daily human activities,
three-minute egocentric video segments. Each question is associated with five possible answers, in
multiple choice question answering format. To correctly answer the question, it requires long-term
temporal understanding. In this paper, we use a subset of the Egoschema dataset, consisting of 500
question and answer pairs.

Ego4D NLQ Grauman et al. (2022) consists of egocentric videos capturing a diverse range of daily
activities from individuals wearing cameras. The primary task involves temporal localizing relevant
frames within these extensive video contexts (e.g. Where did I put X?). The task can be formalized,
given a video V and a natural language question Q, the goal is to identify a relevant frame window A,
such that the answer to Q can be deduced from A. We utilize the validation set for evaluation. The
average length of the video is around 8.7 minutes and the expected prediction time window is around
9.3 seconds.

MovieChat Song et al. (2024) encompasses a range of categories , including documentary and
detective films. The benchmark involves questions such as identifying common objects, temporal
elements (e.g., day, night), and various scenes through open-ended questions and answers. The
average duration of the videos is 9.4 minutes. For our evaluation, we utilize the test set (Global
mode) of this benchmark. As it involves open-ended questions, we utilized Cluade-3.5-sonnet as an
evaluator to evaluate whether the prediction matches with the ground truth answer. To be rigorous,
we made the evaluator to generate the confidence of its judgment, counting only the instances with
confidence over 80 (out of 100) as correct.

 NextQA Xiao et al. (2021) is a benchmark designed to assess various aspects of video understanding,
 including causal action reasoning, temporal action reasoning, and common scene comprehension.
 Compared to other evaluation benchmarks used in this study, NextQA focuses on relatively short
video clips, with an average duration of 44 seconds. While it does not align with the long form video
 question-answer evaluation criteria, we include this benchmark to demonstrate the generalizability
 of our framework across short-from videos. Also, NextQA benchmark consists of questions with
‘textual cues’, for example, Why was the toddler in red crying at the end of the video?, it allows us to
 investigate the adaptive behavior of the agents when presented with questions with textual cues and
without textual cues.


                                                               6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Model                 # Frames         Accuracy
             MultiModalLLM
 FrozenBiLM             90                26.9
 InternVid              90                32.1                                    Ours
                                                                         65
                   ViT
 ShortViViT             32                49.6                           60       Ours(w/o sampler)                    VideoAgent
                                                                                                                       LLoVi


                                                          Accuracy (%)
 LongViViT             256                56.8
                  Agent                                                  55       Ours(w/o memory)                           LongViViT
 LLoVi                 180                57.6                           50               ShortViViT                            ShortViViT
 VideoAgent            180                60.2                                                                                  LongViViT
                                                                                                                                LLoVi
                                                                                                                                VideoAgent
 LifelongMemory        180                62.4                           45                                                     ReAct
                                                                                                                                Ours
                                                                                  ReAct                                         Ours(w/o memory)
                                                                                                                                Ours(w/o sampler)
 Ours                      14.27          66.98                               0             1          2       3            4
                                                                                                % of Frames Accessed
 Total Avg Frames      5400 (30 fps)
                                                           Figure 4: Frames Accessed Ratio vs. Ac-
Table 4: Egoschema Results. The number of                  curacy(%) Our method demonstrate reduced
frames accessed and Accuracy.                             % of frames accessed while maintaining high
                                                          accuracy.


4.3   BASELINES
We experiments with several strong baselines which are comprised of multiModal LLMs incorporating
the visual components along with the textual querys as inputs. FrozenBiLM Yang et al. (2022) learns
cross modalities by training image projection layer. Similarly, InternVid Wang et al. (2023a) uses a
image captioning model along with transformer based text embeddings to align the image and the text.
These methods work on fixed and limited number of frames. Vision transformer (ViT) based methods
are based on vision transformer utilizing joint space time attention. ShortViViT and LongViViT
Papalampidi et al. (2024) harness input masking strategy, supporting prefixed number of frames 32
frames and 256 number of frames respectively.
We also experiment with agent-based methods, which utilize language models as agents harnessing
external tools to solve video question and answering task. LLoVi Zhang et al. (2023a) extracts captions
and LLM tackles the QA task based on the extracted captions. Analogously, LifelongMemory Wang
et al. (2023b) process extracted captions and adopts voting by confidence strategy to conclude answers.
VideoAgent Fan et al. (2024) harness multiple tools to process video. These methods typically sample
frames with predefined fps rate (e.g. 1fps).

5     R ESULTS
5.1   P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
Egoschema Results Table 4 shows the results of evaluation on Egoschema benchmark. Our proposed
method achieves accuracy of 66.98% which is more than 4% improvement over the best performing
basline method, LifelongMemory (62.4%). For the baselines, we also observe a trade-off between
the number of frames accessed and accuracy. For instance, Multimodal LLMs Yang et al. (2022)
and Wang et al. (2023a) use a fixed sampling of 90 frames, but achieve relatively low accuracy
( 30%), whereas agent-based methods achieve significantly higher accuracy but sample twice as many
frames. In contrast, our approach, which dynamically accesses relevant frames based on reasoning,
reduces the number of frames accessed by approximately 93% while maintaining significant accuracy
improvements. Existing methods typically use a uniform sampling strategy (1 frame per second),
leading to a static number of frames. Our method avoids preprocessing all sub-sampled frames,
thereby enhancing both accuracy and efficiency (Fig 4).
Ego4d NLQ Results We evaluate the intersection over union (IoU) at top-1 recall. (Table 5).
Our method surpasses the baselines by 2% for IoU=0.3(%). Specifically, our method shows large
improvement in IoU=0.5(%), which is around 10 % larger than the agent approach, and 11 % larger
than the supervised approach. This may be attributed to the adaptive sampling strategy, which
dynamically samples the frames, allowing both fine grained and coarse sampling. The frames are
accessed on average 80% less than the agent method.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      IoU=0.3(%) r@1         IoU=0.5(%) r@1                          #Frames
                   2D-TAN                     5.04                      3.12                             1024
      Supervised   VSLNet                     5.45                      6.63                             1461
                   VideoAgent                17.38                      7.47                    avg 487(1fps)
                   LifelongMemory            15.99                        -                     avg 487(1fps)
        Agent
                   Ours                       19.5                      17.1                  avg 98 (0.002%)

                                   Table 5: Ego4d NLQ Results.

                                                                                 Questions with START cue
                     Accuracy       #Frames
                                                                                 Questions with MIDDLE cue
    VideoChat             57.8         32
   VideoLlaMA             51.7         32                                         Questions with END cue
  VideoChatGPT            47.6        100                                         Questions with NO cues
    MovieChat             62.3        2048
                                                        Beginning of the video                               End of the video
         Ours             84.8    13.59 (0.1%)                                    % of Frames accessed
                                                        Figure 5: Frame accessed ratio based on tex-
           Table 6: MovieChat Results.                  tual cues from NextQA benchmark. Darker
                                                        color corresponds to the higher ratio of ac-
                                                        cess.


MovieChat Results Our method shows more than 22% increase in accuracy, while accessing only
0.1% of frames (Table 6), compared to the baseline models. This indicates that our method is more
effective at processing long-form videos compared to both multimodal LLM–based (MovieChat Song
et al. (2024)) and agent–based (VideoChatGPT, VideoLlama,VideoChat Maaz et al. (2023); Zhang
et al. (2023b); Li et al. (2023)) baselines.

                                 Temporal      Causal    Descriptive             Average           # Frames (%)
      Supervised   InternVid        43.4          48          65.1                  49.1           19.92 (1.8%)
                   SeViLA           61.3         61.5         75.6                  63.6           39.85 (3.5%)
                   MVU              55.4         48.1         64.1                  55.2           39.85 (3.5%)
      Agent        LLoVi             61          69.5         75.6                  67.7           39.85 (3.5%)
                   VideoAgent       64.5         72.7         81.1                  71.3           39.85 (3.5%)
                   Ours             71.42        69.1        77.77                  72.7           12.37(1.1%)

Table 7: NextQA results The NextQA results are categorized by question types: temporal or causal
reasoning and descriptive QA. Our method achieves a +1.4% higher accuracy compared to baseline
methods, while accessing 2.4% fewer frames.

NextQA Results Our method shows a 1.4% improvement in overall average accuracy (Table 7).
When analyzed by question type—temporal, causal, and descriptive—our method particularly excels
in temporal reasoning tasks, providing around 6.9% absolute improvement over the next best method.

5.2    A BLATION A NALYSIS
Agents Without Guidance are Suboptimal Reasoners LLM agents using the default ReAct
reasoning, without any intervention, exhibit suboptimal performance (Table 8, 9 ReAct). This
approach results in both low accuracy and a reduced percentage of frames accessed. Although LLMs
have the potential to examine all avaiable frames and provide accurate answers, they often produce
suboptimal results with fewer frames access. This is similar to observations where LLMs given
one-shot questions demonstrate less rigorous reasoning compared to those using chain-of-thought or
step-by-step interventions Wei et al. (2022); Yao et al. (2024). Our framework, akin to the chain-of-
though method, enhances reasoning by incorporating internal interventions, leading to more accurate
answers even if it requires accessing more frames.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Questions including textual vs. non textual cues Our proposed framework suggests that agents are
query-adaptive, meaning they sample more efficiently when textual cues are present, as these cues
guide their focus. For instance, a question like ‘Why was the toddler crying at the end of the video?’
will direct the agent to focus on the end of the video. The NextQA benchmark provides a natural
testbed for evaluating whether agents leverage textual cues, as it includes both types of questions.
Results indicate that the questions with textual cues result in an average of 10.56 frames accessed
(.008%), compared to 12.26 (.01%) for questions without cues. Figure 8 presents a detailed analysis,
showing that the ratio of frame accessed correlates with the presence of textual cues in the query.
(e.g., a higher ratio of frames accessed at the beginning when ‘Start’ cues are included).
Ablation of a component results in accuracy drop A clear trend demonstrated across benchmarks
(Table 8, 9) is that ablating any component consistently reduces accuracy. For Egoschema, the largest
accuracy drop occurs when the evaluator is removed, while for Ego4D, the sampler’s removal has
the greatest impact. Although accuracy trends are clear, the effect on the number of frames accessed
is less consistent. For example, ablating the sampler or refiner generally increases frame access,
whereas in Ego4D, it decreases. This indicates that the role of components like the sampler and
refiner may vary with benchmark characteristics. Ego4D benefits from extensive frame search, while
Egoschema needs a holistic video understanding. Thus, these components help balance frame access
and accuracy depending on the benchmark’s requirements.

                           Egoschema                                    Ego4d
    Model            # Frames(%) Accuracy        # Frames (%)     IoU=0.3(%) r@1      IoU=0.5(%) r@1
    ReAct            12.87 (.0024)    42.02       23.987(.00)           3.71                  3.7
    Ours             14.27 (.0026)    66.98        98 (.002)            19.51               17.07
    -w/o memory      20.57 (.0038)     55.1      90.04 (.0022)          9.09                 9.09
    -w/o evaluator    15.69 (.003)     50.1       40.0 (.001)           5.41                 4.69
    -w/o sampler     19.77 (.0037)     60.1       55.67(.002)           5.01                   5
    -w/o refiner     20.46(0.003)      53.2       65.33(.001)            5.1                  3.5

Table 8: Ablation results on Frames Accessed and Accuracy. The ReAct model, with no interven-
tions, exhibits the lowest accuracy and frame access ratio. Ablations of different components reveal
varying performance trends. The ablation results of Moviechat and NextQA can be found in Table 9

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a novel framework for video understanding that addresses the limitations
of current methods by leveraging the daynamic reasoning capabilities of LLMs. While traditional
approaches often rely on static or uniform frame sampling, which can be inefficient and redundant, our
method enhances sampling efficiency by enabling the LLM based agent to adaptively select relevant
frames based on specific queries. The results from extensive benchmarking validate the effectiveness
and adaptability of our framework, showcasing its ability to handle diverse video understanding tasks
more efficiently than traditional methods.

7     L IMITATIONS
While our method demonstrated effectiveness across several benchmark tasks, it is important to
acknowledge its limitations. First, the performance of our approach is dependent on the capabilities of
the tools it utilizes. Variations in tool performance can directly impact the overall effectiveness of the
framework. Additionally, reliance on API calls introduces potential latency issues. This dependency
on external APIs may affect the consistency and speed of the processing.

8     B ROADER IMPACT
The proposed framework for video understanding presents several broader impacts with potential
implications across various domains. By leveraging dynamic LLM-based agents for adaptive frame
sampling, our approach offers a more efficient and effective solution to the challenges of long-form
video comprehension. This advancement could significantly enhance applications in fields such as
automated video content analysis, surveillance, and multimedia indexing, where processing large
volumes of video data is essential.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Anthropic.  The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku, 2024.   URL https:
 //www-cdn.anthropic.com/de8ba9b01c9ab7cbabf5c33b80b7bbc618857627/Model_Card_
  Claude_3.pdf.

Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and memory-
  efficient exact attention with io-awareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:16344–16359, 2022.

Yue Fan, Xiaojian Ma, Rujie Wu, Yuntao Du, Jiaqi Li, Zhi Gao, and Qing Li. Videoagent: A
  memory-augmented multimodal agent for video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11481,
  2024.

Difei Gao, Lei Ji, Luowei Zhou, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Joya Chen, Zihan Fan, and Mike Zheng Shou.
  Assistgpt: A general multi-modal assistant that can plan, execute, inspect, and learn. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.08640, 2023a.

Difei Gao, Luowei Zhou, Lei Ji, Linchao Zhu, Yi Yang, and Mike Zheng Shou. Mist: Multi-modal
  iterative spatial-temporal transformer for long-form video question answering. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 14773–14783, 2023b.

Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
  Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.

Wei Han, Hui Chen, Min-Yen Kan, and Soujanya Poria. Sas video-qa: Self-adaptive sampling for
 efficient video question-answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04192, 2023.

Sabine Heim and Andreas Keil. Developmental trajectories of regulating attentional selection over
  time. Frontiers in Psychology, 3:277, 2012.

Sabine Heim and Andreas Keil. Too much information, too little time: How the brain separates
  important from unimportant things in our fast-paced media world. Frontiers for Young Minds, 5(1),
  2017.

Eric Jang. Can llms critique and iterate on their own outputs? evjang. com. URL https://evjang.
  com/2023/03/26/self-reflection. html, 2023.

Peter J Lang, Margaret M Bradley, and Bruce N Cuthbert. Motivated attention: Affect, activation,
  and action. In Attention and orienting, pp. 97–135. Psychology Press, 2013.

KunChang Li, Yinan He, Yi Wang, Yizhuo Li, Wenhai Wang, Ping Luo, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and
  Yu Qiao. Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06355, 2023.

Yunxin Li, Xinyu Chen, Baotain Hu, and Min Zhang. Llms meet long video: Advancing long video
  comprehension with an interactive visual adapter in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13546, 2024.

Bin Lin, Bin Zhu, Yang Ye, Munan Ning, Peng Jin, and Li Yuan. Video-llava: Learning united visual
  representation by alignment before projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10122, 2023.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.

Shilong Liu, Hao Cheng, Haotian Liu, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Tianhe Ren, Xueyan Zou, Jianwei Yang,
  Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Llava-plus: Learning to use tools for creating multimodal agents. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.05437, 2023.

Muhammad Maaz, Hanoona Rasheed, Salman Khan, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Video-chatgpt:
 Towards detailed video understanding via large vision and language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.05424, 2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karttikeya Mangalam, Raiymbek Akshulakov, and Jitendra Malik. Egoschema: A diagnostic
  benchmark for very long-form video language understanding. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

PaddleOCR. Paddleocr, 2024. URL https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleOCR.

Vishal Pallagani, Bharath Muppasani, Keerthiram Murugesan, Francesca Rossi, Biplav Srivastava,
  Lior Horesh, Francesco Fabiano, and Andrea Loreggia. Understanding the capabilities of large
  language models for automated planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16151, 2023.

Junting Pan, Ziyi Lin, Yuying Ge, Xiatian Zhu, Renrui Zhang, Yi Wang, Yu Qiao, and Hongsheng Li.
  Retrieving-to-answer: Zero-shot video question answering with frozen large language models. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 272–283, 2023a.

Liangming Pan, Michael Saxon, Wenda Xu, Deepak Nathani, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang.
  Automatically correcting large language models: Surveying the landscape of diverse self-correction
  strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03188, 2023b.

Pinelopi Papalampidi, Skanda Koppula, Shreya Pathak, Justin Chiu, Joe Heyward, Viorica Patraucean,
  Jiajun Shen, Antoine Miech, Andrew Zisserman, and Aida Nematzdeh. A simple recipe for
  contrastively pre-training video-first encoders beyond 16 frames. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14386–14397, 2024.

AJ Piergiovanni, Isaac Noble, Dahun Kim, Michael S Ryoo, Victor Gomes, and Anelia Angelova.
  Mirasol3b: A multimodal autoregressive model for time-aligned and contextual modalities. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  26804–26814, 2024.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023.

Jane E Raymond, Kimron L Shapiro, and Karen M Arnell. Temporary suppression of visual
  processing in an rsvp task: An attentional blink? Journal of experimental psychology: Human
  perception and performance, 18(3):849, 1992.

David Romero and Thamar Solorio. Question-instructed visual descriptions for zero-shot video
  question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10698, 2024.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach
  themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.

Enxin Song, Wenhao Chai, Guanhong Wang, Yucheng Zhang, Haoyang Zhou, Feiyang Wu, Haozhe
  Chi, Xun Guo, Tian Ye, Yanting Zhang, et al. Moviechat: From dense token to sparse memory for
  long video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 18221–18232, 2024.

Xiaohan Wang, Yuhui Zhang, Orr Zohar, and Serena Yeung-Levy. Videoagent: Long-form video
  understanding with large language model as agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10517, 2024a.

Yi Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Kunchang Li, Jiashuo Yu, Xin Ma, Xinhao Li, Guo Chen, Xinyuan
  Chen, Yaohui Wang, et al. Internvid: A large-scale video-text dataset for multimodal understanding
  and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06942, 2023a.

Ying Wang, Yanlai Yang, and Mengye Ren. Lifelongmemory: Leveraging llms for answering queries
  in egocentric videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05269, 2023b.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ziyang Wang, Shoubin Yu, Elias Stengel-Eskin, Jaehong Yoon, Feng Cheng, Gedas Bertasius, and
  Mohit Bansal. Videotree: Adaptive tree-based video representation for llm reasoning on long
  videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19209, 2024b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Chao-Yuan Wu, Yanghao Li, Karttikeya Mangalam, Haoqi Fan, Bo Xiong, Jitendra Malik, and
  Christoph Feichtenhofer. Memvit: Memory-augmented multiscale vision transformer for efficient
  long-term video recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13587–13597, 2022.
Junbin Xiao, Xindi Shang, Angela Yao, and Tat-Seng Chua. Next-qa: Next phase of question-
  answering to explaining temporal actions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9777–9786, 2021.
Antoine Yang, Antoine Miech, Josef Sivic, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Zero-shot video
  question answering via frozen bidirectional language models. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 35:124–141, 2022.
Zongxin Yang, Guikun Chen, Xiaodi Li, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. Doraemongpt: Toward
  understanding dynamic scenes with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08392,
  2024.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
  Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Shoubin Yu, Jaemin Cho, Prateek Yadav, and Mohit Bansal. Self-chained image-language model for
  video localization and question answering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024.
Ce Zhang, Taixi Lu, Md Mohaiminul Islam, Ziyang Wang, Shoubin Yu, Mohit Bansal, and Gedas
  Bertasius. A simple llm framework for long-range video question-answering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.17235, 2023a.
Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language
  model for video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02858, 2023b.
Yifu Zhang, Peize Sun, Yi Jiang, Dongdong Yu, Fucheng Weng, Zehuan Yuan, Ping Luo, Wenyu
  Liu, and Xinggang Wang. Bytetrack: Multi-object tracking by associating every detection box. In
  European conference on computer vision, pp. 1–21. Springer, 2022.
Yian Zhao, Wenyu Lv, Shangliang Xu, Jinman Wei, Guanzhong Wang, Qingqing Dang, Yi Liu,
  and Jie Chen. Detrs beat yolos on real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16965–16974, 2024a.
Yue Zhao, Ishan Misra, Philipp Krähenbühl, and Rohit Girdhar. Learning video representations from
  large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 6586–6597, 2023.
Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. Large language models as commonsense knowledge for
  large-scale task planning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX



A.C ASE S TUDY



Question: What can be deduced about c's level of expertise in the task by observing the kind of adjustments made
throughout the video?
option 0: C is a novice woodworker. he was not able to cut the wood to size and install it on the wall without making several adjustments.
option 1: C is an expert woodworker. he was able to cut the wood to size and install it on the wall without making any adjustments.
option 2: C is a professional woodworker. he was able to cut the wood to size and install it on the wall in a timely and efficient manner.
option 3: C is an experienced woodworker. he was able to cut the wood to size and install it on the wall with few adjustments.
option 4: C is an amateur woodworker. he was able to cut the wood to size and install it on the wall, but he took a long time to do so.            Frame 0          Frame 1000          Frame 2000


  Policy Generation                                                                                             {refined plan} Policy Generation
  Question type: “Action sequence analysis”                                                                     Question type: “Action sequence analysis”
  Question Analysis: “To determine C's level of expertise, we need to closely observe the                       Question Analysis: “To determine C's level of expertise, we need to analyze the
  adjustments and process C goes through while cutting the wood and installing it on the                        adjustments and actions taken by C throughout the woodworking process shown in the video.
  wall throughout the video. Key things to look for are:                                                        Key elements include:
  - How smoothly/efficiently C performs each step (cutting wood, measuring, making                              - The specific woodworking task being performed (cutting wood, installing on wall, etc.)
     adjustments, installing)                                                                                   - The tools and materials used
  - Number and type of adjustments/corrections needed                                                           - The number and type of adjustments made
  - Overall time taken to complete the task..                                                                   - The overall efficiency and quality of C's work process. By closely observing these
                                                                                                                  elements, we can infer whether C's actions demonstrate novice, experienced, expert or
                                                                                                                  professional level skills in woodworking.
  Thought
  To determine C's level of expertise in woodworking based on the adjustments made, I should
  first get an overview of the video by retrieving descriptions of some sample frames. This                     Thought
  will give me context on the task being performed and C's actions.
                                                                                                                The descriptions from the initial frame do not provide enough context about any
  Action get_video_description Action Input Frame 0                                                             woodworking tasks being performed. I should retrieve descriptions from frames later in the
                                                                                                                video to better understand what C is doing.

 Observation                                                                                                    Action get_video_description Action Input Frame 2000
 '#C C walks around the compound', '#C C walks around the building'
                                                                                                               Observation
                                                                                                                #C C picks the wooden tile', '#C C bends towards the floor', '#C C puts his
  Thought The initial frame descriptions don't provide enough context about the                                 left hand on the', '#C C puts a hand in the pocket', '#C C bends down'
  woodworking task or adjustments made by C. I should retrieve descriptions for some frames
  further into the video to better understand what is happening.
                                                                                                                Thought The descriptions from frame 2000 mention C interacting with wooden tiles, which
  Action get_video_description Action Input Frame 1000                                                          suggests some kind of woodworking or carpentry task. However, I still don't have a clear
                                                                                                                picture of the specific task being performed or the types of adjustments C is making. To
                                                                                                                get more context, I will ask the video agent a clarifying question.
 Observation                                                                                                                                                 What woodworking or carpentry task is C
 '#C C places the tape measure on the wood ', '#C C holds the table saw.', '#C                                  Action Ask_video_agent         Action Input performing in this video?, Frame 2000
 C touches the wood', '#C C drops the piece of wood on the bench', '#C C
 removes his right hand from the wood cutter'
                                                                                                              Observation In the video, C is performing a woodworking or carpentry task by
                                                                                                               cutting a piece of wood with a knife.Ъ. He is using a knife to cut the wood,
                                                                                                               which is a common tool used in woodworking and carpentry projects. The task
                                          ...                                                                  requires precision and skill to ensure that the wood is cut accurately and to
                                                                                                               the desired size.
  Thought The descriptions from frame 2000 do not provide any clear information about the
  task C is performing. There seems to be conflicting information between the video agent's
  response about fixing a bicycle wheel and the frame descriptions showing woodworking tools                    Thought The video agent's response clarifies that C is performing a woodworking task of
  and materials. To better understand what is happening, I should try identifying objects in                    cutting wood with a knife. This provides useful context about the type of task and tools
  one of the frames that showed potential woodworking activity.                                                 being used. To further assess C's level of expertise based on the adjustments made, I
                                                                                                                should try to identify any specific adjustments or issues C encounters during the wood
   Action identify_objects        Action Input Frame 1000                                                       cutting process.                             Does C make any adjustments or have any
                                                                                                                                               Action Input issues while cutting the wood with the knife?
                                                                                                                 Action Ask_video_agent                      If so, what kinds of adjustments are made?
 Observation                                                                                                                                                 Frame 2000
  {'object': 'person', 'confidence': 0.9270391},
  {'object': 'surfboard', 'confidence': 0.69368607}                                                            Observation Yes, the man in the orange vest makes adjustments to the wood while
                                                                                                                cutting it with the knife.Ъ. He uses a ruler to measure the wood and make
                                          ...                                                                   adjustments to ensure that it is cut to the desired length. This shows that he
                                                                                                                is a skilled worker who pays attention to detail and takes the necessary steps
                                                                                                                to ensure that the wood is cut accurately and efficiently.

  Final Answer
  None of the given options accurately describe C's level of expertise                                          Final Answer Based on the observations of C making precise adjustments like
                                                                                                                using a ruler to measure while cutting wood, and demonstrating attention to
  in woodworking, since the video does not show C performing any                                                detail in the process, Option 3 seems the most accurate - C is an experienced
  woodworking or carpentry tasks.                                                                               woodworker who has developed skilled woodworking abilities beyond a novice or
                                                                                                                amateur level, even if not quite at an expert or professional level.

   Evaluation False, Confidence 80                                                                                Evaluation    True, Confidence 90


  Refinement: Diagnosis "The main issue was that the initial observations from the frame descriptions suggested C was
  performing a woodworking task, but the video agent's responses contradicted this and indicated C was not doing any
  woodworking. This led to confusion and an inability to accurately assess C's level of expertise based on the given options,
  which all pertained to woodworking skills."
  Refined plan To avoid a similar issue in the future, I should:
                 1. Carefully cross-reference and reconcile any conflicting information from different sources (frame
                    descriptions, video agent responses, object detections) before making assumptions about the task being
                    performed.
                 2.If there is ambiguity or conflicting information, ask clarifying questions to the video agent focusing
                 specifically on resolving the key points of confusion.


Figure 6: Example of Egoschema Refinement. Given the refinement based on the first trial (left), it
attempts a second trial, with a refined policy π ∗ , which leads to the correct evaluation.


Refined policy is more detailed and specific What distinguishes the refined policy π ∗ from the
initial generated policy? Figure 7 illustrates examples of refined policies, where the initial trial
produced an incorrect prediction, while the second trial yielded a correct one. Compared to the
original policy, the refined policy is notably more detailed. Specifically, it includes: 1) updates in
question analysis, and 2) a more nuanced approach to sampling strategies. Although the sampling
strategies in both trials were largely similar, the refined policy offers a more granular description. For
instance, while the initial policy merely referenced dense and sparse sampling, the updated policy
provides a comprehensive overview of when to transition between different sampling strategies.


                                                                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [Egoschema] Question: What key transitional moments can be observed in the video where c
 switches from one activity to another? Explain how these transitions contribute to the overall
                                                                                                               Policy Generation (2nd trial, after refinement)
 video narrative.                                                                                              The question type is action sequence analysis. To identify the key transitional moments where the
                                                                                                               character switches activities and how they contribute to the overall narrative, I will:
 Policy Generation (1st trial)                                                                                 1. Get a high-level overview of the main activity/process from the video agent to set the context.
                                                                                                               2. Sample frames densely across the entire video duration using the get_frame_info tool. For each
 The question type is action sequence analysis. To answer this question, we need to identify the key           frame, analyze the specific sub-activity happening (stirring, adding ingredients, checking progress
 transitional moments where the character switches from one activity to another in the video. We should        etc.)
 sample frames uniformly across the video to detect these transitions. If a potential transition is            3. Identify the transitional frames where the sub-activity changes from one to the next. These will
 detected, we can sample more densely around that region to confirm and analyze the transition in              be the "key transitional moments".
 detail. The transitions and how they contribute to the overall narrative need to be explained.                4. Describe how each identified transition contributes to the overall narrative flow of the main
                                                                                                               cooking/food preparation process.



 [Egoschema] Question: What was the main dish prepared in the video, and which key ingredients were used?
                                                                                                               Policy Generation (2nd trial, after refinement)
                                                                                                               The question type is Identifying main dish and key ingredients. To answer this question, we need to:
 Policy Generation (1st trial)                                                                                 1. Get an overview of the video content by sampling descriptions at different time points to
 The question type is Key action/moment detection. To answer this question, we need to identify the key        understand if it involves cooking/preparing a dish.
 moments in the video where the main dish is being prepared and the ingredients being used are shown.
 We should sample frames densely around those key moments to observe the dish preparation process and          2. Analyze key frames where active cooking/preparation seems to be happening to identify the specific
 ingredients used. For other parts of the video, a more sparse sampling may suffice.                           dish being made and ingredients being used.

                                                                                                               3. Keep an open mind to different possibilities like curries, stir-fries, sautees etc. based on the
                                                                                                               ingredients and cooking methods observed, instead of fixating on one dish type too early.

                                                                                                               4. Cross-reference the observed dish and ingredients against the multiple choice options provided to
                                                                                                               select the best match.

                                                                                                               The key tactics are:
                                                                                                               - Sample video descriptions at different time points for an overview
                                                                                                               - Analyze key cooking frames to identify dish type and ingredients
                                                                                                               - Consider multiple dish possibilities based on evidence
                                                                                                               - Map observations to the closest matching option without premature assumptions.


Figure 7: Example of Refined Policy Compared to the original policy, the refined policy is notably
more detailed. Texts highlighted in yellow shows the added instruction.


Figure 8: Latency Comparison with Other Agent Approaches: Our method reduces latency by
processing videos only at runtime, compared to LifelongMemory Wang et al. (2023b) and Videoagent
Fan et al. (2024), which require preprocessing.

B. L ATENCY A NALYSIS
C. P ROMPTS C ONFIGURATION
       Policy Generation Prompt

        You are an advanced AI agent tasked with efficiently and accurately
       processing video question and answering tasks.

       You will be given a question related to a video, and you are responsibile
       for coming up with a set of tactics and plans based on the characteristics
       of each question. The questions you will encounter will vary greatly,
       ranging from inquires about the overall plot to specific details within
       the video.

       To effectively handle these tasks, you must first generate a set of tactics
       and plans based on the characteristics of each question. You will be given
       a question, please analyze the question.

      - Determine the type of question (e.g. purpose/goal identification, tools
      and materials usage, key action/moment detection, character interaction,
      action sequence analysis..etc)

      - How should the frames be sampled to solve the question? (e.g. Uniform
      sampling with timestep 30. If relevant frame is detected, more uniform
      sample with timestep 2.)

      {Question}
      {Video details}                                                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Agent Prompt

   You are an advanced AI specialized in video question-answering tasks.
   Your capabilities include executing necessary tools and interpreting their
   outputs. Your objective is to select which frames to process and strategize
   which tools to deploy and use their outputs to provide accurate answers to
   questions related to a video.
   <Video Details>:
   - Duration: {duration_min} minutes ({duration_sec} seconds)
   - Frame Rate: {frame_rate} frame per second
   - Total Frames: {total_frames} frames.
   - Frames with scene change: {scene_list}
   Among the total {total_frames}, you will first choose sample frames to
   understand the context. Please use the tool ‘get_frame_info’ to get the
   general information of the frame. You can use the tools listed below. You
   can reason what’s happening between frames, and what’s described in the
   frame itself.
   Use these tools to help: {tools}
   Use the following format:
   Thought: Consider what to do next.
   Action: The action to take, using one of [{tool_names}].
   Action Input: The input for the action.
   You will receive the result of the action as Observation: The result of the
   action. Please repeat the Thought/Action/Action Input/Observation cycle as
   needed.
   The final answer should be provided under ’Final Answer:’ You must choose
   one of the options among Option 0, Option 1, Option 2, Option 3, Option 4.
   Please start with Thought:
   Begin!

   Refiner Prompt

   You are an advanced reasoning agent that can improve based on self refection.
   Your goal is to come up with a diagnoses and a refinement plan that is
   effective in making a correct prediction. You will be given a previous
   reasoning trial in which you were given access to execute tools to solve
   and an evaluation to the trial.
   If the evaluation is False, you were unsuccessful in answering the question
   either because you guessed the wrong answer with Final Answer, or you used
   up your set number of reasoning steps. The optimal goal is to have concise
   reasoning path without having redundant actions. Even if the evaluation is
   True, you can improve the reasoning path by removing the redundant steps or
   by refining the repetitive actions. In a few sentences, Diagnose a possible
   reason for failure and devise a new, concise, reasoning paths that aims
   to mitigate the same failure. Be detailed as possible and use complete
   sentences.

   Evaluator Prompt

   You are an advanced agent that evaluates whether the predicted answer
   is correct or not. You will be given a question, reasoning trajectories,
   and the final answer predicted by an agent. Please evaluate whether the
   prediction is valid or not. You can give your confidence in percentage
   (0-100). Remember that the reasoning and predictions are not always correct.
   For example, Evaluation: True, Confidence: 90


                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Ablation result of Moviechat and NextQA. The results are consistent in exhibiting a drop in
accuracy when ablating any component. However, the trends of the number of frames accessed are
not consistent, varying across the benchmark, and the components

                                        MovieChat                  NextQA
                  Model            # Frames    Accuracy     # Frames    Accuracy
                  ReAct              10.62        69.4        9.87        47.27
                  Ours               13.59        84.8        12.37        71.6
                  -w/o memory        15.84        70.3        11.79       63.11
                  -w/o evaluator     15.31       72.43        13.59       58.97
                  -w/o sampler       15.51        80.2        13.87        60.2
                  -w/o refiner       15.51        70.2         11.8       65.42


  Question: Where was the rim before I picked it?
  Sampler Suggestions
 > Start from the beginning of the video to identify the rim object and its initial
 location before being picked up <Sampler Suggestion: frame_index 0>

 > Perform uniform sampling with a large timestep (7200 frames ~ 1/2 of total 14402
 frames) to quickly identify if the rim object is visible around the middle portion
 of the video before being picked up <Sampler Suggestion: frame_index 7200>

 > To identify the approximate range where the "rim" object appears before being
 picked up, I will sample at frame 10800 which is around 3/4 through the video. If
 the rim is not visible there, I can infer it likely appears in the final 1/4 of the
 video before being picked up.<Sampler Suggestion: frame_index 10800>

 > To identify the approximate range where the rim first appears, I will sample
 frames closer to the start with a smaller timestep of 1800 (30 seconds at 60 fps).
 If the rim is visible in this frame, the relevant range likely starts around here.
 If not, I will continue sampling backwards from this point with an even smaller
 timestep. <Sampler Suggestion: frame_index 1800>

 …

 > To find the first appearance of the "rim" object before it is picked up, I should
 start watching the video sequentially from the very beginning (frame 0) since my
 previous sampling attempts were unable to identify when the rim first shows up.
 <Sampler Suggestion: frame_index 0>

 > Since the rim is already visible in frame 0, I should sample a few frames ahead to
 see if the rim's position changes or if it gets picked up in the next few frames.
 Frame 30 seems like a reasonable next step to check for any movement or interaction
 with the rim. <Sampler Suggestion: frame_index 30>



Figure 9: Sampler Example The Sampler examples demonstrates that it is able to 1) calculate
the frames in terms of sparse sampling 2) Dynamically switch sampling fps, based on previous
observation 3) Densly sample relevant frames


                                                16
