Real World
             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             L EARNING TO G ENERATE D IVERSE P EDESTRIAN
             M OVEMENTS FROM W EB V IDEOS WITH N OISY L ABELS
               Zhizheng Liu, Joe Lin, Wayne Wu, Bolei Zhou
               Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
Simulation


             Figure 1: Pedestrian Movement Generation. Our method can generate diverse pedestrian movements in
             real-world (top row) and simulated (bottom row) urban environments.

                                                                A BSTRACT
                            Understanding and modeling pedestrian movements in the real world is crucial for
                            applications like motion forecasting and scene simulation. Many factors influence
                            pedestrian movements, such as scene context, individual characteristics, and goals,
                            which are often ignored by the existing human generation methods. Web videos
                            contain natural pedestrian behavior and rich motion context, but annotating them
                            with pre-trained predictors leads to noisy labels. In this work, we propose learning
                            diverse pedestrian movements from web videos. We first curate a large-scale
                            dataset called CityWalkers that captures diverse real-world pedestrian movements
                            in urban scenes. Then, based on CityWalkers, we propose a generative model called
                            PedGen for diverse pedestrian movement generation. PedGen introduces automatic
                            label filtering to remove the low-quality labels and a mask embedding to train with
                            partial labels. It also contains a novel context encoder that lifts the 2D scene context
                            to 3D and can incorporate various context factors in generating realistic pedestrian
                            movements in urban scenes. Experiments show that PedGen outperforms existing
                            baseline methods for pedestrian movement generation by learning from noisy labels
                            and incorporating the context factors. In addition, PedGen achieves zero-shot
                            generalization in both real-world and simulated environments. The code, model,
                            and data are available at https://genforce.github.io/PedGen/.


             1            I NTRODUCTION
             In a bustling city, office workers rush through the crosswalk to nearby buildings, tourists wander
             around along storefronts looking at items on display, and friends sit and enjoy coffee on the outdoor
             patio. Pedestrians are essential participants in urban spaces. Their movements represent the social
             lives and interactions with the surrounding environments. Understanding and modeling pedestrian
             movements is critical to many applications. For example, city designers simulate pedestrian move-
             ments to optimize public areas and transportation systems (Mehta, 2008); forecasting the future
             pedestrian path is crucial for the safe deployment of autonomous vehicles (Lyssenko et al., 2021).
             Generating diverse and realistic pedestrian movements remains challenging. Multiple context factors
             affect pedestrian movements in the scenes. The first factor is the surrounding environment. As


                                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


people constantly interact with the environment, it is important to model the scene context where the
interaction happens. For example, objects like trash bins, plants, and other pedestrians in the scene
can influence the walking behavior of a pedestrian (Daamen & Hoogendoorn, 2003), while the space
types like crosswalks and waiting zones decide the overall movement pattern (Sime, 1995). The
second factor is the individual characteristics. Studies have shown that walking speed and gait are
influenced by age (Ostrosky et al., 1994), gender (Yamasaki et al., 1991), and body weight (Heglund
& Taylor, 1988) and can also reflect the pedestrian’s fitness level (Dridi, 2015). The last factor is the
goal of the pedestrian, which decides the walking route in the scene (Hoogendoorn & Bovy, 2004).
Existing human motion generation research mainly focuses on the breadth of activities (Mahmood
et al., 2019), but few have studied generating natural real-world pedestrian movements in diverse
scene contexts. For example, existing outdoor human motion datasets have limited scenes and human
subjects with unnatural motion performed by actors with specific instructions (Kaufmann et al., 2023;
Dai et al., 2023). Moreover, current motion generation methods (Guo et al., 2020; Tevet et al., 2022)
lean toward generating complex motions from clean MoCap data, where many motion categories are
rare in daily scenes. Few have considered learning the diverse motion contexts from noisy labels.
Web videos, captured by many people walking and touring in different cities worldwide and shared on
the YouTube website, contain diverse scene contexts and pedestrian movements in the most natural
forms. However, labeling pedestrian movements in these web videos with pretrained predictors leads
to inevitable label noise. How to harness the web data with large noise yet rich context becomes
the pivot of modeling and generating diverse pedestrian movements. To this end, we first collect
CityWalkers, a large-scale real-world dataset containing pedestrians in urban scenes, annotated with
pseudo-labels by off-the-shelf 4D human motion estimation models. CityWalkers captures diverse
real-world pedestrian movements regarding various moving speeds, gaits, headings, and local motions.
Each movement is also paired with labels of context factors, such as the pedestrian’s body shape,
route destinations, and the environment’s semantics and geometry.
We then develop a new diffusion-based generative model PedGen for learning context-aware pedes-
trian movements with the noisy pseudo-labels from the CityWalkers dataset. PedGen has two key
designs: 1) To mitigate the anomaly and incomplete labels from pseudo-labeling techniques, PedGen
adopts a data iteration strategy to identify and remove low-quality labels from the dataset automati-
cally and a motion mask embedding to train with partial labels; 2) To model the important context
factors, PedGen considers the surrounding environment, the individual characteristics, and the goal
points as input conditions to generate realistic and long-term pedestrian movements in urban scenes.
As web videos only contain scene context labels in 2D, we propose a novel Context Encoder that
can lift the environment context from 2D images into a 3D local scene representation with geometry
and semantic information and also encode the other context factors to help generate realistic and
long-term 3D pedestrian movements. We show some randomly sampled results of PedGen in Fig. 1.
Experiment results on the CityWalkers validation set, the real-world Waymo open dataset (Sun
et al., 2020) and CARLA simulator (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017) show that PedGen can predict more
realistic and accurate future pedestrian movements than existing human motion generation methods
and achieve better zero-shot generalization by generating high-quality context-aware movements.
Additional experiments and ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of PedGen in addressing
noisy labels and incorporating the key context factors. It enables the application of forecasting pedes-
trian movements in the real world and populating simulated environments with realistic pedestrians.
We summarize our contributions as follows: 1) A new task of context-aware pedestrian movement
generation from web videos with unique challenges in dealing with label noises and modeling various
motion contexts. 2) A new large-scale real-world pedestrian movement dataset CityWalkers with
pseudo-labels of diverse pedestrian movements and motion contexts. 3) The context-aware generative
model PedGen that can learn from noisy pseudo-labels to generate diverse pedestrian movements.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Pedestrian Movement Analysis. Pedestrian behaviors have been extensively studied in transporta-
tion and social science. A hierarchical structure is defined for pedestrian behavior analysis (Hoogen-
doorn & Bovy, 2004; Feng et al., 2021) from the high-level strategic behavior, the middle-level tactical
behavior, to the low-level operational behavior. Pedestrian movements belong to operational behav-
iors, where pedestrians continuously make short-term movement decisions on their route to respond


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to their immediate environment (Daamen, 2002; Duives, 2016). Many works analyze different factors
influencing pedestrian movements (Dridi, 2015). Some critical environmental factors include types
of space (Sime, 1995), objects in the environment (Daamen & Hoogendoorn, 2003), and movement
of other pedestrians (van den Berg, 2016). Pedestrian movements also depend on their biometric data,
like age (Ostrosky et al., 1994), gender (Yamasaki et al., 1991), and body size (Heglund & Taylor,
1988). Different from most existing works in pedestrian movement analysis that collect data from
field observations (Shields & Boyce, 2000) or controlled experiments (Haghani & Sarvi, 2018) and
analyze them using statistical approaches (Tong & Bode, 2023), we extract pedestrian movements
from web videos and learn a generative model to facilitate pedestrian movement modeling.

Human Motion Datasets. AMASS (Mahmood et al., 2019) is one of the most popular human
motion datasets with diverse motions annotated with SMPL (Loper et al., 2023) parameters. The
main issue of AMASS is the lack of context information related to the motion. Later datasets have
focused on adding more human subjects (Cheng et al., 2023b), text descriptions (Guo et al., 2022),
human-object interactions (Bhatnagar et al., 2022) and human-scene interactions (Hassan et al., 2019;
2021; Huang et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2024) to the labels. Nevertheless, most of these datasets are
captured in a controlled environment with the subjects asked to follow specific action instructions, and
many motions, such as jump jacks and martial arts, are rarely seen in urban scenes. In-the-wild videos
serve as a more suitable source for studying human movement with their richness in individuals
and environments. Another line of work (Von Marcard et al., 2018; Guzov et al., 2021; Dai et al.,
2023; Kaufmann et al., 2023) focuses on collecting human motion in outdoor places from in-the-wild
videos, but their additional sensor requirements like IMUs limit their scalability to collect large-scale
datasets. Zhu et al. (2021); Zheng et al. (2022) propose benchmarks for gait recognition in the
wild, but these datasets lack diverse scene contexts. Some other datasets (Vendrow et al., 2023;
Robicquet et al., 2016) label human social behaviors and trajectories from street videos as key points
or bounding boxes. Still, these labels have worse motion granularity than the SMPL parameters for
pedestrian movement analysis. Our proposed dataset, CityWalkers, consists of large-scale web videos
of pedestrians in diverse urban environments. CityWalkers provides both SMPL movement labels
and context pseudo-labels, including the body shape of the pedestrians, their route destinations, and
the semantics and geometry of the scene.

Human Motion Generation. Human motion generation has been accelerated by large-scale motion
datasets and rapid advancements in generative models, with diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) being
the most successful architecture for its high generation quality and multi-modal modeling capacity. To
generate motion with more fine-grained control, various input conditions have been used, including
action labels (Tevet et al., 2022), texts (Zhang et al., 2024), audios (Dabral et al., 2023), and history
motions (Chen et al., 2023a). The most relevant motion generation models to ours are the ones that
condition on the indoor scenes (Huang et al., 2023; Yi et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024). However, there
is a huge gap between indoor and outdoor environments, and generating pedestrian movement requires
considering more context factors other than the surrounding environment, like route destinations and
pedestrian characteristics. Some works (Tripathi et al., 2024; Xue & Seo, 2024) propose to condition
the motion on the body shape but do not consider the scene context. Rempe et al. (2023) animate
pedestrian movements by generating high-level trajectories and then training a policy to control the
pedestrian movements in simulation. Nevertheless, their movement data for training the RL policy
comes from a subset of AMASS (Mahmood et al., 2019) with limited diversity. Wang et al. (2024)
can generate diverse pedestrian animations while following the given trajectory, but the motion is not
learned from real-world pedestrians. Shan et al. (2023) tackle pedestrian movement generation with
rule-based approaches by combining path planning algorithms (Treuille et al., 2006) and manually
designed animations, lacking the diversity and realism of real-world pedestrian movements. On the
contrary, our proposed PedGen model learns to generate diverse and realistic pedestrian movements
conditioned on the context factors from large-scale real-world data with noisy labels.

3    C APTURING D IVERSE R EAL -W ORLD P EDESTRIAN M OVEMENTS
This section introduces our effort to capture real-world pedestrian movements from web videos.
Existing human motion datasets rarely capture natural pedestrian movements, lack diversity in scenes
and human subjects, and do not provide the critical context factors of pedestrian movements, such
as surrounding environments, individual characteristics, and route destinations. To support the task


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Diverse Pedestrian Movements
       leaning on a stroller        taking out phone                                 Diverse Individual Characteristics
                                    to take a picture     pointing at a wall
           and turning


                                  turning and walking         scratching head
           moving items          with hands behind back         while sitting
                 Diverse Surrounding Environments                               Diverse Route Destinations


Figure 2: Samples in the CityWalker dataset. Top Left: The diverse pedestrian movements. Top Right:
The diverse body shapes of the pedestrians. Bottom Left: The diverse surrounding environments from depth-
unprojected images and the 4D pedestrian movement labels. Bottom Right: The diverse route destinations shown
on the depth labels and semantic maps of the scene. The background showcases pedestrians in bustling cities
from where we construct the CityWalker dataset.


of context-aware pedestrian movement generation, we construct CityWalkers, a large-scale dataset
with real-world pedestrian movements in diverse urban environments annotated by pseudo-labeling
techniques. Sec. 3.1 shows an overview of CityWalkers, and Sec. 3.2 describes our data collection
and annotation procedure. Please refer to the appendix for more details about CityWalkers.

3.1   C ITY WALKERS DATASET

The CityWalkers dataset is collected from YouTube’s city tour videos. Our data source consists
of high-quality web videos of walking in cities worldwide posted by content creators on YouTube,
such as the YouTube channel POPtravel (Sczepansky, 2024). We manually picked videos so they
incorporate a wide spectrum of urban public places in different regions and cultures with various scene
contexts and real-world pedestrian movements. We label each video’s scene attributes, including
weather, location, crowd density, and time of the day, using an off-the-shelf VLM (Chen et al.,
2023b). We then detect (Jocher et al., 2023) and track (Cheng et al., 2023a) each pedestrian in the
video, and label the pedestrian movements as SMPL parameters and scene context as depth and
semantic segmentation maps. These labels contain the crucial context factors for learning pedestrian
movements. In total, CityWalker contains 30.8 hours of high-quality videos, including 120,914
pedestrians and 16,215 scenes across 227 cities and 49 countries, making it the most diverse human
motion dataset regarding scene context and human subjects. As shown in Fig. 2, CityWalkers contains
a variety of pedestrian movements, scene contexts, pedestrian body shapes, and route destinations.

3.2   DATA P ROCESSING AND AUTOLABELING

We adopt WHAM (Shin et al., 2023) to recover 4D pedestrian movement pseudo-labels. Given
tracked pedestrians and their body key points, WHAM outputs their global human motion with
SMPL (Loper et al., 2023) parameters {tt , ϕt , θt , β} at every timestep t. tt ∈ R3 , ϕt ∈ SO(3)
are the root translation and orientation of the SMPL model, and θt ∈ SO(3)23 , β ∈ R10 are the
body pose and shape parameters. We further use the state-of-the-art monocular depth estimation
model ZoeDepth (Bhat et al., 2023) and semantic segmentation model SegFormer (Xie et al., 2021)
to automatically label scene depth and semantics. To filter low-quality pedestrian movement labels
brought by model noise, we threshold the detection confidence score, human bounding box size, and
keypoint confidence scores. We also discard the occluded motion by thresholding the number of
human key points that are within the 2D human segmentation mask. To further clean the labels and
curate a more accurate evaluation dataset, we manually check the label quality and adjust the labels,
such as 2D key points, if necessary. We want to stress that though we have tried our best to improve


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the quality of pseudo labels by using state-of-the-art models and filtering wrong predictions, label
noise from web videos is still inevitable. We show in the experiments that learning from the noisy
labels still benefits pedestrian movement generation. We also apply techniques in our generation
model to further mitigate the effect of label noise. A benchmark result of the accuracy of our data
autolabeling pipeline is provided in the appendix.
The final label includes future pedestrian movements and their corresponding context factors. {x =
{(tt , ϕt , θt )}, y = [I, I d , I s , β, t1 , tT ]}, where x is the pedestrian movement label and y is the
context label. I, I d , I s are images, depth labels, and segmentation maps of the scene, β represents
the pedestrian’s personal characteristics, and t1 , tT are the starting and goal positions.


4     G ENERATING C ONTEXT-AWARE P EDESTRIAN M OVEMENTS FROM N OISY
      L ABELS

This section introduces our method, PedGen, to address the label noise and incorporate the context
factors from the CityWalkers dataset. PedGen is a diffusion-based generative model and the first
method for the new task of context-aware pedestrian movement generation. An overview of PedGen
is shown in Fig. 3. Sec. 4.1 defines the task of context-aware pedestrian movement generation. We
introduce the overall architecture of PedGen in Sec. 4.2. Sec. 4.3 introduces two simple and effective
strategies to deal with the low-quality and incomplete labels from web videos, respectively. As it
is crucial to model the context factors, including the surrounding environments, the pedestrian’s
characteristics, and the goal points during generation, we design a novel Context Encoder in Sec. 4.4.

4.1   TASK D EFINITION

We define the task of context-aware pedestrian movement generation as follows: Given the initial 3D
position t1 = [x1 , y1 , z1 ] of a pedestrian and the 2D image of an urban scene, our goal is to generate
the pedestrian’s future movements x = [tt , ϕt , θt ]Tt=1 . The movement at each timestep is represented
as the SMPL root translation tt , root orientation ϕt , and body pose θt . The following context factors
are also provided to help generation: 1). The urban scene context represented as the 2D image I,
semantic mask I s , and depth label I d . 2). The SMPL human shape parameter β, which is a latent
representation that can indicate a pedestrian’s characteristics, such as height, weight, and body shape.
3). The 3D goal position tT = [xT , yT , zT ] as the pedestrian’s route destination in the scene.

4.2   P ED G EN M ODEL

PedGen follows the conditional diffusion framework (Ho et al., 2020; Ho & Salimans, 2022). Given
a sampled movement x from the dataset, the forward diffusion is a Markov noising process {xk }K    k=0
defined from the noise scheduling parameter {αk }K k=1 . The goal is to train a reverse denoising model
x̂ = F (x̂k , k, c) that predicts the sampled movement x given the noisy movement x̂k , the diffusion
timestep k, and the condition factor c. Our denoising model architecture follows state-of-the-art
transformer-based human motion generation models (Tevet et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2024; Chen et al.,
2023a), where movements at different timesteps are encoded as separate tokens in the transformer.
We represent x as velocity vt = tt − tt−1 and rotation ϕt , θt with 6D rotation (Zhou et al., 2019)
representation. Different from existing approaches that encode all parts of the motion into a single
token, we find it helpful to treat the velocity and the rotation of the motion as different tokens in
the transformer, as they have different representations and scales in the data. Our loss function for
training the denoising model F is as follows:
                  L(x, x̂) = Ek∈[1,K],(x,c)∈D [wrec Lrec + wtraj Ltraj + wgeo Lgeo ],                   (1)

where D is the training dataset. Lrec = ∥x − x̂∥22 is the standard diffusion reconstruction loss.
           PT
Ltraj = t=1 ∥tt − t̂t − t0 ∥1 is the trajectory loss on the reconstructed global translation t̂t =
PT                      PT
  t=1 v̂t , and Lgeo =    t=1 ∥FK(θt ) − FK(θ̂t )∥2 is the geometric loss (Tevet et al., 2022) that
computes the joint position error with forward kinematics on the SMPL body pose. In ablation
experiments, we will show the effectiveness of separating velocity and rotation tokens, as well as
adding the trajectory and geometry losses.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


During inference, we start from the k = K step by sampling x̂K from the standard Gaussian
distribution. We then pass it to the denoising model to predict the clean motion x̂ and add noise
again to obtain the noised sample x̂K−1 . This process is repeated K times to get the final generated
pedestrian movement x̂. Our model can also facilitate the efficient generation of infinitely long
movements by concatenating the short motion intervals. Please refer to the appendix for more details.


4.3   A DDRESSING N OISY L ABELS

Pseudo-labels from pre-trained predictors have inevitable noise. Unlike existing human motion
generation approaches that focus on datasets with clean MoCap data, our PedGen model aims to
address noisy labels from web videos. There are two sources of label noise in CityWalkers. The
first is the inherent compound noise from the data and models used for pseudo-labeling, leading
to low-quality labels. As it is difficult to examine the label quality of 4D human motion from only
2D videos, many anomaly labels remain in the dataset even after rule-based filtering and manual
checks. We propose to automatically identify these low-quality labels using reconstruction-based
unsupervised anomaly detection techniques (Livernoche et al., 2023; Wolleb et al., 2022). Specifically,
we first train a PedGen model without context on the training data of CityWalkers. We then partially
add noise with half of the diffusion steps K/2 for each sample and denoise it using the trained model.
We use the reconstruction error between the original and the denoised sample as a metric for anomaly
labels and filter labels with errors greater than a certain threshold. We then iterate the above process
by re-training the model with the remaining labels and filtering based on the new reconstruction error.
Another source of label noise is the discontinuous or lost tracks of pedestrians due to occlusions and
missed detections. As a result, more than half of the labels are incomplete and only annotated on
a subset of frames. These labels provide partial supervision that can benefit learning more diverse
context-aware pedestrian movements. To train with these partial labels, we replace the missing
timesteps for these partial labels with a learnable motion mask embedding m to the denoising
transformer. We first define a label mask M , where Mt == 1 indicates the label at timestep t is
missing. Then we add the mask embedding to the original noisy sample as xk = xk (1−M )+m·M
to replace the missing timesteps with the mask embedding m and feed to the network to output
the denoised prediction x̂ similar to Sec. 4.2. We then update the loss with the masked predictions
and masked ground truth as L = L(x(M ), x̂(M )) so it only operates on the labels at the available
timesteps. All losses will guide the training with the masked outputs.


4.4   C ONTEXT E NCODER

Our context encoder module outputs a condition embedding c from the provided context factors.
To encode the scene context, we first unproject the 2D depth label I d and semantic map I s into
a 3D point cloud P = {p = [px , py , pz , pc ]}, where pc is the semantic label. Next, we extract
points within a local neighborhood of the starting location t1 , resulting in the local point cloud
Plocal = {p ∈ P | ∥px − x1 ∥ < ∆x , ∥py − y1 ∥ < ∆y , ∥pz − z1 ∥ < ∆z} and voxelize it into
a 3D grid. The class label of each voxel is either empty or determined by majority voting of the
points within the voxel. The voxel is then processed with a single cross-attention layer to get the
scene context embedding. The scene encoding is then added with embeddings from other conditions,
including the human shape β and the goal position tT , to get the final context embedding c.
As web videos only contain 2D images, a natural idea is to directly encode the scene context using the
2D image feature extractors (e.g., Dino-V2 (Oquab et al., 2023)). We find that our proposed context
encoder can encode the scene context more effectively than encoding the scene context in 2D. Since
pedestrian movement is represented in the 3D space and generating it requires 3D information about
the scene, it is easier to reason about the surrounding environment using a 3D representation than 2D
image features. Furthermore, it is hard to disentangle the pedestrian and its surrounding context from
the 2D image features. As a result, the model may exploit the ego pedestrian instead of the scene
context to generate future movements. Our context encoder could address this issue by unprojecting
the pixels into 3D point clouds and discarding point clouds belonging to the ego pedestrian. In our
ablation experiments, we show the importance of using the 3D scene representation and appending
the semantic labels in encoding the scene context.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                             Context Encoder                           Todo: separate procedure
                                                                                                                       in training and evaluation


    Data: CityWalkers                         Model: PedGen
                                                                                                             Generated Pedestrian Movement
               Label      Anomaly Labels                     Scene Context


                                                                              Attention
              Filtering                                Lift to
                                            Semantics ! " 3D
 Raw Labels
                           Partial Labels
                                              Depth ! !

                                                                                            Context
                                                                                          Embedding %


                                                                              MLP
                           Other Labels        Body Shape +                                                     Denoising Transformer
                                                                                          Time Embedding "

                                                                                             Mask
                                                                                          Embedding !


                                                                              MLP
                                               Goal * !                                                                   MLP + PE
                                                                                                                          %                         %
                                                                                                             Velocity !!" !#$     Rotation "!" , $!" !#$


Figure 3: Our method. We discard the anomaly labels with an iterative automatic label filtering procedure
and add the partial labels to training data. We then train PedGen with a Context Encoder to represent crucial
context factors. The scene context is obtained by lifting the 2D depth and semantic labels to the 3D space and
converting them into a local voxel representation. The encoded scene context is combined with other context
factors, including the body shape and the goal to get the context embedding c. The context embedding c and the
timestep embedding k are then used to guide the Denoising Transformer to predict the clean motion from the
noised one. We use a learnable motion mask embedding m to address the partial labels during training.


5     E XPERIMENTS
We compare the performance of PedGen to the other baselines on the real-world Citywalkers and
Waymo datasets and in simulated CARLA environments in Sec. 5.1. Sec. 5.2 shows experiments
on the effect of training with noisy labels and different context factors. Sec. 5.3 demonstrates the
ablation study of our data and model. The diverse pedestrian movements generated by PedGen are
shown in Fig. 4. We provide additional experimental details in the appendix.

Datasets. We train PedGen on the proposed CityWalkers dataset. For each pedestrian movement
trajectory, we sample the initial timestep at an interval of 30 frames and keep at most the future 60
frames (2 seconds) as the ground truth movement. The training set has 104,192 samples, including
53,405 partial labels that have at least 30 frames of annotation. The validation set has 13,039 samples
and only contains complete labels. We split the validation set to contain novel scenes with completely
different locations and human subjects never seen in the training set.
To verify the performance of PedGen on real-world pedestrian movement prediction with ground
truth labels, we use the Waymo open dataset (Sun et al., 2020) with human-annotated 3D human
keypoint labels, which is only used for testing. Waymo is critical as it is the largest urban dataset that
captures diverse pedestrian motions with sparse 3D keypoint labels at 10 Hz. In total, we selected 80
test samples that (1) spans 2 seconds and (2) includes at least 6 sparse human keypoint labels.
We also collect an additional test set in the CARLA Simulator (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017) to demonstrate
the application of PedGen in simulation. We sample initial locations, goal locations, and camera view
angles in different maps and render the ground truth images, depth labels, and segmentation maps in
simulation. We manually check that all the sampled locations are valid and that all the camera views
are not occluded by obstacles, resulting in a simulated test set with 262 diverse samples.

Evaluation metrics. For experiments on the CityWalkers and Waymo dataset, we compare the
generated pedestrian movement with the ground truth, and follow the metrics used in human motion
prediction (Chen et al., 2023a) to compute Average Displacement Error (ADE) and Final Displace-
ment Error (FDE) on the realism of the predicted motion. We generate 50 movements for each data
sample and report both minimum and average ADEs (mADE, aADE) and FDEs (mFDE, aFDE)
among all samples. For experiments on the simulated test set, we evaluate the context awareness and
the physical plausibility of the generated motion. Our metrics include the Collision Rate (CR), which
measures the ratio of the generated movement that collides with other objects in the environment,
and the Foot Floating Rate (FFR), which measures the ratio of the generated movement whose feet
are either floating or penetrating with the ground greater than a given threshold (20cm).

Baselines. We compare our method with several recent human motion diffusion models, which
have different input conditions and motion representations. Note that since context-aware pedestrian


                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Visualizations of the generated pedestrian movements. The top row shows results in real scenes
from the CityWalkers dataset, the middle row shows results in the real-world Waymo test set, and the bottom
row shows results in simulated scenes from the CARLA test set.

Table 1: Comparison to baselines. We consider two cases where the model is given the goal condition or not.
We evaluate on the validation set of CityWalkers, the real-world Waymo test set, and the simulated CARLA test
set. We evaluate our model (PedGen) compared with the other baselines.

            Goal                         CityWalkers                    Waymo               CARLA
                       Method
          Condition
                                 mADE ↓ aADE ↓ mFDE ↓ aFDE ↓ mADE ↓ aADE ↓ mFDE ↓ aFDE ↓ CR ↓ FFR ↓
             ✗        HumanMAC    1.31   4.67    1.86   8.65   3.19   5.29   5.61   10.36 2.5% 10.2%
             ✗           MDM      1.33   4.55    1.93   8.41   3.03   5.35   5.66   10.60 2.1% 3.2%
             ✗          PedGen    1.13   4.08    1.61   7.56   2.90   5.15   5.52   10.11 1.6% 2.6%
             ✓        TRUMANS     0.73   1.26    0.56   1.13   2.01   2.37   1.41   1.94   0.6% 0.6%
             ✓         PedGen     0.59   1.08    0.46   0.99   1.91   2.18   0.78   1.04   0.0% 0.0%


movement generation is a newly defined task, no models could directly support it; we thus made
minimum adjustments to make them compatible with our problem setting. MDM (Tevet et al., 2022)
uses texts or action labels as the condition and proposes several geometric losses to improve motion
quality. We did not use the foot contact loss proposed in their method as CityWalkers does not
provide ground-truth foot contact labels. HumanMac (Chen et al., 2023a) conditions the future
motion generation on the history motion sequences, which uses the DCT transform to ensure smooth
motion generation. TRUMANS (Jiang et al., 2024) uses the initial human pose, the 2D BEV goal
position, the indoor scene context, and the frame-wise action labels as the input condition. We modify
TRUMANS so it is compatible with our scene context and goal point conditions.

5.1   C OMPARISON TO BASELINES

We compare PedGen with the other baselines on the validation set of CityWalkers, the real-world
Waymo test set, and the simulated CARLA test set. We separately evaluate whether the goal condition
is given, as it is a deterministic factor for pedestrian movement. The benchmarking results are shown
in Tab. 1. It can be observed that PedGen outperforms other baseline models by a clear margin on
CityWalkers. PedGen also achieves the best zero-shot generalization ability on Waymo and CARLA
test sets, further showing the superiority of PedGen to the other baseline.

5.2   E FFECT OF N OISY L ABELS AND C ONTEXT FACTORS

Table 2a demonstrates the effectiveness of PedGen in addressing noisy labels. We can see that
removing the anomaly labels with the proposed automatic label filtering can help generate more
realistic pedestrian movements and improve aADE by 2.9%. Moreover, adding the partial labels as
additional training data can improve the aADE by 5.8%, highlighting the value of partial labels in
web videos. Combining both strategies for noisy labels leads to the best performance of a 4.08 aADE.


                                                        8
            No Context                   With Context             With Context (Long-Term)
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       a)


                            No Context                                 With Context                         With Context (Long-Term)
       b)


                         No Context                     With Context                    No Context                     With Context

Figure 5: Qualitative comparison of training with context factors. We compare the generated movements of
PedGen trained with or without context factors in real-world environments (a) and in simulation (b).


Table 2: Results with noisy labels and context factors. We experiment on the CityWalkers validation set and
the CARLA test set and study the effect of training with noisy labels (a) and different context factors (b).

(a) Evaluation of training with noisy labels.                    (b) Evaluation of the context factors. We evaluate PedGen condi-
We evaluate PedGen with no context trained                       tioned on each context factor, including the surrounding environ-
with or without anomaly and partial labels.                      ment (scene), the pedestrian’s own characteristics (human), and the
                                                                 goal points (goal).
Anomaly Partial                  CityWalkers
 Labels Labels                                                                      Context                    CityWalkers             CARLA
                         mADE ↓ aADE ↓ mFDE ↓ aFDE ↓                   Idx
                                                                                    Factor
   ✓            ✗         1.17    4.45     1.64         8.31                                     mADE ↓ aADE ↓ mFDE ↓ aFDE ↓ CR ↓ FFR ↓
   ✗            ✗         1.13    4.32     1.60         8.09           1               No            1.13       4.08   1.61    7.56 2.1% 5.2%
   ✓            ✓         1.15    4.19     1.62         7.79           2             Scene           1.11       3.75   1.55    6.92 1.6% 2.6%
   ✗            ✓         1.13    4.08     1.61         7.56           3             Human           1.09       3.24   1.61    5.95 1.9% 0.7%
                                                                       4         Scene + Human       1.00       3.12   1.43    5.65 1.5% 0.3%
                                                                       5         Goal                0.60       1.09   0.47    1.00 0.0% 0.0%
                                                                       6     Scene + Goal            0.59       1.08   0.46    0.99 0.0% 0.0%
                                                                       7     Human + Goal            0.55       1.01   0.43    0.93 0.0% 0.0%
                                                                       8 Scene + Human + Goal        0.54       0.96   0.43    0.91 0.0% 0.0%


We further examine the effect of each context factor on the pedestrian movement generation perfor-
mance in Tab. 2b. The comparisons between “setting 1 vs. 2” and between “setting 1 vs. 3” show that
adding the surrounding environment and the pedestrian’s own characteristics as conditions are helpful
to pedestrian movement generation and can reduce the aADE by 6.7% and 19.4%, respectively.
Setting 4 demonstrates that incorporating both context factors achieves even better results. From
settings 1 and 5, we find that the goal points are the most important context factor for the final
performance and can significantly reduce aADE by 72.9%. The comparison between “setting 5 vs. 6”
and between “setting 5 vs. 7” further proves that the other two context factors (scene and human)
can also help movement generation after the goal is provided. Finally, setting 8 demonstrates that
using all three context factors leads to the smallest generation errors. From the results of the CARLA
test set, we can see that the scene context can contribute to both a lower collision rate of 1.6% and a
lower foot floating rate of 2.6%, while the human context is more useful in reducing the foot floating
rate to only 0.7%. Adding both the scene and the human context can further improve the physical
plausibility of the generated movements. Using the goal context is the most crucial factor and can
reduce the failure rate to 0. This further proves the effectiveness of each context factor.
Some qualitative comparison results in real-world environments are shown in Fig. 5 (a). We can
observe that PedGen trained without context factors generate arbitrary movements that walk off the
sidewalk. By conditioning the generation on the context factors, the movement becomes context-
aware, and the model can further generate long-term pedestrian walking behaviors on the sidewalk.
Visualization results in simulation are shown in Fig. 5 (b). From the left two figures, we can see that
without the context factors, the generated movements have the feet floating from the ground, while
adding context factors fix this issue. From the right two figures, we see that PedGen trained without
context generated a walking pose that is in collision with the bench, while it successfully generated a
sitting pose on the bench after considering the context factors.


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Ablation experiment results. We ablate on the training data of PedGen (a) and the PedGen model’s
key components (b) on the CityWalkers validation set.

         (a) Ablation on training data of PedGen.                   (b) Ablation on model components of PedGen.

Context       Training                  Metric                Context                                      Metric
                                                                                Method
Factor          Data                                          Factor
                              mADE ↓ aADE ↓ mFDE ↓ aFDE ↓                                        mADE ↓ aADE ↓ mFDE ↓ aFDE ↓
              SLOPER4D         1.61   6.04    2.42   11.65                 PedGen (-traj/geo)     1.33   4.47   1.97   8.29
    No    CityWalkers(50%)     1.16   4.19    1.66   7.76          No     PedGen (-sep. token)    1.32   4.26   2.01   7.95
          CityWalkers(100%)    1.13   4.08    1.61    7.56                     PedGen             1.13   4.08   1.61   7.56
              SLOPER4D         1.47   6.45    2.19   12.50                PedGen (-3D rep.)       1.13   4.26   1.60   7.95
 Scene    CityWalkers(50%)     1.14   4.02    1.57   7.47         Scene   PedGen (-semantic)      1.12   3.86   1.56   7.09
          CityWalkers(100%)    1.11   3.75    1.55    6.92                    PedGen              1.11   3.75   1.55   6.92
           SLOPER4D            3.82   10.39   7.11   20.62
 Human CityWalkers(50%)        1.13   3.34    1.65   6.18
       CityWalkers(100%)       1.09    3.24   1.61    5.95



5.3      A BLATION S TUDY

Ablation on training data of PedGen. Table 3a shows an ablation study on the training data of
PedGen. To demonstrate the effectiveness and necessity of using web videos for pedestrian movement
generation, we train PedGen on SLOPER4D (Dai et al., 2023). SLOPER4D is one of the largest
outdoor 4D human datasets annotated from LiDAR point clouds. Still, its scale and diversity in
human subjects and scene contexts are much less than CityWalkers, and its motion is captured from
human actors instead of real-world pedestrians. We can observe that training on CityWalkers leads to
significant performance improvement compared to training on SLOPER4D, even though CityWalkers
is annotated with pseudo-labels. Notably, training with the human context on SLOPER4D only
achieves 3.82 mADE, as the model can easily overfit the 12 human subjects in the dataset and results
in degraded generalization performance. On the contrary, with more training data of CityWalkers,
models conditioned on different context factors all perform better than those trained with less data,
highlighting the value of capturing large-scale pedestrian movement data using web videos.
Ablation on model components of PedGen. Table 3b shows ablations on key model components of
PedGen. -traj/geo means the model is trained only with the diffusion reconstruction loss without the
trajectory and geometry losses. -sep. token means the motion at each timestep is represented as a
single token in the transformer instead of separate tokens for the rotation and velocity. -3D rep. means
the scene context is encoded with 2D feature using a depth anything (Yang et al., 2024) pre-trained
image backbone DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023). -semantic means the 3D voxel only encodes the
occupancy without semantic labels. The results show the importance of using 3D scene context with
semantic labels for pedestrian movement generation, the effectiveness of separating velocity and
rotation tokens, and adding the geometry and trajectory losses in the motion diffusion model.

6        C ONCLUSION
We study a new task of generating context-aware pedestrian movements by learning from web
videos with noisy labels. To facilitate this study, we collect a large-scale dataset CityWalkers
with diverse real-world pedestrian movements in urban scenes. We further propose PedGen, a
generative model that addresses the noisy labels in CityWalkers and models the three important
context factors: the scene context, the personal characteristics, and the goal position. Experiments
show that PedGen can generate realistic context-aware pedestrian movements in both real-world and
simulation environments. We hope this study will present new opportunities and facilitate future
research on modeling pedestrian movements in real-world settings.
Limitations. PedGen only considers static scene context at the starting frame, while pedestrian
movement also depends on dynamic scene contexts such as the history trajectories of other pedestrians.
Modeling these dynamic objects would be an interesting future direction. In addition, PedGen only
generates the movements of a single pedestrian at one time, while modeling group activities in urban
scenes can help generate more realistic real-world behaviors.


                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT

We are fully aware of the potential privacy and ethical issues when using street-view videos, and we
take these concerns as our highest priority. We acknowledge that we will be solely responsible for
any legal violations with respect to our collected dataset and that we accept all the associated risks.
We have taken several measures to mitigate these issues:
Legal Compliance with YouTube’s Terms of Service and Creative Commons Licensing: Our
dataset comprises YouTube videos that are explicitly labeled under the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY-SA1 ) license. This license allows for redistribution and adaptation of the material for any
purpose, including research, as long as proper attribution is provided to the original creators. We have
carefully reviewed YouTube’s Terms of Service and Creative Commons guidelines 2 to ensure that our
use of these videos is legally permissible. YouTube’s Terms of Service explicitly permit redistribution
of Creative Commons-licensed content, provided proper attribution is given. Our dataset strictly
excludes videos marked under the “Standard YouTube License” or any content that carries additional
restrictions. We do not download videos through unauthorized means but instead rely on publicly
available Creative Commons content accessible via YouTube’s official API, ensuring compliance
with both YouTube’s platform policies and broader copyright laws.
Privacy Protection and Anonymization Measures: We follow standard protocols used by street
datasets such as Waymo and Ego4D (Sun et al., 2020; Grauman et al., 2022) to ensure complete
anonymization of identifiable features. As the first step of our data preprocessing, we apply mosaics
to faces and license plates to prevent re-identification of individuals in the videos. Additionally, we
omit any copyright-related information, such as logos, channel owner details, or other copyrighted
materials, during data processing to protect intellectual property rights. Our model is trained
exclusively on preprocessed images, ensuring that identifiable features and copyrighted materials are
neither stored nor accessible within our dataset. Furthermore, our IRB-approved protocol ensures
compliance with human subjects protection guidelines, giving individuals in the videos the right to
request data removal if privacy concerns arise.
Ethical Use and Responsible Data Sharing: Upon data release, we will provide clear and transparent
terms of use for the dataset, outlining ethical guidelines, usage restrictions, and legal obligations
that users must comply with. We will implement safeguards on our dataset webpage, including
detailed user agreements, encryption measures to protect personal information, and access controls
to monitor and prevent unauthorized data use. To align with privacy protection best practices from
existing YouTube datasets such as YouTube-8M and YouTube-VOS (Abu-El-Haija et al., 2016; Xu
et al., 2018), we will not provide processed video clips directly. Instead, users will be redirected to
the original YouTube videos via a link and will be required to follow our preprocessing scripts to
prepare the dataset themselves. Additionally, as our labels are generated using off-the-shelf models,
we will not release direct annotations but will provide scripts that allow users to generate their own
pseudo-labels. To further prevent misuse, we will only release the trained model weights, allowing
researchers to utilize the dataset for downstream tasks such as pedestrian movement simulation
without exposing raw video data.
Institutional Review Board (IRB) Oversight and Legal Compliance: Our dataset will be overseen
by the UCLA Institutional Review Board (IRB) with security protocols in place to protect against
unauthorized access and misuse. The UCLA IRB will review our data collection, ensuring compliance
with ethical and legal standards. Specifically, the IRB will assess the legal permissibility of using
publicly available, CC-licensed videos and will confirm that our approach aligns with applicable
laws and institutional policies. The human subjects in the videos have the right to view, correct, and
request deletion of personal information in the dataset. The review board will continue to evaluate
the collection, use, and sharing of the data to ensure alignment with best practices in data privacy and
ethics. Any legal concerns raised post-publication will be addressed under UCLA’s data governance
framework, ensuring continued compliance and ethical responsibility.
By implementing these measures, we ensure that our dataset adheres to both legal requirements and
ethical best practices. We remain committed to continuously reviewing and improving our compliance
protocols in response to emerging ethical and legal considerations.

   1
       https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode.en
   2
       https://www.youtube.com/static?template=terms


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The project was supported by the NSF grants CNS-2235012 and IIS-2339769.

R EFERENCES
Sami Abu-El-Haija, Nisarg Kothari, Joonseok Lee, Paul Natsev, George Toderici, Balakrishnan
  Varadarajan, and Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan. Youtube-8m: A large-scale video classification
  benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08675, 2016.
Shariq Farooq Bhat, Reiner Birkl, Diana Wofk, Peter Wonka, and Matthias Müller. Zoedepth:
  Zero-shot transfer by combining relative and metric depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12288, 2023.
Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Xianghui Xie, Ilya A Petrov, Cristian Sminchisescu, Christian Theobalt,
  and Gerard Pons-Moll. Behave: Dataset and method for tracking human object interactions.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
 15935–15946, 2022.
Ling-Hao Chen, Jiawei Zhang, Yewen Li, Yiren Pang, Xiaobo Xia, and Tongliang Liu. Humanmac:
  Masked motion completion for human motion prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9544–9555, 2023a.
Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong
  Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, Bin Li, Ping Luo, Tong Lu, Yu Qiao, and Jifeng Dai. Internvl:
  Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.14238, 2023b.
Ziyu Chen, Jiawei Yang, Jiahui Huang, Riccardo de Lutio, Janick Martinez Esturo, Boris Ivanovic,
  Or Litany, Zan Gojcic, Sanja Fidler, Marco Pavone, Li Song, and Yue Wang. Omnire: Omni urban
  scene reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16760, 2024.
Ho Kei Cheng, Seoung Wug Oh, Brian Price, Alexander Schwing, and Joon-Young Lee. Tracking
  anything with decoupled video segmentation. In ICCV, 2023a.
Wei Cheng, Ruixiang Chen, Siming Fan, Wanqi Yin, Keyu Chen, Zhongang Cai, Jingbo Wang, Yang
 Gao, Zhengming Yu, Zhengyu Lin, et al. Dna-rendering: A diverse neural actor repository for
 high-fidelity human-centric rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
 on Computer Vision, pp. 19982–19993, 2023b.
Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo
 Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban
 scene understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 3213–3223, 2016.
Winnie Daamen. Modelling passenger flows in public transport facilities. 2002.
Winnie Daamen and Serge P Hoogendoorn. Experimental research of pedestrian walking behavior.
 Transportation research record, 1828(1):20–30, 2003.
Rishabh Dabral, Muhammad Hamza Mughal, Vladislav Golyanik, and Christian Theobalt. Mofusion:
  A framework for denoising-diffusion-based motion synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9760–9770, 2023.
Yudi Dai, Yitai Lin, Xiping Lin, Chenglu Wen, Lan Xu, Hongwei Yi, Siqi Shen, Yuexin Ma, and
  Cheng Wang. Sloper4d: A scene-aware dataset for global 4d human pose estimation in urban
  environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 682–692, June 2023.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An
  open urban driving simulator. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1–16. PMLR, 2017.
Mohamed H Dridi. List parameters influencing the pedestrian movement and pedestrian database.
 Int’l J. Soc. Sci. Stud., 3:94, 2015.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dorine Duives. Analysis and modelling of pedestrian movement dynamics at large-scale events.
  2016.
Yan Feng, Dorine Duives, Winnie Daamen, and Serge Hoogendoorn. Data collection methods for
  studying pedestrian behaviour: A systematic review. Building and Environment, 187:107329,
  2021.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
  Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.
Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Shihao Zou, Qingyao Sun, Annan Deng, Minglun Gong, and
  Li Cheng. Action2motion: Conditioned generation of 3d human motions. In Proceedings of the
  28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 2021–2029, 2020.
Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji, Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. Generating
  diverse and natural 3d human motions from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5152–5161, June 2022.
Vladimir Guzov, Aymen Mir, Torsten Sattler, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Human poseitioning system
  (hps): 3d human pose estimation and self-localization in large scenes from body-mounted sensors.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  4318–4329, 2021.
Milad Haghani and Majid Sarvi. Crowd behaviour and motion: Empirical methods. Transportation
 research part B: methodological, 107:253–294, 2018.
Mohamed Hassan, Vasileios Choutas, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Resolving 3d
 human pose ambiguities with 3d scene constraints. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
 conference on computer vision, pp. 2282–2292, 2019.
Mohamed Hassan, Duygu Ceylan, Ruben Villegas, Jun Saito, Jimei Yang, Yi Zhou, and Michael J
 Black. Stochastic scene-aware motion prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 11374–11384, 2021.
Norman C Heglund and C Richard Taylor. Speed, stride frequency and energy cost per stride: how
  do they change with body size and gait? Journal of Experimental Biology, 138(1):301–318, 1988.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
  2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Serge P Hoogendoorn and Piet HL Bovy. Pedestrian route-choice and activity scheduling theory and
  models. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 38(2):169–190, 2004.
Chun-Hao P Huang, Hongwei Yi, Markus Höschle, Matvey Safroshkin, Tsvetelina Alexiadis, Senya
  Polikovsky, Daniel Scharstein, and Michael J Black. Capturing and inferring dense full-body
  human-scene contact. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 13274–13285, 2022.
Siyuan Huang, Zan Wang, Puhao Li, Baoxiong Jia, Tengyu Liu, Yixin Zhu, Wei Liang, and Song-
  Chun Zhu. Diffusion-based generation, optimization, and planning in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16750–16761, 2023.
Nan Jiang, Zhiyuan Zhang, Hongjie Li, Xiaoxuan Ma, Zan Wang, Yixin Chen, Tengyu Liu, Yixin
  Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Scaling up dynamic human-scene interaction modeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.08629, 2024.
Glenn Jocher, Ayush Chaurasia, and Jing Qiu. Ultralytics YOLO, January 2023. URL https:
  //github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Manuel Kaufmann, Jie Song, Chen Guo, Kaiyue Shen, Tianjian Jiang, Chengcheng Tang, Juan José
 Zárate, and Otmar Hilliges. Emdb: The electromagnetic database of global 3d human pose and
 shape in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
 pp. 14632–14643, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Victor Livernoche, Vineet Jain, Yashar Hezaveh, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh. On diffusion modeling
  for anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18593, 2023.
Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl:
 A skinned multi-person linear model. In Seminal Graphics Papers: Pushing the Boundaries,
 Volume 2, pp. 851–866. 2023.
Maria Lyssenko, Christoph Gladisch, Christian Heinzemann, Matthias Woehrle, and Rudolph Triebel.
 From evaluation to verification: Towards task-oriented relevance metrics for pedestrian detection
 in safety-critical domains. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 38–45, 2021.
Naureen Mahmood, Nima Ghorbani, Nikolaus F Troje, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black.
  Amass: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 5442–5451, 2019.
Vikas Mehta. Walkable streets: pedestrian behavior, perceptions and attitudes. Journal of Urbanism,
  1(3):217–245, 2008.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
 robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.
Karen M Ostrosky, Jessie M VanSwearingen, Ray G Burdett, and Zena Gee. A comparison of gait
  characteristics in young and old subjects. Physical therapy, 74(7):637–644, 1994.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Davis Rempe, Zhengyi Luo, Xue Bin Peng, Ye Yuan, Kris Kitani, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fidler, and
  Or Litany. Trace and pace: Controllable pedestrian animation via guided trajectory diffusion.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
 13756–13766, 2023.
Alexandre Robicquet, Amir Sadeghian, Alexandre Alahi, and Silvio Savarese. Learning social
  etiquette: Human trajectory prediction in crowded scenes. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), volume 2, pp. 5, 2016.
Daniel Sczepansky. Poptravel. https://www.youtube.com/@poptravelorg, 2024. Ac-
  cessed: 2024-05-21. Licensed under CC BY.
Yonatan Shafir, Guy Tevet, Roy Kapon, and Amit H Bermano. Human motion diffusion as a
  generative prior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01418, 2023.
Mengyi Shan, Brian Curless, Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, and Steve Seitz. Animating street view.
 In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Papers, pp. 1–12, 2023.
TJ Shields and Karen E Boyce. A study of evacuation from large retail stores. Fire safety journal, 35
  (1):25–49, 2000.
Soyong Shin, Juyong Kim, Eni Halilaj, and Michael J Black. Wham: Reconstructing world-grounded
  humans with accurate 3d motion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07531, 2023.
Jonathan D Sime. Crowd psychology and engineering. Safety science, 21(1):1–14, 1995.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Pei Sun, Henrik Kretzschmar, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Aurelien Chouard, Vijaysai Patnaik, Paul Tsui, James
  Guo, Yin Zhou, Yuning Chai, Benjamin Caine, et al. Scalability in perception for autonomous
  driving: Waymo open dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 2446–2454, 2020.
Zachary Teed, Lahav Lipson, and Jia Deng. Deep patch visual odometry. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yonatan Shafir, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Amit H Bermano.
  Human motion diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14916, 2022.
Yunhe Tong and Nikolai WF Bode. An investigation of how context affects the response of pedestrians
  to the movement of others. Safety science, 157:105919, 2023.
Adrien Treuille, Seth Cooper, and Zoran Popović. Continuum crowds. ACM Transactions On
 Graphics (TOG), 25(3):1160–1168, 2006.
Shashank Tripathi, Omid Taheri, Christoph Lassner, Michael J Black, Daniel Holden, and Carsten
  Stoll. Humos: Human motion model conditioned on body shape. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03944,
  2024.
Mignon van den Berg. The Influence of Herding on Departure Choice in Case of an Evacuation:
 Design and Analysis of a Serious Gaming Experimental Set-up. TRAIL, 2016.
Edward Vendrow, Duy Tho Le, Jianfei Cai, and Hamid Rezatofighi. Jrdb-pose: A large-scale dataset
  for multi-person pose estimation and tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4811–4820, 2023.
Timo Von Marcard, Roberto Henschel, Michael J Black, Bodo Rosenhahn, and Gerard Pons-Moll.
  Recovering accurate 3d human pose in the wild using imus and a moving camera. In Proceedings
  of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 601–617, 2018.
Jingbo Wang, Zhengyi Luo, Ye Yuan, Yixuan Li, and Bo Dai. Pacer+: On-demand pedestrian anima-
   tion controller in driving scenarios. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 718–728, 2024.
Julia Wolleb, Florentin Bieder, Robin Sandkühler, and Philippe C Cattin. Diffusion models for
  medical anomaly detection. In International Conference on Medical image computing and
  computer-assisted intervention, pp. 35–45. Springer, 2022.
Enze Xie, Wenhai Wang, Zhiding Yu, Anima Anandkumar, Jose M Alvarez, and Ping Luo. Segformer:
  Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with transformers. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 34:12077–12090, 2021.
Ning Xu, Linjie Yang, Yuchen Fan, Dingcheng Yue, Yuchen Liang, Jianchao Yang, and Thomas
  Huang. Youtube-vos: A large-scale video object segmentation benchmark. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1809.03327, 2018.
Yuanyuan Xu, Wan Yan, Genke Yang, Jiliang Luo, Tao Li, and Jianan He. Centerface: joint face
  detection and alignment using face as point. Scientific Programming, 2020(1):7845384, 2020.
Kebing Xue and Hyewon Seo. Shape conditioned human motion generation with diffusion model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06778, 2024.
Masahiro Yamasaki, Takashi Sasaki, and Masafumi Torii. Sex difference in the pattern of lower limb
 movement during treadmill walking. European journal of applied physiology and occupational
 physiology, 62:99–103, 1991.
Ming Yan, Yan Zhang, Shuqiang Cai, Shuqi Fan, Xincheng Lin, Yudi Dai, Siqi Shen, Chenglu Wen,
 Lan Xu, Yuexin Ma, et al. Reli11d: A comprehensive multimodal human motion dataset and
 method. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19501, 2024.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Xiaogang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. Depth
  anything: Unleashing the power of large-scale unlabeled data. In CVPR, 2024.
Hongwei Yi, Justus Thies, Michael J. Black, Xue Bin Peng, and Davis Rempe. Generating human
  interaction motions in scenes with text control. arXiv:2404.10685, 2024.
Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
 Motiondiffuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffusion model. IEEE Transactions on
 Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024.
Jinkai Zheng, Xinchen Liu, Wu Liu, Lingxiao He, Chenggang Yan, and Tao Mei. Gait recognition
   in the wild with dense 3d representations and a benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20228–20237, 2022.
Yi Zhou, Connelly Barnes, Jingwan Lu, Jimei Yang, and Hao Li. On the continuity of rotation
  representations in neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5745–5753, 2019.
Zheng Zhu, Xianda Guo, Tian Yang, Junjie Huang, Jiankang Deng, Guan Huang, Dalong Du, Jiwen
  Lu, and Jie Zhou. Gait recognition in the wild: A benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  international conference on computer vision, pp. 14789–14799, 2021.


                                               16
