Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROVABLE C ONVERGENCE AND L IMITATIONS OF
G EOMETRIC T EMPERING FOR L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS
 Omar Chehab, Anna Korba, Austin Stromme & Adrien Vacher
 Department of Statistics
 CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
 France
 {emir.chehab,anna.korba,austin.stromme,adrien.vacher}@ensae.fr



                                            A BSTRACT

         Geometric tempering is a popular approach to sampling from challenging multi-
         modal probability distributions by instead sampling from a sequence of distribu-
         tions which interpolate, using the geometric mean, between an easier proposal
         distribution and the target distribution. In this paper, we theoretically investigate
         the soundness of this approach when the sampling algorithm is Langevin dynam-
         ics, proving both upper and lower bounds. Our upper bounds are the first analysis
         in the literature under functional inequalities. They assert the convergence of tem-
         pered Langevin in continuous and discrete-time, and their minimization leads to
         closed-form optimal tempering schedules for some pairs of proposal and target
         distributions. Our lower bounds demonstrate a simple case where the geometric
         tempering takes exponential time, and further reveal that the geometric tempering
         can suffer from poor functional inequalities and slow convergence, even when the
         target distribution is well-conditioned. Overall, our results indicate that geometric
         tempering may not help, and can even be harmful for convergence.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Sampling from a target distribution π whose density is known up to a normalizing constant is a chal-
lenging problem in statistics and machine learning, and is currently the subject of intense interest
due to applications in Bayesian statistics (Dai et al., 2020) and energy-based models in deep learn-
ing (Song et al., 2021a), among other areas. In these settings, the normalizing constant of the target
distribution π is typically intractable, and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms (Roberts
and Rosenthal, 2004; Robert and Casella, 2004) are commonly used to generate Markov chains in
the ambient space, whose law eventually approximates the target distribution.
Among MCMC algorithms, the Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA), which corresponds to a
time discretization of a Langevin diffusion process, has attracted considerable attention due to its
simplicity, theoretical grounding, and utility in practice (Roberts and Tweedie, 1996; Wibisono,
2018; Durmus et al., 2019; Song and Ermon, 2019). For example, ULA can be proven to converge
quickly when the target distribution π is smooth and strongly log-concave (Durmus and Moulines,
2016; Durmus et al., 2019). However, many cases in practice require to sample from distributions
which are not log-concave, and indeed potentially even multi-modal (Parisi, 1981; Zhang et al.,
2020). In such settings, the convergence of ULA is governed by functional inequalities which ef-
fectively quantify the convexity, or lack thereof, of the target distribution (Vempala and Wibisono,
2019). Nonetheless, truly multi-modal target distributions generally have poor functional inequali-
ties, thus leading to weak convergence guarantees for ULA. This phenomenon is not merely a the-
oretical artifact, and it is well-known amongst practitioners that when sampling from multi-modal
distributions, algorithms based on ULA can get stuck in local modes and suffer from slow conver-
gence (Deng et al., 2020).
Tempering or annealing is a popular technique (Neal, 1998; Gelman and Meng, 1998; Syed et al.,
2022) to overcome the deficiencies of ULA and other MCMC methods in the multi-modal setting.
Rather than sample directly from the target distribution π, tempering samples from a sequence of
distributions that interpolate between an easier, unimodal proposal distribution ν and the more chal-


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


lenging π. Intuitively, tempering may help escape local modes and explore the entire target distribu-
tion (Syed et al., 2022). Many possible interpolating paths for tempering exist, but to be practically
useful the path must be implementable with the chosen MCMC scheme, and should improve con-
vergence when compared the latter run directly against the target π.
One of the most popular choices for the tempering path is the geometric tempering (Gelman and
Meng, 1998; Neal, 1998), where the intermediate distributions are defined to be the geometric aver-
ages µλ ∝ ν 1−λ π λ with λ ∈ [0, 1] the (inverse) temperature parameter. At a “hot” temperature, λ is
close to 0 and the distribution µλ is close to the proposal which can be chosen with large variance for
better exploration, and when the temperature is gradually “cooled” to λ = 1, µλ recovers the original
target π. In practice, the geometric tempering does not require access to the normalizing constants,
and has accordingly been widely applied to various MCMC methods (Dai et al., 2020; Chopin and
Papaspiliopoulos, 2020). However, theoretical understanding of the geometric tempering is limited.
This includes identifying situations where it improves upon standard sampling procedures as well as
offering guidance for the selection of the temperature schedule, a crucial question in practice where
a number of heuristics have been proposed (Chopin and Papaspiliopoulos, 2020; Jasra et al., 2011;
Chopin et al., 2024; Kiwaki, 2015).

Contributions. In this paper, we develop theoretical understanding of geometric tempering com-
bined with Langevin dynamics: we refer to this as tempered Langevin dynamics. We make three
main contributions:

      1. We provide in Theorems 1 and 3 the first convergence result for tempered Langevin dy-
         namics in Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL). Our results here are for general tempering
         schedules and depend on the functional inequalities (log-Sobolev) of the intermediate dis-
         tributions along the tempering sequence. In Proposition 6 we derive the optimal tempering
         schedule for our continuous time upper bound in the strongly log-concave setting.
      2. To go beyond the strongly-log concave setting, we must understand the behavior of func-
         tional inequalities along the geometric tempering. Our result here, Theorem 4, is negative,
         and shows that, surprisingly, even when the proposal and target have favorable functional
         inequalities, the geometric tempering can exponentially worsen these inequalities.
      3. Although the poor functional inequalities in Theorem 4 are a worrying sign for the geo-
         metric tempering, they do not yet rule out fast convergence since functional inequalities
         only govern worst-case convergence. We thus analyze a simple bi-modal example where
         we show in Theorem 8 that the geometric path takes exponential time to converge in total
         variation (TV), and then show in Theorem 9 that, surprisingly, similar results even hold for
         a uni-modal target with favorable functional inequalities.

In sum, our results establish sufficient conditions for the tempered Langevin dynamics to converge
in KL divergence. We find some limited situations where these improve upon the rates of standard
Langevin dynamics, but we also find that the geometric tempering can worsen functional inequalities
and suffer from slow convergence, both in the setting of multi-modal target and even for uni-modal
targets with reasonable functional inequalities.

Organization. This paper is organized as follows. In the remainder of this section we discuss re-
lated work and describe our notation. In section 2, we discuss background about ULA and geometric
tempering. In section 3, we state our upper bounds in KL on the convergence of the geometric tem-
pering with Langevin dynamics under functional inequalities, both in continuous and discrete time.
In section 4, we show that the geometric path can have poor functional inequalities even when the
proposal and target do not; yet, in the strongly-concave case, we derive explicit results from our
upper bounds and highlight situations where tempering may be beneficial. In section 5, we describe
two examples where geometric tempering with ULA provably has slow convergence in TV. Proofs
and additional numerical validations are collected in the Appendix.

Related work. Given the empirical success of ULA with a sequence of tempered target distribu-
tions it is desirable to obtain theoretical guarantees on the convergence of the scheme, and especially
to understand when and why certain sequences of moving targets can guide or misguide the sampling
process towards the final target. Closely related to our setting, Tang et al. (2024) also study the con-
vergence of tempered Langevin dynamics for the geometric sequence. However, they focus on the


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


simulated annealing setting. In this case the geometric sequence is taken as π λ , that degenerates to a
target distribution which is a Dirac located at the global maximum of the log density of π as λ goes
to infinity, so that sampling actually becomes an optimization task (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983; Cerný,
1985). Using an explicit temperature schedule, they measure convergence in probability. For an-
other sequence of intermediate targets obtained by convolving the target and proposal distributions,
and using an explicit schedule, Lee et al. (2022) prove fast convergence in TV. Finally, for a general
sequence of intermediate targets, Guo et al. (2024) very recently obtained a rate of convergence that
depends on Wasserstein metric derivative along the path of distributions: their result suggests that an
optimal path can be obtained as a Wasserstein geodesic between the initial and target distributions.
A modification of tempered Langevin dynamics, called Sequential Monte Carlo, that importantly
includes resampling of particles, has been shown to achieve fast convergence in TV (Schweizer,
2012; Paulin et al., 2018; Mathews and Schmidler, 2024; Lee and Santana-Gijzen, 2024). These
results apply to different sampling processes and rely on strong assumptions, effectively modeling
far-away modes by disjoint sets (Schweizer, 2012; Mathews and Schmidler, 2024), using a specific
path that interpolates between a uniform and target distribution by increasing the number of compo-
nents that follow the target’s law (Paulin et al., 2018), or assuming uniformly bounded consecutive
distributions along the path (Lee and Santana-Gijzen, 2024). In contrast, our results are specific
to the geometric sequence, but we obtain upper and lower bounds on convergence that explicitly
depend on the time.
The tempered iterates defined by the geometric path are also at the basis of simulated or parallel
tempering schemes (Geyer, 1991; Marinari and Parisi, 1992; Hukushima and Nemoto, 1996; Syed
et al., 2021), which are MCMC algorithms where the temperature is a random variable instead of a
monotonic function of time. Both schemes produce samples at all temperatures and involve swap-
ping particles between hotter and colder temperatures. In that setting, some works have investigated
the spectral gap of these methods, which is related to the rate of convergence in TV distance (Madras
and Zheng, 2003; Woodard et al., 2009a;b). When that rate is polynomially (resp. exponentially)
decreasing in the problem size, convergence is said to be fast (resp. ‘torpid’). These rates are studied
for arbitrary target distributions, using lower and upper bounds. Namely, Woodard et al. (2009a;b)
show that for target distributions which have modes with different weights or shapes, convergence
can be slow, and that symmetric modes are required for fast convergence. This generalizes previous
findings that for specific targets with two symmetric and equally weighted modes, convergence is
fast (Madras and Zheng, 2003), whereas for another specific target with three asymmetric modes,
convergence is slow for any schedule (Bhatnagar and Randall, 2015). Ge et al. (2018) also prove
fast convergence when the target is a Gaussian mixture. More recently, Chen et al. (2019) study the
Poincaré constant in parallel tempering, which governs the rate of convergence in χ2 divergence:
they show it improves upon standard Langevin, and relate this improvement to the exchange rate
of particles between different temperatures. Our work differs in several important ways: we study
a different sampling algorithm (Unadjusted Langevin algorithm), obtain upper and lower bounds
directly in time rather than on the spectral gap, and prove explicit rates of convergence, as well as
lower bounds, for simple choices of proposal and target distributions.


Notation. Cc∞ (Rd ) denotes the set of infinitely differentiable functions with compact support.
P(Rd ) denotes the set of probability measures p on Rd . For p ∈ P(Rd ), we denote that p is
absolutely continuous w.r.t. q using p ≪ q and we use dp/dq to denote the Radon-Nikodym
derivative. The set of probability measures which are absolutely continuous with respect to the
Lebesgue measure is written Pac (Rd ). The Total Variation (TV) distance is defined as TV(p, q) :=
supA⊂Rd |p(A) − q(A)|, where the supremumR runs over all Borel sets. For any p ∈ P(Rd ), L2 (p) is
the space of functions f : Rd → R such that ∥f ∥2 dp < ∞. We denote by ∥ · ∥L2 (p) and ⟨·, ·⟩L2 (p)
                                                                  2
                                                                L (p).2 For p ≪ q, the 2Kullback-
respectively the norm and the inner product of the RHilbert space
                                                           dp
Leibler (KL) divergence is defined as KL(p, q) = log dq dp, the χ -divergence as χ (p, q) :=
R dp        2                                                      dp
                                                                        2
    dq − 1 dq and the Fisher-divergence as FD(p, q) = ∇ log dq          L2 (p)
                                                                               , and +∞ otherwise.
For a measurable function f : Rd → R we define the variance Varp (f ) := Ep [(f − Ep [f ])2 ] for
p ∈ P(Rd ). We write the standard Gaussian on R with mean a and variance σ 2 as N (a, σ 2 ), and
the uniform measure on a Borel set A ⊂ Rd with finite and positive Lebesgue measure as unif A .
Given a closed set A ⊂ Rd we define d(x, A) := inf y∈A ∥x − y∥ for all x ∈ Rd . Finally, we define
                                   Rz    2
the error function by erf(z) := √2π 0 e−x dx.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide some background on functional inequalities, Langevin dynamics, and
geometric tempering.

Functional inequalities. Let q ∈ Pac (Rd ). We say that q satisfies the Poincaré inequality with
constant CP ≥ 0 if for all f ∈ Cc∞ (Rd ),
                                      Varq (f ) ≤ CP ∥∇f ∥2L2 (q) ,                                   (1)
and let CP (q) be the best constant in Eq. 1, or +∞ if it does not exist. We say that q satisfies the
log-Sobolev inequality with constant CLS if for all f ∈ Cc∞ (Rd ),
                                       h         f 2  i
                      entq (f 2 ) := Eq f 2 ln            ≤ 2CLS ∥∇f ∥2L2 (q) ,                   (2)
                                                Eq [f 2 ]
and let CLS (q) be the best constant in Eq. 2, or +∞ if it does not exist. Note that log-Sobolev
implies Poincaré with the same constant (Bakry et al., 2014), so that CLS (q) ≥ CP (q). If q ∝ e−V
and the potential V is αq -strongly convex, then q satisfies Eq. 2 with constant α1q . However, the latter
is more general, including for instance distributions q whose potentials are bounded perturbations of
a strongly convex potential (Bakry et al., 2014; Cattiaux and Guillin, 2022).

Langevin dynamics. Let π ∈ Pac (Rd ). The Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) (Parisi,
1981; Besag, 1994) consists in sampling a target distribution π using noisy gradient ascent
                                                      √
                    Xk+1 = Xk + h∇ log π(Xk ) + 2hϵk , ϵk ∼ N (0, Id )                      (3)
with step size h > 0 at iteration k ∈ N. Setting time as t = hk and taking the continuous limit
obtained as h → 0, Eq. 3 defines a continuous process known as the Langevin diffusion. The
convergence of the law of the Langevin diffusion to the equilibrium measure π is then governed
by the Poincaré and log-Sobolev inequalities. In particular, if we denote the law of the Langevin
diffusion at time t by pt , then pt converges to π in KL with exponential rate determined by the
log-Sobolev constant of π (Vempala and Wibisono, 2019, Theorem 2), namely
                                                         −1
                                KL(pt , π) ≤ e−2CLS (π)       t
                                                                  KL(p0 , π).                         (4)
However, for multi-modal distributions such as Gaussian mixtures, the log-Sobolev constant can
grow exponentially with the distance between modes (Chen et al., 2021). Nevertheless, ULA re-
mains a popular choice, due to its computational simplicity: simulating Eq. 3 only requires access
to the score ∇ log π which does not depend on the target’s normalizing constant.

Langevin with moving targets. Many heuristics broadly known as annealing or tempering consist
in using ULA to sample a path, or sequence of distributions (µt )t∈R+ instead of the single target
π. The hope is that this sequence of intermediate distributions will improve the convergence of the
ULA sampler. Different tempering algorithms sample the path sequentially in time (Dai et al., 2020;
Neal, 1998; Rubin, 1987), back-and-forth in time (Lee et al., 2021; Neal, 1996; Zhang et al., 2020),
or at all times jointly (Marinari and Parisi, 1992; Geyer, 1991). This paper deals with the first case,
i.e.,
                                                        p
                     Xk+1 = Xk + hk ∇ log µk (Xk ) + 2hk ϵk , ϵk ∼ N (0, 1)                         (5)
where the target now is updated (“moved”) at each iteration. This generic sampling method has
been used in high-dimensional spaces (Wu et al., 2020; Thin et al., 2021; Geffner and Domke, 2023;
Song and Ermon, 2019) and has achieved state-of-the-art results for sampling images, where it is
sometimes known by the names Annealed Langevin Dynamics (Song and Ermon, 2019) or the “cor-
rector” sampler (Song et al., 2021b). It is therefore of interest to find moving targets whose geometry
is well-suited to ULA’s convergence properties. A number of paths (µt )t∈R+ can be used to guide
the process toward the final target π. Many of them interpolate between a proposal distribution ν
that is easy to sample and the target distribution π, for example by taking their convolution (Song
and Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021b; Albergo et al., 2023), their geometric mean (Neal, 1998), or
following the gradient flow of a loss from proposal to target (Tieleman, 2008; Carbone et al., 2024;


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Marion et al., 2024). The path obtained by convolving the two distributions is the default choice
for sampling from so-called “diffusion models”, yet the scores ∇ log µt along that path are not an-
alytically tractable in our setting when the density of π is known up to a normalization constant,
and estimating them is the subject of current research (Huang et al., 2024; He et al., 2024; Grenioux
et al., 2024; Saremi et al., 2024).

Geometric tempering. The path obtained by taking the geometric mean of the proposal and tar-
get distributions has distinguished itself in the sampling literature (Neal, 1998; Gelman and Meng,
1998). It is written as
                                µt (x) = cλt ν(x)1−λt π(x)λt ,    t ∈ R+ ,                         (6)
where cλt is a normalizing factor, ν ∈ Pac (Rd ) is a proposal distribution and λ(·) : R+ → [0, 1]
is an increasing function called the tempering schedule. It has recently been shown that the ge-
ometric path can be identified to a time-discretized gradient flow of the Kullback-Leibler diver-
gence to the target, with respect to the Fisher-Rao distance (Chopin et al., 2024; Domingo-Enrich
and Pooladian, 2023). Its main advantage is its computational tractability, since the score of
∇ log µt = (1 − λt )∇ log ν + λt ∇ log π is known in closed-form. This path is a default in some
sampling libraries (Cabezas et al., 2023) and remains a popular choice in recent sampling litera-
ture (Thin et al., 2021; Geffner and Domke, 2023; Dai et al., 2020) and applications (Bradley and
Nakkiran, 2024; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Dieleman, 2022). A special case of the
geometric path is especially popular, choosing ν to be “uniform”, or more formally, equal to the
Lebesgue measure: µt (x) = ct π(x)λt ; this choice is commonly used in practice to sample from
un-normalized distributions parameterized by a deep neural network (Wu et al., 2020; Grathwohl
et al., 2020; Nijkamp et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2017) or for global optimization (Marinari and Parisi,
1992). Note that when λ0 > 0, we can define the probability measure ν ∝ π λ0 and a tempering
                   t −λ0
schedule γt := λ1−λ    0
                         , and rewrite µt (x) = ct π(x)λt as a special case of Eq. 6 with the tempering
schedule γt . When ν is not chosen to be “uniform”, it is often chosen as a simple distribution, such
as a Gaussian (Cabezas et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2021; Thin et al., 2021).

3    C ONVERGENCE RATE FOR TEMPERED L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS
Throughout, we take as given proposal and target distributions ν and π, as well as a temperature
schedule λ : R+ → [0, 1], which we assume satisfy the following conditions.
Assumption 1 (Regularity of proposal, target, and tempering) The proposal ν and the target π have
densities with respect to the Lebesgue measure, which we write ν ∝ e−Vν and π ∝ e−Vπ . The
tempering schedule (λt )t≥0 is such that λ : R+ → [0, 1] and λt is non-decreasing in t and weakly
differentiable.

In addition to this basic regularity, we also make the following quantitative assumptions on the
negative log densities.
Assumption 2 (Lipschitz gradients and dissipativity) The negative log densities Vν , Vπ have Lips-
chitz continuous gradients on all of Rd , with Lipschitz constants Lν , Lπ , respectively. In addition,
Vν and Vπ satisfy the dissipativity inequalities
                  ⟨∇Vν (x), x⟩ ≥ aν ∥x∥2 − bν ,        ⟨∇Vπ (x), x⟩ ≥ aπ ∥x∥2 − bπ ,               (7)
with constants aν , aπ , bν , bπ > 0.

The Lipschitz assumption is used both for our discrete time results as well as in guaranteeing exis-
tence and uniqueness of the continuous time dynamics; see Appendix A.1 for more discussion on
this latter point. The dissipativity condition is common in the sampling literature (Conforti, 2024;
Erdogdu et al., 2022) as it implies a finite log-Sobolev constant under Lipschitz gradients (Catti-
aux et al., 2010). Our only quantitative use of the dissipativity condition will be to get control on
the second moments of the tempering dynamics, but it is also convenient to ensure the log-Sobolev
constants remain finite along the tempering path. Indeed, dissipativity of both Vν and Vπ implies
dissipativity of µt from Eq. 6, so CLS (µt ) < ∞. Our results will crucially rely on the size of the
inverse of these log-Sobolev constants, so we define the notation
                                  αt := CLS (µt )−1 > 0,         ∀t ≥ 0.                           (8)


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As a simple example, notice that if Vν , Vπ are αν , απ strongly convex, then αt ≥ (1 − t)αν + tαπ .
In section 4.1, we investigate how αt depends on the log-Sobolev constants of ν and π, and here
proceed with the statement of our convergence results.
Given the proposal ν and target π, as well as a tempering schedule (λt )t≥0 , we are interested in the
tempered Langevin dynamics, where the moving target is the geometric path µt , as defined in Eq. 6.
In continuous time, this is the stochastic differential equation
                                                                 √
                          dXt = − (1 − λt )∇Vν + λt ∇Vπ dt + 2dWt ,                                (9)
with initialization X0 ∼ p0 for some p0 ∈ P(Rd ), and where Wt is a standard d-dimensional
Brownian motion. We denote by pt the density of Xt given by the continuous time dynamics Eq. 9.
Our main upper bound in continuous time follows.
Theorem 1 (Continuous time) Suppose Assumption 1 and 2 hold, and let (αt )t≥0 be the inverse log-
Sobolev constants as in Eq. 8, assumed to be integrable. Let pt be the law of Eq. 9 with initialization
p0 and denote by λ̇t the weak time derivative of the tempering schedule. Then, for all t ≥ 0:
                    Ç Z t          å                                 Z t        Ç Z t           å
  KL(pt , π) ≤ exp −2        αs ds KL(p0 , µ0 ) + A(1 − λt ) + A         λ̇s exp −2       αv dv ds
                             0                                         0               s
                                                                                                  (10)
where A = 2(Lπ + Lν )( 2(d+b  ν +bπ )
                           aν ∧aπ     + Ep0 [∥x∥2 ]) depends on the constants from Assumption 2, the
second moment of the initial distribution p0 , and linearly on the dimension d.
The proof of Theorem 1 can be found in Appendix A.2. To the best of our knowledge, Theorem 1
is the first convergence analysis of Tempered Langevin dynamics, namely Eq. 9, in the literature.
The first two terms of the upper bound deal with the start and end of the tempering: the first one
measures the convergence rate to the first tempered distribution µ0 and the second one measures
how far the current tempered distribution is from the target. The first term is set to zero when the
schedule starts with λt = 0 and the sampling process Eq. 9 is initialized with the proposal p0 = ν.
The second term is null when λt = 1 at the time when convergence is evaluated. The last term in the
upper bound involves the tempering speed λ̇, as well as the geometry of the moving targets µt via
their inverse log-Sobolev constants αt between inverse temperatures λ0 and λt , and, in particular, is
null when the annealing schedule is constant. Note that, in Appendix A.3, we translate Theorem 1
to give sufficient conditions for convergence to the target at precision KL(pt , π) < ϵ.
Remark 2 (Recovering standard upper bound for Langevin dynamics without tempering) Notice
that Eq. 9 recovers standard Langevin dynamics when we set λt ≡ 1 for all t ∈ R+ . In this case,
only the first term in the upper bound is non-zero, and the bound recovers the standard continuous-
time upper bound for Langevin dynamics, as recalled in Eq. 4.
Next, we analyze the Euler-Maruyama discretization of the continuous time Tempered Langevin
Dynamics Eq. 9. Namely, we take X0 ∼ p0 and then, for a tempering sequence (λk )k≥0 and a
sequence of step-sizes (hk )k≥0 , we follow the iteration
                                                                         p
                Xk+1 = Xk − hk+1 ((1 − λk+1 )∇Vν + λk+1 ∇Vπ ) + 2hk+1 ϵk+1 ,                   (11)
where ϵk+1 is independent standard Gaussian noise. In other words, at each iteration k we take a
Langevin step of size hk+1 towards µk+1 := ck+1 ν 1−λk+1 π λk+1 .
Theorem 3 (Discrete time) Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and let (αk )k≥1 be the inverse log-
Sobolev constants as in Eq. 8. Define the smoothness constant of the tempered path to be Lk :=
(1 − λk )Lν + λk Lπ , and let pk be the law of Eq. 5 with initialization p0 . Then, so long as
                                              αk       aπ ∧ aν
                                  hk ≤ min( 2 ,                   , 1)
                                             4Lk 2(Lπ + Lν )2
for all k, we have
                     Xk
   KL(pk , π) ≤ exp −   αj hj KL(p0 , µ0 ) + A′ (1 − λk )
                            j=1
                     k
                     X                       Xk           k
                                                          X                k
                                                                           X
              + A′         (λi − λi−1 ) exp −   αj hj + 6   h2i dL2i exp −   αj hj   (12)
                     i=1                      j=i             i=1                 j=i+1



                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where A′ = 2(Lπ +Lν ) max Ep0 [∥x∥2 ], 2(3(baππ+b ν )/2+d)
                                                             3(d+bν +bπ )
                                                ∧aν ∧1      + aπ ∧aν         depends on the constants
from Assumption 2, the second moment of the initial distribution p0 , and linearly on the dimensional
d.

The proof of Theorem 3 can be found in Appendix B. The first three terms are the discrete-time
equivalent of those obtained in the continuous-time setup of Theorem 1. The novelty is the fourth
term which is the bias from the discretization: it becomes null as the step sizes hk tend to zero.
Otherwise, it involves the geometry of the intermediate target distributions via their smoothness
constants Lk , additionally to their inverse log-Sobolev constants αk . Again, when there is no tem-
pering, i.e. setting λk ≡ 1, since the second and third term cancel, we recover the known upper
bound on the convergence of ULA (Vempala and Wibisono, 2019, Th. 2) up to a multiplicative
constant. Similarly to the continuous case, we derive in Appendix B.2 sufficient conditions for
converging to the target with a given precision KL(pk , π) < ϵ.
Understanding the upper bounds in this section mainly involves two key points: the geometry of the
moving targets via their inverse log-Sobolev constants αt , and the tempering schedule λ(·). These
will be the focus of the next sections.

4      A NALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF THE UPPER - BOUNDS
In this section we explore the continuous-time upper bound from Theorem 1. We first present
in section 4.1 a simple example where the log-Sobolev constants of the intermediate distributions
along the geometric mean path can be exponentially worse than those of the target and proposal.
Motivated by this result, we then conduct a detailed study of the optimal tempering schedule in
section 4.2 in the setting where both ν and π are strongly log-concave.

4.1     G EOMETRIC TEMPERING CAN EXPONENTIALLY WORSEN FUNCTIONAL INEQUALITIES

Because of the fundamental role that log-Sobolev constants play in governing the convergence of
Langevin dynamics without tempering, it is natural that our upper bounds for tempered Langevin
dynamics depend on the log-Sobolev constants of the intermediate distributions. Nonetheless, the
size of these log-Sobolev constants is crucial for ensuring rapid convergence of tempered Langevin
dynamics. We are thus led to ask a fascinating yet, to the best of our knowledge, new question: how
do the log-Sobolev constants along the geometric tempering path depend on the proposal and target
distributions?
Developing a complete answer to this question is an in-                              Bi-modality in geometric tempering
teresting direction for future work, but here we provide                      0.40
                                                                                        Proposal
a simple example which shows that, in general, the ge-                        0.35
                                                                                        Target
ometric path can actually make functional inequalities                        0.30
                                                                                           0.45
exponentially worse. As is commonly done in prac-                             0.25
                                                                    Density


tice, we take the proposal distribution ν to be Gaus-                         0.20

sian (Cabezas et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2021; Thin                          0.15

et al., 2021). For the target, we take a parameter m > 0                      0.10

and put                                                                       0.05


                    −m2 /4                   −m2 /4                           0.00
      π := (1 − e            )N (m, 1) + e            um ,   (13)                    2.5     0.0   2.5   5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5
                                                                                                         x
where um is the smoothed uniform distribution on Figure 1: Bi-modal intermediate distribu-
Im := [−m, 2m] with density proportional to tion at λ = 0.45 with ν, π as in Eq. 13 for
   1         2
e− 2 d(x,Im ) . Note that without the small mixing with m = 10.
the smoothed uniform distribution in Eq. 13, the target π would be strongly log-concave, and the
geometric path would remain well-conditioned. The next result shows that while this small mixing
does not greatly worsen the log-Sobolev constant of ν, it does cause the geometric tempering to have
exponentially worse log-Sobolev constant, in fact even Poincaré constant.
Theorem 4 Let ν := N (0, 1) and π be as defined in Eq. 13 for m ≥ 10. Then CLS (ν) = 1 and
CLS (π) ≤ 81m5 , yet for all λ ∈ [ 21 , 1],
                                                      1     2
                                   CP (µλ ) ≥           4
                                                          em (1−λ)/100 − m2 .
                                                 4 · 10 m


                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since CLS (·) ≥ CP (·), the above holds, in particular, with CLS (µλ ) on the left-hand side.

The proof of Theorem 4 can be found in Appendix D.3. This example is plotted in Figure 1; the
intuition is that while both distributions are unimodal and thus well-conditioned, the small mix-
ing with the uniform measure creates multi-modality in the geometric tempering. The proof relies
on careful analysis to characterize this multi-modality, and then uses a test function which simply
linearly interpolates between the modes to witness the exponentially large Poincaré constant.
Theorem 4 rules out the possibility that the geometric tempering generically improves, or even
preserves, functional inequalities. Since our upper bounds depend on the log-Sobolev constants of
the geometric tempering, they also can suffer from such exponentially poor conditioning. But since
log-Sobolev inequalities only govern worst-case convergence, it is still at least a priori possible that
geometric tempering nonetheless achieves fast convergence. We investigate this question further in
section 5, and here instead continue exploring our upper bounds.

4.2   O PTIMAL TEMPERING IN THE STRONGLY LOG - CONCAVE CASE

Other than the log-Sobolev constants αt , the main input to our upper bounds is the tempering sched-
ule λ, and in this section we use our upper bounds to investigate the optimal schedule, an impor-
tant question in practice (Grosse et al., 2013; Song and Ermon, 2020). Both to make our analysis
tractable and because of the degeneracy in the non log-concave case identified in the previous sec-
tion, we here restrict to the strongly log-concave setting. Specifically, we assume that both the
proposal ν and the target π are log-concave with strong-concavity parameters απ , αν > 0. In this
case, αt ≥ (1 − λt )αν + λt απ .
We start by reformulating the continuous time result that we obtained in Theorem 1, in the case
where both the proposal ν and target π are log-concave.
Corollary 5 Suppose ν and π satisfy Assumptions 1 and 2, are αν and απ -strongly log-concave
respectively so that αt ≥ λt απ + (1 − λt )αν , and that the process is initialized at the proposal
distribution p0 = ν. Then for all t ≥ 0, we have
                                                       Z t                Z t

            KL(pt , π) ≤ AGt (λ),      Gt (λ) := 1 − 2     λs αs exp − 2      αv dv ds,        (14)
                                                           0                   s
where A is as in Theorem 1. Suppose additionally that απ ≥ αν . Then Gt (λ) is minimized by the
vanilla Langevin scheme λ(t) ≡ 1.

The proof of Corollary 5 is in Appendix C.1 and relies on integration by parts. This new expression
allows us to optimize on the schedule λ independently of the unknown quantity A. As one could ex-
pect, the corollary above states that when the target π is already better conditioned than the proposal
ν, so απ ≥ αν , there is no need to temper and the optimal tempering scheme is given by vanilla
Langevin λ ≡ 1. In the next proposition, we show on the contrary that if π is too poorly conditioned
with respect to ν, then one should indeed use a custom tempering scheme other than Langevin.
Proposition 6 Suppose απ < αν . Then the functional Gt (λ) is minimized for the scheme
                                             Å                       ã
                                                   αν     1 + αν s
                                 λ(s) = min                        ,1 .                            (15)
                                                αν − απ 2 + αν s
In particular, the optimal schedule does not depend on the horizon t, and when απ ≥ αν /2, vanilla
Langevin λ(t) ≡ 1 is optimal.

Proposition 6 is proven in Appendix C.2. Hence when the target is sufficiently peakier than the
proposal απ ≥ αν /2, tempering does not improve convergence beyond that of vanilla Langevin.
Conversely, when the target is flat enough απ < αν /2, then tempered Langevin with the schedule
in Eq. 15 does improve convergence over vanilla Langevin. While the optimal schedule is provided
analytically in Eq. 15, it cannot be computed exactly in practice given that the constant απ that
describes the geometry of the target distribution is unknown. On the other hand, in the limit of a
                                                                                1
flat and log-concave target απ → 0, the optimal schedule tends to λ(s) = 1 − 2+α  νs
                                                                                     , which can be
implemented in practice.
A natural question follows: can other schedules, which may not be optimal but are feasible to
implement in general, actually improve convergence beyond that of vanilla Langevin? A simple


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


example is the linear schedule. Here, we obtain an explicit convergence rate that does not improve
on standard Langevin at large times, but that is faster than standard Langevin at small times for small
απ .
Proposition 7 Assume αν > απ . Let t > 0 until which the continuous process 9 is run. Then, with
the linear tempering scheme λ(s) ≡ st defined on [0,t], Gt in the upper-bound of Corollary 5 writes
                             ß       Å                   ã                      Å              ã™
                      π                           t                                       t
              …
                                                               −(αν +απ )t
     Gt (λ) =                   erfcx απ                   −e              erfcx αν                ,
                4t(αν − απ )                 αν − απ                                 αν − απ
                                                                         2
where erfcx is the complementary scaled error function erfcx(x) = ex (1 − erf(x)). In particular,
as t → ∞, we have Gt (λ) ∼ 2α1π t .
                                                       1.0                     Optimal upper bound
The proof of Proposition 7 appears in Ap-                                      Vanilla Langevin upper bound
pendix C.3.                                                                    Linear Tempering upper bound
                                                       0.8
Finally, we compare in Figure 2 the value of
the upper-bound G at different time horizons          0.6
t using the optimal tempering scheme given in
Eq. 15, the linear tempering scheme λ(s) ≡ st         0.4

and vanilla Langevin λ(s) ≡ 1, for απ = 0.01
                                                      0.2
and αν = 1.0. We observe that the optimal
schedule always yields a lower value of G (as
                                                      0.0
it should) and that it provides a clear advantage         0   25  50   75  100 125 150 175 200
over vanilla Langevin at short horizons t. How-                             t
ever, as the horizon grows, this edge is even- Figure 2: Value of the upper-bound G uling the
tually lost. Similarly, we observe that the lin- optimal tempering, linear tempering, and standard
ear tempering schedule improves over vanilla Langevin.
Langevin at short time horizons yet is eventually beaten as the horizon grows.

5   E XPONENTIALLY SLOW CONVERGENCE FOR TEMPERED L ANGEVIN
    DYNAMICS

The upper bounds in Theorem 3 show that, so long as the log-Sobolev constants remain well-behaved
along the geometric tempering, Langevin with moving target can successfully sample from the target
distribution. While this assumption holds in favorable cases where the proposal and target are both
strongly log-concave, it may fail even when both distributions are well-conditioned yet not log-
concave, as demonstrated in Theorem 4. Nevertheless, such poor functional inequalities do not
necessarily rule out fast convergence of the geometric tempering because functional inequalities
only govern mixing in the worst case, and so it is still possible a priori that our upper bounds are
loose in such cases. The purpose of this section is to develop rigorous lower bounds for the geometric
tempering in two simple examples where the log-Sobolev constants of the intermediate distributions
are poor.

Setup. Throughout this section, we let the proposal distribution be the standard Gaussian ν :=
N (0, 1), as is common for the geometric tempering (Cabezas et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2021; Thin et al., 2021). We work in the setting of a discrete temperature schedule but with
continuous time inner Langevin iterations. In particular, we take as fixed a discrete temperature
schedule λ0 = 0 < λ1 < · · · < λK−1 < λK = 1 and a sequence of times T1 , . . . , TK that the inner
Langevin iteration is run for. We then put p0T0 := ν and define inductively pkt to be the law at time
t of Langevin initialized at pk−1
                              Tk−1 and run towards µk . Our goal is then to study the convergence of
the final output pK
                  TK  towards  π, as a function of the temperature and time sequences, as well as the
target π.

Bi-modal target. Since annealing is designed to overcome multi-modality and associated poor
mixing in the target, we begin by studying a toy model of multi-modality. Specifically, we take a
parameter m > 0, and consider
                                                 1          1
                         ν := N (0, 1),    π := N (0, 1) + N (m, 1).                         (16)
                                                 2          2

                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


It can be checked that π, as well as some of the intermediate distributions in the geometric tempering,
have log-Sobolev constant exponential in the mode separation m. However, as we mentioned above,
it remains possible a priori that the geometric tempering avoids this exponentially poor conditioning
by following non-worst case distributions. The following result shows that this is not the case,
and indeed that the total time spent on Langevin dynamics must be exponential in m to ensure
convergence.
Theorem 8 Suppose ν, π are as in Eq. 16 for m ≥ 11. Then
                                                                     K
                                                 1           2      X
                              TV(pK
                                  TK , π) ≥        − 16 · e−m /64 ·   Tk .
                                                20
                                                                    k=1

The proof of Theorem 8 can be found in Appendix D.2. Several remarks are in order. First, we em-
phasize that this result has no dependence whatsoever on the tempering schedule. Second, because
of classical inequalities
                     » between divergences
                                       »      (Polyanskiy and Wu, 2022, Section 7.6), the same re-
                         1               1 2
sult also holds with 2 KL(ρT , µk ), 2 χ (ρT , µk ) on the left-hand side. And finally, we remark
that other works have studied related tempering algorithms with a uniform, rather than Gaussian,
proposal, and shown that in this case tempered dynamics can successfully sample from mixtures of
Gaussians, so long as each mixture component has the same variance (Woodard et al., 2009b; Ge
et al., 2018). Theorem 8 shows that, in contrast, tempered Langevin dynamics with Gaussian pro-
posal can fail for mixtures of Gaussians with identical variance, and therefore additionally suggests
an unfavorable property of Gaussian proposals as compared with uniform.

Well-conditioned target. The previous result establishes a simple case where tempering is a nat-
ural approach, yet the geometric tempering suffers from exponentially poor performance. Since
the target distribution in that case has poor functional inequalities, a simpler sanity check for the
geometric tempering is to establish its convergence when the target is actually well-conditioned.
We now analyze an example similar to that of Theorem 4, where the target has decent log-Sobolev
inequalities, and show that, nonetheless, the geometric tempering suffers from exponentially poor
convergence, at least until the end of the tempering scheme. For some m > 0, put
                                                          1           1
                              ν := N (0, 1),       π :=     N (m, 1) + um ,                            (17)
                                                          2           2
                                                                                               1   2
where, as in section 4.1, um is the probability distribution with density proportional to e− 2 d (x,Im )
for Im = [−m, 2m]. Similar to Theorem 4, although π has a reasonable log-Sobolev constant,
the geometric tempering is partially bimodal. The next result shows that the geometric tempering
suffers from exponentially slow convergence, at least until the tempering is almost at 1.
Theorem 9 Suppose ν, π are as in Eq. 17 for m ≥ 4. Then CLS (π) ≤ 324m3 , yet for all k ∈ [K]
                                                                    k
                                               1             p     X
                              TV(pkTk , π) ≥     − δk − 10m · δk ·     Ti ,
                                               5                   i=1
                          2
for δk := 6m3 e−(1−λk )m /10 .

The proof of Theorem 9 can be found in Appendix D.3. This result demonstrates a simple case where
geometric tempering suffers from exponentially slower convergence than Langevin dynamics, and to
the best of our knowledge is the first result of»this kind for the »
                                                                   geometric tempering in the literature.
As for Theorem 8, the statement holds with 2 KL(ρT , µk ), 12 χ2 (ρT , µk ) on the left-hand side.
                                                   1

We finally remark that Theorems 8 and 9 are both consequences of a more general TV lower bound,
Theorem 20 in Appendix D.1, which may be of further interest.

6   C ONCLUSION
We provided the first convergence analysis of tempered Langevin dynamics, Eq. 9, in the literature,
both for continuous (Theorem 1), and discrete (Theorem 3), time. Our bounds are naturally driven by
the log-Sobolev constants of the geometric tempering path, and we identified in Theorem 4 a surpris-
ing degeneracy of the geometric tempering where it can make these constants exponentially worse


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


than that of the target. Restricting to the strongly log-concave setting, we rigorously established the
optimal tempering schedule for our upper bounds in Proposition 6, and identified a regime where
it is strictly distinct from vanilla Langevin. Finally, we developed rigorous lower bounds proving
exponentially slow convergence for a bimodal target in Theorem 8, and even demonstrated a novel
failure of the geometric tempering for a uni-modal target in Theorem 9, where it has exponentially
worse performance than vanilla Langevin. Interesting questions for future work include developing
a more complete understanding of the log-Sobolev constants along the geometric tempering, par-
ticularly for the uniform proposal, as well as identifying alternative paths for Langevin which have
more favorable properties. In this connection, we mention some recent works which modify the
geometric path so that mode weights are kept constant along the path (Bhatnagar and Randall, 2015;
Tawn et al., 2018); it would be interesting to extend our analysis to these algorithms.

Acknowledgements A. Vacher, O. Chehab, and A. Korba were supported by funding from the
French ANR JCJC WOS granted to A. Korba.


R EFERENCES
C. Dai, J. Heng, P.E. Jacob, and N. Whiteley. An Invitation to Sequential Monte Carlo Samplers.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 117:1587–1600, 2020.
Y. Song, S. Sohl-Dickstein, D.P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole. Score-Based Genera-
   tive Modeling through Stochastic Differential Equations. In International Conference on Learn-
   ing Representations, 2021a.
G.O. Roberts and J.S. Rosenthal. General state space Markov chains and MCMC algorithms. Prob-
  ability Surveys, 1, 2004.
C.P. Robert and G. Casella. Monte Carlo statistical methods. Springer Verlag, 2004.
G.O. Roberts and R.L. Tweedie. Exponential convergence of Langevin distributions and their dis-
  crete approximations. Bernoulli, pages 341–363, 1996.
A. Wibisono. Sampling as optimization in the space of measures: The Langevin dynamics as a
  composite optimization problem. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 2093–3027. PMLR,
  2018.
A. Durmus, S. Majewski, and B. Miasojedow. Analysis of Langevin Monte Carlo via convex opti-
  mization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):2666–2711, 2019.
Y. Song and S. Ermon. Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data Distribution. In
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
A. Durmus and E. Moulines. High-dimensional bayesian inference via the unadjusted langevin
  algorithm. Bernoulli, 2016.
G. Parisi. Correlation Functions and Computer Simulations. Nucl. Phys. B, 180:378, 1981.
R. Zhang, C. Li, J. Zhang, C. Chen, and A. Gordon Wilson. Cyclical Stochastic Gradient MCMC
  for Bayesian Deep Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
S. Vempala and A. Wibisono. Rapid Convergence of the Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm:
  Isoperimetry Suffices. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
W. Deng, G. Lin, and F. Liang. A Contour Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics Algorithm
  for Simulations of Multi-modal Distributions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020.
R.M. Neal. Annealed importance sampling. Statistics and Computing, 11:125–139, 1998.
A. Gelman and X.-L. Meng. Simulating Normalizing Constants: From Importance Sampling to
  Bridge Sampling to Path Sampling. Statistical Science, 13:163–185, 1998.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S. Syed, A. Bouchard-Côté, G. Deligiannidis, and A. Doucet. Non-Reversible Parallel Tempering:
   A Scalable Highly Parallel MCMC Scheme. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B:
   Statistical Methodology, 84(2):321–350, 2022.
N. Chopin and O. Papaspiliopoulos. An Introduction to Sequential Monte Carlo. Springer Series in
  Statistics. Springer International Publishing, 2020. ISBN 9783030478452.
A. Jasra, D. A. Stephens, A. Doucet, and T. Tsagaris. Inference for Lévy-Driven Stochastic Volatility
  Models via Adaptive Sequential Monte Carlo. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 38(1):1–22,
  2011.
N. Chopin, F. R Crucinio, and A. Korba. A connection between Tempering and Entropic Mirror
  Descent. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
T. Kiwaki. Variational Optimization of Annealing Schedules. ArXiv, abs/1502.05313, 2015.
W. Tang, Y. Wu, and X. Yu Zhou. Discrete-time simulated annealing: A convergence analysis via
  the Eyring–Kramers law. Numerical Algebra, Control and Optimization, 2024. ISSN 2155-3289.
S. Kirkpatrick, C.D. Gelatt, and M.P. Vecchi. Optimization by Simulated Annealing. Science, 220:
   671–680, 1983.
V. Cerný. Thermodynamical approach to the traveling salesman problem: An efficient simulation
   algorithm. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 45:41–51, 1985.
H. Lee, J. Lu, and Y. Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with polynomial
  complexity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
W. Guo, M. Tao, and Y. Chen. Provable Benefit of Annealed Langevin Monte Carlo for Non-log-
  concave Sampling. ArXiv, abs/2407.16936, 2024.
N. Schweizer. Non-asymptotic Error Bounds for Sequential MCMC Methods in Multimodal Set-
  tings. ArXiv, abs/1205.6733, 2012.
D. Paulin, A. Jasra, and A. Thiery. Error Bounds for Sequential Monte Carlo Samplers for Multi-
  modal Distributions. ArXiv, abs/1509.08775, 2018.
J. Mathews and S.C. Schmidler. Finite sample complexity of sequential Monte Carlo estimators on
   multimodal target distributions. The Annals of Applied Probability, 34(1B):1199–1223, 2024.
H. Lee and M. Santana-Gijzen. Convergence Bounds for Sequential Monte Carlo on Multimodal
  Distributions using Soft Decomposition, 2024.
C. J. Geyer. Markov Chain Monte Carlo Maximum likelihood. In E. M. Keramides, editor, Comput-
  ing Science and Statistics: Proceedings of the 23rd Symposium on the Interface, pages 156–163,
  1991.
E. Marinari and G. Parisi. Simulated tempering: a new Monte Carlo scheme. EPL, 19:451–458,
  1992.
K. Hukushima and K. Nemoto. Exchange Monte Carlo Method and Application to Spin Glass
  Simulations. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 65(6):1604–1608, 1996.
S. Syed, V. Romaniello, T. Campbell, and A. Bouchard-Côté. Parallel tempering on optimized paths.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10033–10042. PMLR, 2021.
N. Madras and Z. Zheng. On the Swapping Algorithm. Random Struct. Algorithms, 22:66–97, 01
  2003.
D. Woodard, S. Schmidler, and M. Huber. Sufficient Conditions for Torpid Mixing of Parallel and
  Simulated Tempering. Electronic Journal of Probability, 14(none):780 – 804, 2009a.
D. Woodard, S. Schmidler, and M. Huber. Conditions for Rapid Mixing of Parallel and Simulated
  Tempering on Multimodal Distributions. The Annals of Applied Probability, 19, 06 2009b.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N. Bhatnagar and D. Randall. Simulated Tempering and Swapping on Mean-Field Models. Journal
  of Statistical Physics, 164:495–530, 2015.
R. Ge, H. Lee, and A. Risteski. Simulated Tempering Langevin Monte Carlo II: An Improved Proof
  using Soft Markov Chain Decomposition. ArXiv, abs/1812.00793, 2018.
Y. Chen, J. Chen, J. Dong, J. Peng, and Z. Wang. Accelerating Nonconvex Learning via Replica
  Exchange Langevin diffusion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
D. Bakry, I. Gentil, M. Ledoux, et al. Analysis and Geometry of Markov Diffusion Operators,
  volume 103. Springer, 2014.
P. Cattiaux and A. Guillin. Functional inequalities for perturbed measures with applications to log-
   concave measures and to some Bayesian problems. Bernoulli, 28(4):2294–2321, 2022.
J. Besag. “Comments on “Representations of knowledge in complex systems” by U. Grenander and
   MI Miller. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B., 56:591–592, 1994.
H.-B. Chen, S. Chewi, and J. Niles-Weed. Dimension-free log-Sobolev inequalities for mixture
  distributions. Journal of Functional Analysis, 281(11):109236, 2021.
D. B. Rubin. Comment on “The calculation of posterior distributions by data augmentation”, by M.
  A. Tanner and W. H. Wong. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1987.
Y. T. Lee, R. Shen, and K. Tian. Structured logconcave sampling with a Restricted Gaussian Oracle.
   In Conference on Learning Theory, volume 134 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
   pages 2993–3050. PMLR, 2021.
R. M. Neal. Sampling from multimodal distributions using tempered transitions. Statistics and
  Computing, 6:353–366, 1996.
H. Wu, J. Köhler, and F. Noe. Stochastic Normalizing Flows. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 5933–5944. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
A. Thin, N. Kotelevskii, A. Doucet, A. Durmus, E. Moulines, and M. Panov. Monte Carlo Variational
  Auto-Encoders. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pages 10247–10257. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
T. Geffner and J. Domke. Langevin Diffusion Variational Inference. In International Conference on
   Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 206 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
   pages 576–593. PMLR, 25–27 Apr 2023.
J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models. International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2021b.
M.S. Albergo, N.M. Boffi, and E. Vanden-Eijnden. Stochastic Interpolants: A Unifying Framework
 for Flows and Diffusions. ArXiv, abs/2303.08797, 2023.
T. Tieleman. Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines using Approximations to the Likelihood
   Gradient. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2008.
D. Carbone, M. Hua, S. Coste, and E. Vanden-Eijnden. Efficient Training of Energy-Based Models
  Using Jarzynski Equality. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
P. Marion, A. Korba, P. Bartlett, M. Blondel, V. De Bortoli, A. Doucet, F. Llinares-López, C. Pa-
   quette, and Q. Berthet. Implicit Diffusion: Efficient Optimization through Stochastic Sampling.
   ICML 2024 Workshop on Differentiable Almost Everything: Differentiable Relaxations, Algo-
   rithms, Operators, and Simulators, 2024.
X. Huang, H. Dong, Y. Hao, Y. Ma, and T. Zhang. Reverse Diffusion Monte Carlo. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Y. He, K. Rojas, and M. Tao. Zeroth-Order Sampling Methods for Non-Log-Concave Distributions:
   Alleviating Metastability by Denoising Diffusion. ArXiv, abs/2402.17886, 2024.

                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L. Grenioux, M. Noble, M. Gabrié, and A.O. Durmus. Stochastic Localization via Iterative Posterior
   Sampling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
S. Saremi, J. W. Park, and F. Bach. Chain of Log-Concave Markov Chains. In International Con-
   ference on Learning Representations, 2024.
C. Domingo-Enrich and A.-A. Pooladian. An Explicit Expansion of the Kullback-Leibler Diver-
  gence along its Fisher-Rao Gradient Flow. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
A. Cabezas, J. Lao, and R. Louf. BlackJAX: A sampling library for JAX, 2023. URL http:
  //github.com/blackjax-devs/blackjax.
A. Bradley and P. Nakkiran.        Classifier-Free Guidance is a Predictor-Corrector.        ArXiv,
  abs/2408.09000, 2024.
A. Ramesh, P. Dhariwal, A. Nichol, C. Chu, and M. Chen. Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image
  Generation with CLIP Latents. ArXiv, abs/2204.06125, 2022.
C. Saharia, W. Chan, S. Saxena, L. Li, J. Whang, E. Denton, K. Ghasemipour, R. Gontijo Lopes,
  B. Karagol Ayan, T. Salimans, J. Ho, D. Fleet, and M. Norouzi. Photorealistic Text-to-Image
  Diffusion Models with Deep Language Understanding. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 35, pages 36479–36494. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
S.      Dieleman.           Guidance:       a cheat code       for   diffusion    models,     2022.
     https://benanne.github.io/2022/05/26/guidance.html.
W. Grathwohl, K.-C. Wang, J.-H. Jacobsen, D. Duvenaud, M. Norouzi, and K. Swersky. Your
  Classifier is Secretly an Energy Based Model and You Should Treat it Like One. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
E. Nijkamp, M. Hill, S.-C. Zhu, and Y. N. Wu. Learning Non-Convergent Non-Persistent Short-
  Run MCMC Toward Energy-Based Model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.
N. Ye, Z. Zhu, and R. Mantiuk. Langevin Dynamics with Continuous Tempering for Training Deep
  Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2017.
G. Zhang, K. Hsu, J. Li, C. Finn, and R. Baker Grosse. Differentiable Annealed Importance Sam-
  pling and the Perils of Gradient Noise. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021.
G. Conforti. Weak semiconvexity estimates for Schrödinger potentials and logarithmic Sobolev
  inequality for Schrödinger bridges. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 2024.
M. A. Erdogdu, R. Hosseinzadeh, and S. Zhang. Convergence of Langevin Monte Carlo in chi-
 squared and Rényi divergence. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
 tics, pages 8151–8175. PMLR, 2022.
P. Cattiaux, A. Guillin, and L.-M. Wu. A note on Talagrand’s transportation inequality and logarith-
   mic Sobolev inequality. Probability theory and related fields, 148:285–304, 2010.
R. Grosse, C. Maddison, and R. Salakhutdinov. Annealing Between Distributions by Averaging
  Moments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2013.
Y. Song and S. Ermon. Improved Techniques for Training Score-Based Generative Models. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 12438–12448. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2020.
Y. Polyanskiy and Y. Wu. Information Theory: From Coding to Learning. Cambridge University
   Press, 2022.
N.G. Tawn, G.O. Roberts, and J.S. Rosenthal. Weight-preserving simulated tempering. Statistics
  and Computing, 30:27–41, 2018.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K. Itô. On Stochastic Differential Equations, volume 4. American Mathematical Society New York,
  1951.
S. Kotz, I.I. Gikhman, and A.V. Skorokhod. The Theory of Stochastic Processes II. Classics in
   Mathematics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004.
V.I. Bogachev, N.V. Krylov, M. Röckner, and S.V Shaposhnikov. Fokker–Planck–Kolmogorov Equa-
  tions, volume 207. American Mathematical Society, 2022.
C. Le Bris and P.-L. Lions. Existence and Uniqueness of Solutions to Fokker–Planck Type Equations
  with Irregular Coefficients. Communications in Partial Differential Equations, 33(7):1272–1317,
  2008.
S. Mischler. Lectures Notes: An introduction to evolution PDEs. Chapter 0: On the Gronwall
   Lemma. CEREMADE, Université Paris-Dauphine, September 2019.
A. Schlichting. Poincaré and Log–Sobolev Inequalities for Mixtures. Entropy, 21(1):89, 2019.
R. Holley and D. W. Stroock. Logarithmic Sobolev inequalities and stochastic Ising models. Journal
  of Statistical Physics, 46:1159–1194, 1987.
A. Maurais and Y. Marzouk. Sampling in unit time with kernel Fisher-Rao flow. International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
O. Chehab, A. Hyvarinen, and A. Risteski. Provable benefits of annealing for estimating normalizing
  constants: Importance Sampling, Noise-Contrastive Estimation, and beyond. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX
The paper and appendix are organized as follows.

1   Introduction                                                                                    1

2   Background                                                                                      4

3   Convergence rate for tempered Langevin dynamics                                                 5

4   Analysis and optimization of the upper-bounds                                                   7
    4.1   Geometric tempering can exponentially worsen functional inequalities . . . . . . .        7
    4.2   Optimal tempering in the strongly log-concave case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8

5   Exponentially slow convergence for tempered Langevin dynamics                                   9

6   Conclusion                                                                                     10

A Convergence of continuous-time tempered Langevin dynamics                                        17
    A.1 Well-posedness of continuous tempered Langevin dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . .            17
    A.2 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
    A.3 Continuous-time convergence in precision form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
    A.4 Proofs of technical lemmas from Appendix A.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19

B Convergence of discrete-time tempered Langevin dynamics                                          21
    B.1 Proof of Theorem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
    B.2 Discrete-time convergence in precision form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23
    B.3 Technical lemma from Appendix B.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        24

C Optimization of continuous-time tempered Langevin Dynamics                                       25
    C.1 Proof of Corollary 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
    C.2 Proof of Proposition 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
    C.3 Proof of Proposition 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32

D Lower bounds                                                                                     32
    D.1 A general lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33
    D.2 Lower bounds for bimodal target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      35
    D.3 Lower bounds for unimodal target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       36
    D.4 Upper bounds on the log-Sobolev constant of the unimodal target . . . . . . . . . .        41

E Additional numerical illustrations                                                               42


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     C ONVERGENCE OF CONTINUOUS - TIME TEMPERED L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS
In this section, we give the proof of our continuous-time upper bound, Theorem 1. In Appendix A.1
we discuss the well-posedness of the continuous time dynamics. The proof of Theorem 1 is then
given in Appendix A.2. In the next section, Appendix A.3, we derive from Theorem 1 guarantees
for convergence to a given precision. In Appendix A.4 we give the proofs of the lemmas we used in
the proof of Theorem 1.

A.1    W ELL - POSEDNESS OF CONTINUOUS TEMPERED L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS

Notice that in Equation (9), the drift b(t, x) = ∇ log µt (x) is time-dependent and the diffusion
coefficient is constant. Still, existence and uniqueness of solutions can be guaranteed under mild
assumptions. For instance, if ∇ log ν and ∇ log π are Lν and Lπ -Lipschitz respectively, the drift is
also Lipschitz with bounded constant L ≤ max(Lν , Lπ ) (since the dynamic λt is bounded between
0 and 1), hence satisfy the usual linear growth condition in the second argument. In this case,
there exists a unique, continuous strong solution (Xt )t≥0 adapted to the filtration generated by the
Brownian motion which satisfies Equation (9) (Itô, 1951; Kotz et al., 2004). Strong uniqueness also
means that if two processes satisfy this equation with the same initial conditions, their trajectories are
almost surely indistinguishable. The law (pt )t≥0 of Equation (9) satisfies a Fokker-Planck equation
(Bogachev et al., 2022) that can be written
                                                Å           p  ã
                                     ∂pt                     t
                                         = ∇ · pt ∇ log            .                                 (18)
                                     ∂t                     µt
Generally, proving the existence and uniqueness of solutions for FPEs is more difficult than for
SDEs, but one can also get under mild assumptions existence and uniqueness for solutions of Equa-
tion (18), under the same Lipschitzness assumptions on the score of proposal and target distributions,
and using that the tempering dynamics are bounded in [0, 1] (Bris and Lions, 2008, Proposition 2).

A.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

In this section, we will prove Theorem 1 on the convergence rate of tempered Langevin dynamics.
The proof is in two steps: first, we compute how the process pt tracks the moving target µt , then we
compute how well the moving target µt tracks the final target π.

Step 1: contraction of KL(pt , µt ) over time. Using the chain rule, we have
                                                             −pt ∂µt
                                      Z                   Z
                      d                        p   ∂p
                                                 t   t
                        KL(pt , µt ) = log             +               := a + b.
                     dt                        µt ∂t          µt ∂t
The first term a involves the Langevin dynamics given by the Fokker-Planck equation Eq. 18. Hence,
using integration by parts and the inverse log-Sobolev constants defined in Eq. 8, we obtain:
                 Z       p                    p         Z             p   2
                           t                   t                        t
             a = log          ∇ · pt ∇ log         = − pt ∇ log
                          µt                  µt                       µt
                                                   = − FD(pt , µt ) ≤ −2αt KL(pt , µt ).      (19)
The second term b is specific to the tempering scheme: it involves the tempering dynamics µ̇t , which
                                                                                              1−λt λt
is zero when thereR is no tempering and are here determined by the tempering rule µt = cλt ν      π ,
where cλt = 1/ ν 1−λt π λt is a normalizing factor, that we will denote ct in this proof to alleviate
notation. We can compute the (log) tempering dynamics
                                                                               ∂
                                                                                 R 1−λ λ
                                                                              ∂tR ν        π t
                                                 Z
         ∂ log µt     ∂          π                    1−λt λt
                                                                         π               t
                  =        λt log + log ν − log ν         π     = λ̇t log −
            ∂t        ∂t         ν                                       ν        ν 1−λt π λt
                                          π ν 1−λt π λt
                                   Z
                             π                                       π      h     π i
                  = λ̇t log − λ̇t log R 1−λ λ = λ̇t log − Eµt log
                             ν            ν ν       tπ t             ν            ν
so that the second term becomes
                              −∂ log µt
                         Z                        h    πi      h    π i
                     b = pt              = λ̇t Eµt log    − Ept log      .
                                  ∂t                   ν            ν
To control this term we prove the following Lemma in Appendix A.4.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 10 (Discrepancy between the laws of the sampling process and tempering path) We have
            h    πi       h     πi                  2(d + b + b )
                                                           ν    π

        Eµt log     − Ept log       ≤ 2(Lπ + Lν )                   + Ep0 [∥x∥2 ] .
                 ν              ν                      aν ∧ aπ

Let A be the right-hand side in Lemma 10, namely
                                           2(d + b + b )
                                                  ν   π
                        A := 2(Lπ + Lν )                 + Ep0 [∥x∥2 ] .                         (20)
                                              aν ∧ aπ
Then we obtain
                                                b ≤ Aλ̇t .                                       (21)
Combining Eq. 19 and Eq. 21 we obtain
                             d
                               KL(pt , µt ) ≤ −2αt KL(pt , µt ) + Aλ̇t .
                            dt
To conclude this step, we apply Grönwall’s lemma (Mischler, 2019, Lemma 1.1) to yield
                           ÇZ t         å                  Z t          ÇZ t        å
        KL(pt ,µt ) ≤ exp       −2αs ds KL(p0 , µ0 ) + A        λ̇s exp      −2αv dv ds.
                              0                                  0          s


Step 2: compare KL(pt , µt ) and KL(pt , π). This measures how well the moving target µt tracks
the final target π. We write
                  KL(pt , π) = KL(pt , µt ) + KL(pt , π) − KL(pt , µt )
                                                 h     µt i
                             = KL(pt , µt ) + Ept log
                                                        π h    i
                                                               ν
                             = KL(pt , µt ) + (1 − λt )Ept log         + log ct .
                                                               π
We make the following observation on the log normalizing constants, proved in Appendix A.4.
Lemma 11 (Bounding the normalizing constant of the law of the tempering path) We have

                    0 ≤ log ct ≤ min λt KL(ν, π), (1 − λt ) KL(π, ν) .

Using Lemma 11 to control the normalizing constant ct , we obtain
                                                       h   ν  i           h   π  i
              KL(pt , π) ≤ KL(pt , µt ) + (1 − λt ) Ept log           + Eπ log          .
                                                                  π              ν
Finally, we control this last term using similar estimates as in Lemma 10; the proof is again deferred
to Appendix A.4.
Lemma 12 (Discrepancy between the laws of the sampling process and target) We have
               h     πi          h    πi                   2(d + b + b )
                                                                    ν  π

            Eπ log        − Ept log       ≤ 2(Lπ + Lν )                   + Ep0 [∥x∥2 ] .
                      ν               ν                        aν ∧ aπ

Applying this result we obtain
                               KL(pt , π) ≤ KL(pt , µt ) + (1 − λt )A.

Step 3: putting it together. We find
                          KL(pt , π) ≤ (u1 ) + (u2 ) + (u3 )                                     (22)
                                           Ç Z t          å
                              (u1 ) = exp −2         αs ds KL(p0 , µ0 )
                                                     0
                                  (u2 ) = (1 − λt )A
                                            Z t        Ç Z t      å
                                  (u3 ) = A     λ̇s exp −2   αv dv ds .
                                            0                s


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   C ONTINUOUS - TIME CONVERGENCE IN PRECISION FORM

As in Vempala and Wibisono (2019), we can derive from Theorem 1 sufficient conditions for con-
vergence to precision ϵ by setting each of the three terms in the upper-bound to be less than ϵ/3.
Corollary 13 Suppose the assumptions of Theorem 1 hold. To achieve convergence with precision
ϵ > 0 such that KL(pt , π) < ϵ, sufficient conditions on the time t and schedule λ(·) are
                                 1             3 KL(p , µ )   1            6A
                                                       0  0
                    t > max              log                  ,      log                  (23)
                                  2αmin              ϵ          αmin        ϵ
                                ϵ
                   λt > 1 −                                                               (24)
                              3A
                          ϵ
                   λt < + λt/2 ,                                                          (25)
                          6
where αmin = mins>0 αs is the smallest log-Sobolev constant among the path of tempered distri-
butions.

                                                                  −2tαmin
                                                    by (u1 )  ≤ e
Proof of Corollary 13. We upper-bound the first term                      KL(p0 , µ0 ) so that a
                                                                  3 KL(p0 ,µ0 )
sufficient condition for (u1 ) < ϵ/3 is t > 2α1min log                 ϵ           .

                                                ϵ
A sufficient condition (u2 ) < ϵ/3 is λt ∈]1 − 3A , 1]. If λ is bijective, this yields t > λ−1 1 − 3A
                                                                                                    ϵ
                                                                                                        .

Finally, we upper-bound the third term:
                    Z t        Ç Z t         å
          (u3 ) = A     λ̇s exp −2      αv dv ds                                                            (26)
                         0                   s
                       Z t/2           Ç         Z t          å        Z t             Ç   Z t        å
                =A               λ̇s exp −2             αv dv ds +            λ̇s exp −2         αv dv ds   (27)
                             0                      s                   t/2                 s
                                 Ç   Z t            å Z t/2           Z t
                ≤ A exp −2                  αv dv             λ̇s +          λ̇s ds                         (28)
                                      t/2                0             t/2

                ≤ A exp(−tαmin )(λt/2 − λ0 ) + (λt − λt/2 )                                                 (29)

                ≤ A exp(−tαmin ) + (λt − λt/2 )                                                             (30)
so that sufficient conditions for (u3 ) < 3ϵ can be obtained by setting each of the two terms smaller
                        1
than 6ϵ , yielding t > αmin log 6A
                                 ϵ and λt − λt/2 < ϵ/6.


A.4   P ROOFS OF TECHNICAL LEMMAS FROM A PPENDIX A.2

In this section, we give the deferred proofs from Appendix A.2. We first state and prove two observa-
tions that will be useful, before turning to the deferred proofs. The following proposition translates
the dissipativity assumptions into a condition on the tails of the proposal and target.
Proposition 14 (Tails of the proposal and target) For all x ∈ Rd , we have
                                         bν                                          bπ
   Vν (x) − inf Vν (y) ≤ 2Lν ∥x∥2 +           ,     Vπ (x) − inf Vπ (y) ≤ 2Lπ ∥x∥2 +      .
            y∈Rd                         aν                   y∈Rd                   aπ

Proof of Proposition 14. Observe that because
                                 ⟨∇Vν (x), x⟩ ≥ aν ∥x∥2 − bν ,
                                                          »
the function Vν must be minimized by some point x0 ∈ B(0, abνν ). Therefore, for all x ∈ Rd ,
                                                                               bν
          Vν (x) − inf Vν (y) = Vν (x) − Vν (x0 ) ≤ Lν ∥x − x0 ∥2 ≤ 2Lν ∥x∥2 +      .
                  y∈Rd                                                         aν
The proof for Vπ is identical, so we omit it.


                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The next observation is our main quantitative use of the dissipativity assumption, and crucial for our
control on the terms arising from the tempering dynamics in the continuous time convergence proof.
Lemma 15 (Bounded second moment along the dynamics) For all t ≥ 0,
                                                            d + bν + bπ
                           Ept [∥x∥2 ] ≤ max Ep0 [∥x∥2 ],                  .
                                                              aν ∧ aπ

Proof of Lemma 15. Using the Fokker-Planck equation Eq. 18 and integration by parts several times,
we find
                                   Z
                                                       pt
                   ∂t Ept [∥x∥ ] = ∥x∥2 ∇ · pt ∇ log
                              2
                                                       µt
                                      Z
                                 = −2 ⟨x, ∇ log pt − ∇ log µt ⟩pt
                                         Z
                                 = 2d − 2 ⟨x, (1 − λt )∇Vν + λt ∇Vπ ⟩pt .

Applying the dissipativity assumption, we obtain
           ∂t Ept [∥x∥2 ] ≤ 2(d + (1 − λt )bν + λt bπ ) − 2((1 − λt )aν + λt aπ )Ept [∥x∥2 ]
                         ≤ 2(d + bν + bπ ) − 2(aν ∧ aπ )Ept [∥x∥2 ].
Therefore, as soon as Ept [∥x∥2 ] exceeds the level (d + bν + bπ )/(aν ∧ aπ ), it must start decreasing.
The result follows.

We now give the proofs of the Lemmas from Appendix A.2.

Proof of Lemma 10. Use Proposition 14 to obtain
           h   πi       h   πi
       Eµt log    − Ept log      = Eµt Vν − Vπ + Ept Vπ − Vν
               ν            ν
                                 ≤ Eµt [Vν − inf Vν (y)] + Ept [Vπ − inf Vπ (y)]
                                                   y∈Rd                      y∈Rd
                                                                                   bν      bπ
                                       ≤ 2Lν Eµt [∥x∥2 ] + 2Lπ Ept [∥x∥2 ] + 2Lν      + 2Lπ .
                                                                                   aν      aπ
Let M be the quantity appearing on the right-hand side of Lemma 15. Then we obtain
              h     πi        h    πi                                bπ         bν
           Eµt log      − Ept log      ≤ 2Lν Eµt [∥x∥2 ] + 2Lπ M +        + 2Lν .
                    ν              ν                                 aπ         aν
To handle Eµt [∥x∥2 ], we apply the dissipativity assumption to yield
                            1               h                                               i
     Eµt [∥x∥2 ] ≤                      Eµt ⟨(1 − λt )∇Vν + λt Vπ , x⟩ + (1 − λt )bν + λt bπ .
                   (1 − λt )aν + λt aπ
Integration by parts gives
                                       d + (1 − λt )bν + λt bπ   d + bν + bπ
                       Eµt [∥x∥2 ] ≤                           ≤             .
                                         (1 − λt )aν + λt aπ       aν ∧ aπ
Hence,
               h    πi      h    πi       b
                                            π
                                                                    d + bν + bπ
            Eµt log    − Ept log    ≤2Lπ      + max Ep0 [∥x∥2 ],
                    ν            ν        aπ                          aν ∧ aπ
                                            b      d + b  + b
                                               ν        ν     π
                                     + 2Lν       +                .
                                              aν     aν ∧ aπ
Using max(x, y) ≤ x + y when x, y ≥ 0 and
                                        bν bπ   d + bν + bπ
                                          ,   ≤             ,
                                        aν aπ     aν ∧ aπ
we conclude.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma 11. We have
                                                                      Z
                                             1
                        log ct = log R                      = − log       ν 1−λt π λt
                                          ν 1−λt π λt
The lower bound is immediate from Hölder’s inequality. For the upper bound, write
                                       h  π  λt i        h    νi
                    log ct = − log Eν             ≤ λt Eν log    = λt KL(ν, π)
                                          ν                   π
using Jensen’s inequality. Similarly, we can write
                              h  ν  1−λt i               h    πi
           log ct = − log Eπ                ≤ (1 − λt )Eπ log    = (1 − λt ) KL(π, ν) ,
                                 π                            ν
and therefore conclude that

                         log ct ≤ min λt KL(ν, π), (1 − λt ) KL(π, ν) .

Proof of Lemma 12. Denoting by Vπ∗ (resp. Vν∗ ) the infimum of Vπ (resp. Vν ), we have
                             Z                                  Z
     h     πi      h    πi
  Eπ log      − Ept log    = pt (Vπ − Vπ∗ − (Vν − Vν∗ )) + dπ(Vν − Vν∗ ) − (Vπ − Vπ∗ ).
           ν            ν
Using Proposition 14, we obtain the upper-bound
           h     πi       h     πi                      bπ                      bν
         Eπ log      − Ept log      ≤ 2Lπ Ept [∥x∥2 ] +      + 2Lν Eπ [∥x∥2 ] +      .
                 ν               ν                      aπ                      aν
Let M be the quantity appearing on the right-hand side of Lemma 15. Then
               h     πi       h     πi                bπ                      bν
            Eπ log      − Ept log       ≤ 2Lπ M +          + 2Lν Eπ [∥x∥2 ] +      .
                     ν              ν                 aπ                      aν
On the other hand, a direct application of the dissipativity condition Assumption 2 implies
                                1                           d + bπ   d + bπ + bν
                Eπ [∥x∥2 ] ≤      Eπ [⟨x, ∇Vπ (x)⟩ + bπ ] =        ≤             .
                               aπ                             aπ       aν ∧ aπ
Therefore
              h    πi      h    πi                         d + bν + bπ   bπ
            Eπ log    − Ept log    ≤ 2Lπ max Ep0 [∥x∥2 ],               +
                   ν            ν                            aν ∧ aπ      aπ
                                         d + bπ + bν       bν
                                   + 2Lν             + 2Lν     .
                                           aν ∧ aπ         aν
Again, bounding max(x, y) ≤ x + y for x, y ≥ 0 and using
                                      bν bπ   d + bν + bπ
                                        ,   ≤             ,
                                      aν aπ     aν ∧ aπ
we conclude.

B     C ONVERGENCE OF DISCRETE - TIME TEMPERED L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS
In this section we give proof of our discrete-time upper bound, Theorem 3. In Appendix B.1 we
outline the proof of Theorem 3. In Appendix B.2, we derive from Theorem 3 sufficient conditions
to precision KL(pk , π) < ϵ. And in Appendix B.3 we give the deferred proof from Appendix B.1.

B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

We next prove Theorem 3. Broadly speaking, the proof is in two steps: first, we compute how the
process pk tracks the moving target µk , then we compute how well the moving target µk tracks the
final target π.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 1: contraction of KL(pk , µk ). Using Vempala and Wibisono (2019, Lemma 3), under As-
                            αk
sumptions 1 and 2 and hk ≤ 4L 2 , we obtain
                                k

                         KL(pk , µk ) ≤ KL(pk−1 , µk )e−αk hk + 6h2k dL2k .                    (31)
Next, we can compute the (log) tempering dynamics of µk
                                                         R 1−λ
                                                                  k−1 λk−1
                                                  ν       ν            π
          log µk−1 − log µk = (λk − λk−1 ) log − log R 1−λ λ
                                                  π           ν      k π k
                                                         Z 1−λk−1 λk−1 1−λk λk
                                                  ν         ν           π     ν      π
                            = (λk − λk−1 ) log − log             1−λ      λ
                                                                             R
                                                                                 1−λ
                                                  π            ν      k π  k   ν    k π λk
                                                  ν          h   ν λk −λk−1
                                                                             i
                            = (λk − λk−1 ) log − log Eµk
                                                πν        h      π i
                                                                  ν
                            ≤ (λk − λk−1 ) log − Eµk log                ,
                                                    π             π
where we used Jensen’s inequality at the last step. Thus
       KL(pk−1 , µk ) = KL(pk−1 , µk−1 ) + KL(pk−1 , µk ) − KL(pk−1 , µk−1 )
                                           Z
                                                        µk−1
                      = KL(pk−1 , µk−1 ) + pk−1 log
                                                         µ
                                                         k h       πi         h    π i
                      ≤ KL(pk−1 , µk−1 ) + (λk − λk−1 ) Eµk log        − Epk−1 log       .
                                                                   ν                ν
Using Proposition 14 we can upper bound the difference of expectations via
          h    πi           h     πi                      bν                          bπ
     Eµk log       − Epk−1 log       ≤ 2Lν Eµk [∥x∥2 ] +       + 2Lπ Epk−1 [∥x∥2 ] +
               ν                  ν                       aν                          aπ
The next Lemma, proved in Appendix B.3 controls the second moment of pk .
                                                                                         ∧aν
Lemma 16 (Bounded second moment along the dynamics) Suppose hk ≤ min 1, 2(Laππ +L

                                                                                             2 .
                                                                                           ν)
Then
                                                    2(3(bπ + bν )/2 + d)
                     Epk [∥x∥2 ] ≤ max Ep0 [∥x∥2 ],                        .
                                                        aπ ∧ aµ ∧ 1

For the second moment of µk we use the following bound from the proof of Lemma 10
                                                  d + bν + bπ
                                   Eµk [∥x∥2 ] ≤              .
                                                    aν ∧ aπ
To combine these bounds, let us define
                        n                  2(3(bπ + bν )/2 + d)   3(d + bν + bπ ) o
      A′ := 2(Lπ + Lν ) max Ep0 [∥x∥2 ],                         +                 .           (32)
                                                 aπ ∧ aν ∧ 1           aπ ∧ aν
Plugging into Eq. 31, we obtain
          KL(pk , µk ) ≤ KL(pk−1 , µk−1 )e−αk hk + (λk − λk−1 )A′ e−αk hk + 6h2k dL2k .
              Pk
Now put ψik := j=i αj hj . Unrolling the recursion, we obtain
                                           k
                         k                 X                                           k
      KL(pk , µk ) ≤ e−ψ1 KL(p0 , µ0 ) +         A′ (λi − λi−1 )e−αi hi + 6h2i dL2i e−ψi+1 .   (33)
                                           i=1

Step 2: compare KL(pk , µk ) and KL(pk , π).           Here we use Lemma 11 to control the log-
normalizing constants and obtain
                 KL(pk , π) = KL(pk , µk ) + KL(pk , π) − KL(pk , µk )
                                                 h    µk i
                            = KL(pk , µk ) + Epk log
                                                       π h
                                                              νi
                            = KL(pk , µk ) + (1 − λk )Epk log     + log ck
                                                           h πν i
                            ≤ KL(pk , µk ) + (1 − λk ) Epk log     + KL(π, ν) .
                                                               π


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To control the term in parentheses, we apply Proposition 14 to yield
              h     νi                                    bπ                      bν
          Epk log       + KL(π, ν) ≤ 2Lπ Epk [∥x∥2 ] +         + 2Lν Eπ [∥x∥2 ] +      .
                    π                                     aπ                      aν
Using Lemma 15 and the following bound from the proof of Lemma 12
                                                            d + bπ + bν
                                         Eπ [∥x∥2 ] ≤                   ,
                                                              aν ∧ aπ
we find                                  h    νi
                                      Epk log    + KL(π, ν) ≤ A′ ,
                                              π
for A′ as in Eq. 32.

Step 3: putting it together. Combining the results of steps 1 and 2, we can finally write
                        KL(pt , π) ≤ (v1 ) + (v2 ) + (v3 ) + (v4 )                             (34)
                                            X   k
                            (v1 ) = exp −          αj hj KL(p0 , µ1 ),
                                                      j=1
                                                        ′
                                  (v2 ) = (1 − λk )A ,
                                               k
                                               X                   Xk
                                  (v3 ) = A′     (λi − λi−1 ) exp −   αj hj ,
                                               i=1                           j=i
                                              k
                                              X                      k
                                                                     X
                                  (v4 ) = 6         h2k dL2k exp −           αj hj       .
                                              i=1                    j=i+1


B.2   D ISCRETE - TIME CONVERGENCE IN PRECISION FORM

Corollary 17 To achieve convergence with precision ϵ > 0 such that KL(pk , π) < ϵ, sufficient
conditions are
                                  1        αmin          αmin          aπ ∧ aν
                      h < min          ,           ϵ,               ,             , 1    (35)
                                 4αmin 96L2max d 4(Lπ + Lν )2 2(Lπ + Lν )2
                                  1            4 KL(p , µ )       2         8A′
                                                       0 1
                      k > max            log                  ,       log                (36)
                                  hαmin              ϵ          hαmin        ϵ
                                 ϵ
                     λk > 1 −                                                            (37)
                                4A′
                              ϵ
            λk − λ⌊k/2⌋ <                                                                (38)
                            24A′
where αmin = mins>0 αs and Lmax = maxs>0 Ls denote the smallest (resp. largest) log-Sobolev
(resp. smoothness) constant among the path of tempered distributions.

Proof of Corollary 17. Again, as in Vempala and Wibisono (2019), we can derive sufficient condi-
tions for convergence with a given precision KL(pk , π) < ϵ by setting each of the four terms in the
upper-bound inferior to ϵ/4.
First, we upper-bound the fourth term:
                                       k
                                       X                                      1 − e−khαmin
                (v4 ) ≤ 6h dL2max
                              2
                                              e−(k−i)hαmin = 6h2 dL2max                        (39)
                                       i=1
                                                                              1 − e−hαmin
                                               1                          4      8hdL2max
                       ≤ 6h2 dL2max                      ≤ 6h2 dL2max          =               (40)
                                       1 − e−hαmin                      3hαmin     αmin
where in the last inequality, similarly to Vempala and Wibisono (2019), we use that 1 − e−c ≥ 34 c
for 0 < c = hαmin ≤ 14 which holds assuming that h ≤ 4α1min . Thus, a sufficient condition for
                     αmin
(v4 ) ≤ ϵ/4 is h ≤ 32L 2  d ϵ.
                        max


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                −khαmin
                                  by (v1 )  ≤ e
Next, we upper-bound the first term                     KL(p0 , µ0 ) so that a sufficient condition
                                          4 KL(p0 ,µ0 )
for (v1 ) < ϵ/4 is k > hα1min log              ϵ              .
                                                ϵ
A sufficient condition (v2 ) < ϵ/4 is λk ∈]1 − 4A ′ , 1].


Finally, we upper-bound the third term:
                 k
                 X                          k
                                            X
 (v3 ) := A′           (λi − λi−1 ) exp − h   αj                                                             (41)
                 i=1                               j=i

                  ⌊k/2⌋
                   X                           k
                                               X      k
                                                      X                      k
                                                                             X
            ′
       =A                 (λi − λi−1 ) exp − h   αj +   (λi − λi−1 ) exp − h   αj    (42)
                    i=1                                 j=i            i=⌊k/2⌋                         j=i

                                 k
                                 X              ⌊k/2⌋
                                                 X                          k
                                                                            X
       ≤ A′ exp − h                      αj             (λi − λi−1 ) +              (λi − λi−1 )             (43)
                               j=⌊k/2⌋          i=1                       i=⌊k/2⌋
                Å
            ′

       ≤A           exp(−hkαmin /2)(λ⌊k/2⌋ − λ1 ) + (λk − λ⌊k/2⌋ )                                           (44)

       ≤ A′ exp(−hkαmin /2) + A′ (λk − λ⌊k/2⌋ )                                                              (45)

so that sufficient conditions for (v3 ) < 4ϵ can be obtained by setting each of the two terms smaller
                                 8A′
than 8ϵ , yielding k > αmin
                         2
                            h log ϵ and λk − λ⌊k/2⌋ < 8A′ .
                                                           ϵ



B.3   T ECHNICAL LEMMA FROM A PPENDIX B.1

In this section, we prove Lemma 16.

Proof of Lemma 16. We recall that the particles follow the recursion
                                                             p
                          Xk+1 = Xk − hk ∇Vλk (Xk ) + 2hk zk ,

where zk follows a standard normal distribution on Rd and Xk ∼ pk . Hence, we have
                                                p
     E[∥Xk+1 ∥2 ] = E[∥Xk − hk ∇Vλk (Xk ) + 2hk zk ∥2 ]                                                      (46)
                                                              2
                          = E[∥Xk − hk ∇Vλk (Xk )∥ ] + 2dhk                                                  (47)
                          = E[∥Xk ∥ ] − 2hk E[Xk⊤ ∇Vλk (Xk )] + h2k E[∥∇Vλk (Xk )∥2 ] + 2dhk .
                                    2
                                                                                                             (48)

The dissipativity assumption yields E[Xk⊤ ∇Vλk (Xk )] ≥ (aπ ∧ aν )E[∥Xk ∥2 ] − (bν + bπ ) and as in
the proof of Proposition 14 we have ∥∇Vλk (Xk )∥2 ≤ 2(Lπ + Lν )2 (∥Xk ∥2 + abνµ+b
                                                                                ∧aπ ) so that
                                                                                   π


            E[∥Xk+1 ∥2 ] ≤ E[∥Xk ∥2 ] − 2hk ((aπ ∧ aν )E[∥Xk ∥2 ] − (bν + bπ )) + 2dhk
                                                           bν + bπ
                          + 2h2k (Lπ + Lν )2 E[∥Xk ∥2 ] +            .
                                                          aµ ∧ aπ
Letting L := Lπ + Lν , a := aν ∧ aπ and b := bν + bπ we obtain
                                                                                 Lb
           E[∥Xk+1 ∥2 ] ≤ E[∥Xk ∥2 ] − 2hk (a − hk L2 )E[∥Xk ∥2 ] − (b + d) − hk
                                                                                 a
                                                                              2
                                                                            L  b
                        = E[∥Xk ∥2 ](1 − 2hk (a − hk L2 )) + 2hk b + d + hk       .
                                                                             a
Now by induction, assume that E[∥Xk ∥2 ] ≤ max(Ep0 [∥x∥2 ]), 2(3b/2+d)
                                                                a∧1    ). By construction on hk ,
                                                                  2
a − hk L2 > 0 hence if E[∥Xk ∥2 ] > b+d+h k L b/a                  2           2
                                    2hk (a−hk L2 ) , then E[∥Xk+1 ∥ ] < E[∥Xk ∥ ] and in par-
                                                                                                         2
ticular E[∥Xk+1 ∥2 ] ≤ max(Ep0 [∥x∥2 ], 2(3b/2+d)
                                           a∧1    ). Now, if E[∥Xk ∥2 ] ≤ b+d+h k L b/a
                                                                          2hk (a−hk L2 ) , then if


                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1 > 2hk (a − hk L2 ) we have

                           b + d + hk L2 b/a
        E[∥Xk+1 ∥2 ] ≤                       (1 − 2hk (a − hk L2 )) + 2hk (b + d + hk L2 b/a)              (49)
                               a − hk L2
                           b + d + hk L2 b/a
                         =                                                                                 (50)
                               a − hk L2
                           2(3b/2 + d)
                         ≤             ,                                                                   (51)
                                 a
by construction on hk . Conversely, if 1 ≤ 2hk (a − hk L2 ), then
                                                                L2 b
                                  E[∥Xk+1 ∥2 ] ≤ 2hk b + d + hk
                                                                 a
                                               ≤ 2(3b/2 + d).


C     O PTIMIZATION OF CONTINUOUS - TIME TEMPERED L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS

C.1   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 5

We will rewrite and bound the terms (u1 ), (u2 ) and (u3 ) in the upper bound of Theorem 1 provided
in Eq. 34, so that the role of the tempering schedule λ(·) is more explicit, at the expense of a looser
upper-bound.

Rewriting (u3 ). We begin with the third term, using integration by parts to write
                  Z t      Ç Z t            å
         (u3 ) := A          λ̇s exp −2       αv dv ds
                         0                s
                                    Ç     Z t             å        Z t             Ç    Z t        å
               = A λt − λ0 exp −2                 αv dv       −2         λs αs exp −2         αv dv ds .
                                              0                     0                    s


Recalling (u2 ). Recall that

                                              (u2 ) = A(1 − λt ) .

                                                Ä Rt         ä
Rewriting (u1 ). We recall that (u1 ) = exp −2 0 αv dv KL(p0 , µ0 ). Assuming that the process
is initialized at the proposal distribution p0 = ν, we can use the tempering rule µt = ct ν 1−λt π λt to
rewrite the KL term
                                   KL(ν, µ0 ) = λ0 KL(ν, π) − log c0 .
By positivity of log c0 , we can write − log c0 ≤ λ0 KL(π, ν). In particular

KL(ν, µ0 ) ≤ λ0 (KL(ν, π) + KL(π, ν))
                 Z                                        Z
           = λ0    [Vπ (x) − Vπ∗ − (Vν (x) − Vν∗ )]dν(x) + [Vν (x) − Vν∗ − (Vπ (x) − Vπ∗ )]dπ(x)

           ≤ λ0 A.

Upper bounding the sum. We can now combine     Ä R t upperäbounds on (u1 ), (u2 ) and (u3 ) and sim-
plify the result, using that the terms λ0 A exp −2 0 αv dv and Aλt cancel out, to finally yield
                                                                    Z t                   Z t
          KL(pt , π) ≤ A · Gt (λ),            Gt (λ) := 1 − 2               λs αs exp − 2     αv dv ds.    (52)
                                                                        0                     s


                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                  Rt
Optimal schedule when απ ≥ αν           Now, let Φs := exp − 2 s αu du). We have
                                                    Z t
                                     Gt (λ) = 1 − 2     λs αs Φs ds.
                                                           0

Applying integration by parts, we find
                                           Z t                                      Z t
               Gt (λ) = 1 − [λs Φs ]t0 +         λ̇s Φs ds = 1 − λt + λ0 Φ0 +             λ̇s Φs ds.
                                            0                                        0

Since λ̇s ≥ 0 and Φs ≥ e−2(t−s)απ (using the assumption απ ≥ αν ), it follows that
                                                     Z t
                      Gt (λ) ≥ 1 − λt + λ0 e−2tαπ +      λ̇s e−2(t−s)απ ds.
                                                                 0

Reversing the integration by parts, we obtain
                               Z t                             Z t
                                          −2(t−s)απ
               Gt (λ) ≥ 1 − 2      λs απ e          ds ≥ 1 − 2     απ e−2(t−s)απ ds,
                                 0                                          0

where the last inequality uses λs ≤ 1. Recognizing the right-hand side as Gt evaluated at schedule
λ ≡ 1, we conclude.

C.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 6
                                                                Å         ã
                                                                  Rt
Sketch of proof. We first make the change of variable Φ(s) = exp − s αu du so that the problem
can be re-written as                                    Z t
                                     1     α
                                            ν                              αν 2
                             sup              −                Φ̇2s ds −     Φ ,
                             Φ∈It αν − απ  2               0               2 0
where It is the set of strictly positive functions Φ : [0, t] 7→ R with weak second derivative and
such that απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ ≤ αν Φ and ΦΦ̈ ≤ Φ̇2 and Φ(t) = 1. Unlike the previous objective G(·), note
that our new problem has now a concave objective yet has non-convex (and non closed) constraints.
Hence we make a convex relaxation and solve instead
                                                    Z t
                                       1     α
                                                ν                 αν 2
                              sup                 −     Φ̇2s ds −   Φ ,
                             Φ∈Jt αν − απ      2     0            2 0

where Jt is the set of non-negative functions in W 1,2 ([0, t]) such that απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ and Φ(t) = 1.
After showing that an optimal solution Φ indeed exists, we explicitly describe it and show that it
belongs to It a.k.a. it verifies the original constraints. In order to come up with an explicit solution
Φ, we make a disjunction of cases on whether the constraint απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ is saturated: if it is always
saturated, then Φ is exponential if not, then it must be linear on a maximal neighborhood around the
non saturated point. We then prove that this maximal neighborhood is unique, pathwise connected
and can only be of the form [0, x0 ] with x0 ≤ t so that Φ is linear on [0, x0 ] and is then exponential
on [x0 , t].

Proof of Prop. 6. We first notice that minimizing Gt defined in Corollary 5 over the set of admissible
tempering schedules λ is equivalent to solving
                                    Z t                Z t
                               sup      λs αs exp − 2      αu du ds,
                               λ∈Λt   0                          s

where Λt is the set of functions from [0, t] to [0, 1] with non-negative weak derivative.
Proposition 18 Suppose απ < αν and let It be the set of positive functions Φ with weak second
derivative, such that Φt = 1, απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ ≤ αν Φ and Φ̈Φ − Φ̇2 is a non-positive measure. Then
           Z t                Z                                    Z t
                                                     1     α
                                                              ν                  αν 2
      sup      λs αs exp − 2 αu du ds = sup                      −     Φ̇2s ds −   Φ .       (53)
     λ∈Λt 0                                  Φ∈It αν − απ    2      0            2 0

                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                    Ä Rt    ä
Proof. Let λ ∈ Λt and denote Φs := Φ(s) = exp − s αu du . The function Φ is strictly positive
and such that Φt = 1. Its first and second derivatives read
                                       ®
                                           Φ̇s = αs Φs ,
                                                               Φ̇2
                                               Φ̈s = α̇s Φs + Φss .

In particular, since λ ∈ [0, 1] and αs = (1 − λs )αν + λs απ , we have αs ∈ [απ , αν ] and by
positiveness of Φ, it holds
                                       απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ ≤ αν Φ.
Similarly, since λ̇ is a non-negative measure, α̇ = (απ − αν )λ̇ is a non-positive measure and so is
α̇Φ2 . This implies in particular
                                       Φ̈Φ − Φ̇2 = α̇Φ2 ≤ 0.
Hence we verified that Φ ∈ It . Furthermore, it reads
     Z t                 Z t                          Z t                              Z t
                                               1
         λs αs exp − 2       αu du ds =                   (αν − αs )αs exp − 2             αu du ds
      0                   s               αν − απ 0                                     s
                                                      Z t
                                               1                         2
                                        =                 αν Φ̇s Φs − Φ̇s ds
                                          αν − απ 0
                                                                     Z t
                                               1      α
                                                         ν    2 t

                                        =                  [Φs ]0 −      Φ̇2s ds
                                          αν − απ 2                   0
                                                                         Z t
                                               1      α
                                                         ν         2

                                        =                  (1 − Φ0 ) −         Φ̇2 (s)ds .
                                          αν − απ 2                       0

In particular, we have
              Z t              Z                                           Z t
                                                            1     α
                                                                   ν                         αν 2
         sup      λs αs exp − 2 αu du ds ≤ sup                       −           Φ̇2s ds −     Φ .
        λ∈Λt   0                                         α
                                                     Φ∈It ν − απ  2         0                2 0
                                                                     −αs
Conversely, let Φ ∈ It , defining αs = ∂s log Φ = Φ̇/Φ and λs = ααπν −αν
                                                                          we have by construction
that λ ∈ Λt . Furthermore, the previous computations show that
                                         Z t          Z t               Z
                  1    α
                          ν

                            (1 − Φ20 ) −     Φ̇2s ds =    λs αs exp − 2 αu du ds.
              αν − απ 2                   0            0

In particular, we recover the reverse inequality
                             Z t                      Z t              Z
                1     α
                        ν                  αν 2
      sup                 −      Φ̇2s ds −   Φ0 ≤ sup     λs αs exp − 2 αu du ds.
     Φ∈It αν − απ      2      0            2      λ∈Λt 0

                                                                                        Rt
Hence the problem can be re-written as the minimization of the convex functional Φ 7→ 0 Φ̇2s ds +
αν 2                                                                        2
 2 Φ0 under the constraint Φ ∈ It . As can be noted, the constraint Φ̈Φ − Φ̇ ≤ 0 is non-convex and
the constraints Φ > 0, Φ has a weak second derivative are non-closed. Hence we are going to relax
all of these constraints and solve instead
                                            Z t
                                                          αν 2
                                        inf     Φ̇2s ds +   Φ ,                               (54)
                                       Φ∈Jt 0             2 0

where Jt ⊂ W 1,2 ([0, t]) is the set of positive functions such that Φt = 1, απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ almost
everywhere. Note that we also dropped the constraint Φ̇ ≤ αν Φ for convenience of the proof.
Nevertheless, we show that at the optimum, the solution of the problem above verifies all the initial
constraints.
Proposition 19 Assume απ < αν . Then Eq. 54 admits a minimizer Φ which has the following
expression:

      1. If απ > α2ν , then Φs = eαπ (s−t) .


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2. If tαανν+2 < απ ≤ α2ν , then
                                       1    2                    1    2
                             απ eαπ ( απ − αν −t) s + 2α π απ ( απ − αν −t)
                           ®
                                                       αν e                   s ≤ α1π − α2ν ,
                      Φs =
                             eαπ (s−t)                                        s > α1π − α2ν .

                                      αν
      3. If απ ≤ tαανν+2 , then Φs = 2+tαν
                                                     tαν
                                           s + (1 − 2+tα ν
                                                           ).

Proof. We aim to solve the minimization problem defined in Eq. 54.

Existence of a minimum. Since the objective has compact sub-level sets and is continuous for
the W 1,2 ([0, t]) norm, we can extract a minimizing sequence (Φn )n in Jt that converges in W 1,2
towards some Φ in W 1,2 ([0, t]). Because W 1,2 metrizes pointwise convergence, we obtain that the
infimum verifies two of the constraints: Φt = 1 and Φ ≥ 0 almost everywhere.
Then, since Φn ∈ Jt , for s0 , h > 0 such that s0 , s0 + h ∈ [0, t] we have 0 ≤ απ Φn ≤ Φ̇n and then:
                        απ s0 +h                 1 s0 +h                (Φn )s0 +h − (Φn )s0
                            Z                       Z
         απ (Φn )s0 ≤               (Φn )s ds ≤            (Φ̇n )s ds =                      .
                        h s0                     h s0                             h
Letting n go to infinity and h to zero, we obtain, for almost all s0 ∈ [0, t]
                                             απ Φs0 ≤ Φ̇s0 ,
hence Φ ∈ Jt , showing Φ is a minimizer of Eq. 54.

Explicit expression of the minimum. We now derive an explicit expression for Φ based on
whether or not there exists a point x0 where the constraint
                                               απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ ,
is not saturated.

Case 1: the inequality is saturated everywhere. In the case where the inequality constraint
above is saturated for x almost everywhere, we obtain that the minimizer Φ is of the form Φs =
K exp(απ s) and using the fact that Φt = 1, we recover that Φs = exp((s − t)απ ).

Case 2: the inequality is not saturated saturated everywhere.             Now let us assume that there
exists x0 where the inequality is not saturated by the minimizer
                                          απ Φ(x0 ) < Φ̇(x0 ).
We can make a disjunction of cases with respect to x0 .

If x0 = t. We will show that Φ is linear on [0, t]. We first define a neighborhood of x0 of size ϵ
that satisfies a certain inequality. By continuity of Φ and the definition of the derivative, there exists
an ϵ > 0 such that for all δ < ϵ
                                                  Φ(t) − Φ(t − δ)
                                      απ Φ(t) <                    .                                 (55)
                                                         δ
Let us now define the neighborhood size ϵ to be the largest ϵ > 0 such that t − ϵ ≥ 0 and such that
the inequality above holds for all δ < ϵ.
Next, we define a candidate Φ̃ that is linear in this neighborhood, and equal to the minimizer Φ
outside the neighborhood. Let
                 ®
                     Φ̃(x) = Φ(x) if x ∈ / [t − ϵ, t],
                              Φ(t)−Φ(t−ϵ)
                     Φ̃(x) =       ϵ       (x − t + ϵ) + Φ(t − ϵ) if x ∈ [t − ϵ, t].
By construction, Φ̃ verifies the constraints, i.e. Φ̃ ∈ Jt . Indeed, taking δ → ϵ in Eq. 55, and using
the monotonicity of Φ̃, we get successively for almost every x ∈ [0, t]:
                                                   Φ(t) − Φ(t − ϵ)
                           απ Φ̃(x) ≤ απ Φ̃(t) ≤                   = Φ̇(x).
                                                          ϵ

                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence, Φ̃ is a suitable candidate for solving Problem Eq. 54.
Finally, we show that the candidate we built Φ̃ achieves a smaller objective than a minimizer and
must therefore be equal to a minimizer Φ ∈ Jt . By optimality,
                       Z t                         Z t
                                       αν                            αν
                           Φ̇2 (s)ds +    Φ(0)2 ≤      Φ̃˙ 2 (s)ds +    Φ̃(0)2
                        0              2            0                2
and since Φ and Φ̃ coincide on [0, t − ϵ], it holds
                              Z t
                                                  (Φ(t) − Φ(t − ϵ))2
                                     Φ̇2 (s)ds ≤                     .
                                t−ϵ                       ϵ
The same inequality in the other direction is obtained by applying Jensen’s inequality
                  Z t                  1 Z t           2    (Φ(t) − Φ(t − ϵ))2
                        Φ̇2 (s)ds ≥ ϵ          Φ̇(s)ds =                        .
                    t−ϵ                 ϵ t−ϵ                        ϵ
We are therefore in the equality case of Jensen with a strongly convex and smooth function, so it
must hold for s almost everywhere in the neighborhood [t − ϵ, t] that
                                                 Φ(t) − Φ(t − ϵ)
                                       Φ̇(s) =                   ,
                                                        ϵ
and in particular Φ is linear in the neighborhood [t − ϵ, t] and is of the form Φ(x) = ax + b.
Finally, we will show that the neighborhood covers the entire interval [0, t], or in other words, that
ϵ = t. Suppose it is not the case and ϵ < t. Then, by continuity of Φ at the neighborhood border
t − ϵ,
                                                 Φ(t) − Φ(t − ϵ)
                                     απ Φ(t) =                   .
                                                        ϵ
Combined with the fact that Φ(t) = 1, this implies a = απ which is a contradiction with the
inequality Eq. 55 that characterizes the neighborhood, and in particular yields a > απ . Hence, we
must have ϵ = t and in particular, Φ is linear on the whole interval [0, t].

If x0 ∈]0, t[ As before we can define ϵ+ and ϵ− as the largest ϵ > 0 such that x0 + ϵ < t (resp.
                                                                                   0 −δ)
x0 − ϵ > 0) and Φ(x0 +δ)−Φ(x
                         δ
                               0)
                                   > απ Φ(x0 + δ) for all δ < ϵ+ (resp. Φ(x0 )−Φ(x
                                                                               δ         > απ Φ(x0 ) for
all δ < ϵ− ). Again, we obtain that Φ must be linear on [x0 , x0 + ϵ+ ] of the form Φ(x) = a+ x + b+
and linear on [x0 − ϵ− , x0 ] of the form Φ(x) = a− x + b− . Furthermore, since Φ is differentiable at
x0 , its derivative must read
                                   Φ(x0 + h) − Φ(x0 )       Φ(x0 ) − Φ(x0 − h)
                  Φ̇(x0 ) = lim                       = lim                    ,
                             h→0           h            h→0          h
which implies a+ = a− := a and by continuity of Φ at x0 , we also recover b+ = b− . In particular,
Φ is linear across the whole interval [x0 − ϵ− , x0 + ϵ+ ]. We have now four possibilities: either a)
x0 − ϵ− = 0 and x0 + ϵ+ = t, b) x0 − ϵ− > 0 and x0 + ϵ+ < t, c) x0 − ϵ− > 0 and x0 + ϵ+ = t,
d) x0 − ϵ− = 0 and x0 + ϵ+ < t. The case a) simply corresponds to the case where Φ is linear
across the whole interval. The case b) implies by continuity that a = απ Φ(x0 ) = απ Φ(x0 + ϵ+ )
which implies that a = 0. This cannot hold as we initially assumed that απ Φ(x0 ) < Φ̇(x0 ) = 0
which would result in a violation of the positivity constraint. The case c) yields the contradiction
a = απ Φ(x0 ) and a > απ Φ(x0 ). Finally, let us deal with case d). We prove that in this case, there
exists no other point outside [0, x0 + ϵ+ ] such that the constraint απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ is not saturated ; in
particular this implies that Φ is linear on [0, x0 + ϵ+ ] and of the form K exp(απ x) on [x0 + ϵ+ , t].
Let us assume that there exists x1 outside of [0, x0 + ϵ+ ] such that
                                          απ Φ(x1 ) < Φ̇(x1 ).
Just as before, this implies the existence of ϵ̃+ such that Φ is linear across [0, x1 + ϵ̃+ ] and such that
                                                   Φ(x1 + ϵ̃+ ) − Φ(x1 )
                               απ Φ(x1 + ϵ̃+ ) ≤                         .
                                                            ϵ̃+

                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By linearity, if we take ϵ such that x0 + ϵ < x1 + ϵ̃+ , the right hand side is also given by
Φ(x0 +ϵ)−Φ(x0 )
       ϵ        and since Φ is strictly increasing, the left-hand side can be lower-bounded by
απ Φ(x0 + ϵ) which implies
                                                 Φ(x0 + ϵ) − Φ(x0 )
                                απ Φ(x0 + ϵ) <                        ,
                                                          ϵ
for all ϵ such that x0 + ϵ < x1 + ϵ̃+ . Since x1 + ϵ̃+ > x0 + ϵ+ , this contradicts the definiton of ϵ+
which was chosen as the largest ϵ such that for all ϵ ≤ ϵ+ ,
                                                  Φ(x0 + ϵ) − Φ(x0 )
                                απ Φ(x0 + ϵ) <                       .
                                                          ϵ
In particular, the constraint απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ is always saturated outside of [0, x0 + ϵ+ ].

If x0 = 0 As before, we obtain that Φ is either linear across the whole space [0, t], either there
exists x0 such that Φ is linear across [0, x0 ] and of the form K exp(απ x) on [x0 , t] and such that
απ Φ(x0 ) = Φ̇(x0 ).

Summary of the minimizer candidates We can now summarize the candidates we obtained for
the minimizer function Φ. It has the three following possible forms:

       • Form 1: Φ is an exponential function of the form K exp(απ x) on the entire interval [0, t].
       • Form 2: Φ is a linear function on the entire interval [0, t].
       • Form 3: Φ is linear function then an exponential function on the entire interval.
         Specifically, there exists x0 ∈]0, t[ such that Φ is linear on [0, x0 ] and of the form
         K exp(απ x) on [x0 , t] and such that απ Φ(x0 ) = Φ̇(x0 ).

We shall determine which candidate Φ among the three is the true minimizer, by evaluating the
objective function Eq. 54 for each and picking the candidate which achieves the lowest value.

Form 1. Since Φ(t) = 1, it implies that the function Φ is entirely determined and given by Φ(x) =
exp(απ (x − t)). In this case, the value of the objective is given by
    Z t
                     αν               h e2απ (x−t) it α
                                                          ν −2απ t    απ   e−2απ t
        Φ̇2 (s)ds +      Φ(0)2 = απ2                  +     e      ,=    +         (αν − απ ).
     0                2                   2απ       0    2             2     2

Form 2. The function Φ is of the form Φ(x) = ax + b. Since Φ(t) = 1, the coefficient b is given
by 1 − at. Furthermore, the constraint απ Φ ≤ Φ̇ is equivalent to solving a ≥ απ and the constraint
Φ ≥ 0 becomes a ≤ 1/t. Hence, in the case where 1/t < απ , there is no linear admissible potential.
In the case where, απ ≤ 1/t, we need to solve the following one dimensional quadratic problem
                                                   αν
                                     inf    ta2 +     (1 − at)2 .
                                  1/t≥a≥απ          2
                                                    2
The objective can be rewritten as θ(a) = a2 (t + t 2αν ) − atαν + α2ν . The minimum of θ is given by
                                                      αν
                                            a∗ :=                                                 (56)
                                                    2 + tαν
Note that we always have a∗ ≤ 1/t, hence if απ ≤ a∗ the minimum is attained for a = a∗ and is
given by
                               αν      tαν2    αν        tαν        αν
                    θ(a∗ ) =      −          =    (1 −         )=         .
                               2    4 + 2tαν   2       2 + tαν    2 + tαν
If απ > a∗ , the minimum is attained for a = απ and is given by
                 αν                       αν                     αν                    απ αν    αν
θ(απ ) = tαπ2 +     (1 − απ t)2 = tαπ2 +     − αν απ t + (tαπ )2    = tαπ (απ − αν + t       )+    .
                  2                        2                     2                       2      2

                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Form 3. There exists 0 < x0 < t such that the function Φ is of the form ax + b over [0, x0 ] and
then is given by eαπ (x−t) over [x0 , t] and which is such that Φ̇(x0 ) = απ Φ(x0 ). The continuity of
Φ implies that ax0 + b = eαπ (x0 −t) and the previous equation gives a = (ax0 + b)απ . Both these
equations uniquely determine a and b when x0 is fixed as
                                   ®
                                         a = απ eαπ (x0 −t) ,
                                         b = eαπ (x0 −t) (1 − απ x0 ),
and in particular the positivity constraint is equivalent to x0 ≤ α1π ; note that the constraint απ Φ ≤ Φ̇
is indeed respected over [0, t]. Hence, we must solve the following one dimensional problem
                                                απ                       αν 2απ (x0 −t)
             inf          x0 απ2 e2απ (x0 −t) +    (1 − e2απ (x0 −t) ) +   e            (1 − απ x0 )2 .
       0≤x0 ≤min(t, α1π )                        2                       2
Let us remark that x0 = 0 being an admissible candidate, the potential Φ(x) = eαπ (x−t) is indeed
an admissible candidate and in particular, the value of the problem above is always lower than the
one obtained with Form 1. Denoting f the objective function, let us compute the derivative of f .
For all x0 , we have
        f ′ (x0 ) = απ2 e2(x0 −t) + 2x0 απ3 e2(x0 −t) − απ2 e2(x0 −t) + απ αν (1 − x0 απ )2 e2(x0 −t)
                 − αν απ (1 − x0 απ )e2(x0 −t) ,

                = e2(x0 −t) απ 2x0 απ2 − αν (1 − x0 απ )(1 − 1 + x0 απ ) ,
                = x0 e2(x0 −t) απ2 (2απ − αν (1 − x0 απ )).
The term (2απ − αν (1 − x0 απ )) cancels for x0 = α1π − α2ν , hence if απ ≥ α2ν , the derivative
f ′ is always non-negative for all x0 ≥ 0 hence the optimal choice of x0 is given by x0 = 0. Let
us remark that this case implies απ > a∗ where a∗ is defined in Eq. 56 and for which the optimal
Form 2. is given by Φ(x) = απ x + (1 − tαπ ) which an admissibile candidate for Form 3. This
proves that whenever απ > α2ν , the optimal potential is given by Φ(x) = eαπ (s−t) .with x0 = t.
If απ < α2ν , then f decreases between 0 and α1π − α2ν and then increases. In particular, since
 1      2     1                                           1     2                            1     2
απ − αν < απ , the minimum is attained for x0 = min(t, απ − αν ). In the case where t ≤ απ − αν
which is equivalent to απ ≤ a∗ with a∗ defined in Eq. 56, the obtained potential is linear hence it is
necessarily sub-optimal with respect to Form 2. which yields as an optimal potential
                                        Φ(x) = a∗ x + (1 − a∗ t).
Let us now place ourselves in the case t > α1π − α2ν . In the case where t > α1π − α2ν ,
which is equivalent to απ > a∗ , the optimal potential yielded by Form 2. (if any) is given by
Φ(x) = απ x + (1 − απ t) which is admissible for Form 3. by taking x0 = t hence, Form 3. is
necessarily sub-optimal.

As a conclusion, we have obtained the following expressions for Φ:

      1. If απ > α2ν , we have Φ(x) = eαπ (x−t) .
      2. If tαανν+2 < απ ≤ α2ν , then Φ is given by
                                         1    2                   1    2
                       Φ(x) = απ eαπ ( απ − αν −t) x + 2α π απ ( απ − αν −t)
                    ®
                                                        αν e                 if x ≤ α1π − α2ν ,
                       Φ(x) = eαπ (x−t) if x > α1π − α2ν .

      3. If απ ≤ tαανν+2 , then Φ(x) = 2+tα
                                        αν
                                           ν
                                                       tαν
                                             x + (1 − 2+tα ν
                                                             ).

Note that in any case, Φ is in fact continuously differentiable and verifies almost everywhere Φ̈Φ ≤
Φ̇2 as well as Φ̇ ≤ αν Φ, hence it is a solution of the problem
                                                  Z t
                                                                   αν
                                     inf               Φ̇2 (s)ds +    Φ(0)2 .
                                           2
                                Φ≥0,Φ̈Φ≤Φ̇ ,        0              2
                            Φ(t)=1, απ Φ≤Φ̇≤αν Φ.


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       −αs
The optimal Φ is linked to the optimal tempering scheme λ as λs = αανν −απ
                                                                           with αs = ∂s log(Φ).
Hence we obtain                                 αν (αν s + 1)
                              λs = min 1,                          .
                                            (αν − απ )(αν s + 2)


C.3     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 7

Reversing the integration by parts we have
                        Z t                Z t            Z t             Z t

        Gt (λ) = 1 − 2      λs αs exp − 2      αv dv ds =     λ̇s exp − 2     αv dv ds.
                          0                  s               0                s

Hence
                              Z t          Z t
                 Gt (λ) =      λ̇s exp − 2       αv dv ds
                            0                s
                           1 t
                             Z            Z t
                                                 v
                         =        exp − 2      ( (απ − αν ) + αν )dv ds
                           t 0              s t
                             Z t
                           1              απ − αν 1 2
                         =        exp − 2               (t − s2 ) − 2(t − s)αν ds
                           t 0                  t     2
                             Z t
                           1            αν − απ 2
                         =        exp −             s + 2αν s − t(αν + απ ) ds .
                           t 0                t
Recall that for generic a, b, c > 0, we have
                                      √
                                                                √
    Z
                                         π
        exp −ax2 + bx − c dx = √ exp b2 /4a − c erf((2ax − b)/(2 a)) + constant.

                                      2 a
We may apply this formula since απ < αν . it yields the equality claim:
               1
                      √
                        π           tα2                 √tα                  √tα
                                         π                     ν                  π
    Gt (λ) = √ √              exp                 erf √               − erf √            .
                t 2 αν − απ         αν − απ               αν − απ             αν − απ
Now, let us consider the behavior of Gt (λ) as t → ∞. Here, we Taylor expand to obtain
                     √tα                   √tα
                            ν                      π
               erf √               − erf √
                        αν − απ              αν − απ
                  …
                      αν − απ 1                  tαπ2      1             tαν2
                =                    exp −               −     exp −
                         tπ      απ            αν − απ     αν          αν − απ
                      1                      2                    2
                                          tαν                   tαπ
               + O 3/2        exp −                 − exp −               .
                      t                αν − απ                αν − απ
Therefore
                          1      1        −tα2 − α2       1      −tα2 − α2
                                              ν    π                 ν    π
             Gt (λ) =        −      exp               + O( exp               ) .
                        2tαπ   2tαν        αν − απ        t       αν − απ
This yields the claimed asymptotic result.
These results are numerically validated in Figure 3.

D     L OWER BOUNDS
In this section, we give the proofs of Theorems 4, 8 and 9. In section D.1 we prove a general lower
bound in total variation for the setup we consider in Theorems 8 and 9. We apply this result to the
bimodal example in section D.2. We then study the unimodal examples from Theorems 4 and 9
in section D.3. The bound on the log-Sobolev constant for the uni-modal example is deferred to
section D.4. Throughout, we use the notation introduced in section 5.


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Numerical validation of the rate of convergence predicted by Proposition 7. Dashed lines
are our prediction from Proposition 7 and full lines are from simulations of the process using 10 000
particles. The proposal and target are two-dimensional Gaussians, with zero mean and covariance
matrices that have a constant diagonal, equal to one for the proposal and 10 for the target. As
expected, the predicted rate from Proposition 7 (in dashed red) matches the approximated upper
bound from Theorem 3 (in dashed yellow) as well as particle-based simulations (full lines), for large
values of time.


D.1     A GENERAL LOWER BOUND

In this section we state and prove the following general lower bound for the geometric path; in the
following sections it is applied to obtain Theorems 8 and 9.
Theorem 20 (Total variation lower bounds for the geometric path) Suppose ν, π ∈ Pac (R) have
log-Lipschitz densities and there is an interval I = [a, b] ⊂ R and λ⋆ ∈ [0, 1], δ, B > 0 such that:

      1. Bounded scores on I: both |Vν′ (x)|, |Vπ′ (x)| ≤ B for x ∈ I.
      2. Small mass on I: for all λ ∈ [0, λ⋆ ], we have µλ (I) ≤ δ.

Then for each k ∈ [K] such that λk ≤ λ⋆ ,

                                                                 √  X k
                                                             B
 TV(pkTk , π) ≥ π([b, ∞)) − π(I) − ν([b, ∞)) − δ −              · δ·     Ti (χ2 (pi0 , µi ) + 1)1/2 .
                                                            b−a      i=1


This result will be typically be applied in conjuction with the following lemma, which allows us
to control the χ2 terms arising above when we have pointwise comparisons of one distribution to
another.
Lemma 21 Suppose that there exists a C > 0 such that in the support of π, ν(x) ≤ Cπ(x). Then
                                        χ2 (pk0 , µk ) ≤ C λk − 1.

Proof of Lemma 21. Take k ∈ [K]. Write
                                        (pk0 )2       (pk0 )2 µk−1
                                      Z             Z
                     χ2 (pk0 , µk ) =           −1=          ·     − 1.
                                         µk           µk−1     µk
Now, letting ci := cλi for each i ∈ {0, . . . , k}, we have
                      µk−1   ck−1 λk −λk−1 λk−1 −λk                ck−1
                           =     ·ν       π         ≤ C λk −λk−1 ·      .
                       µk     ck                                    ck
Hence
                                                                     (pk0 )2
                                                                 Z
                                                          ck−1
                          χ2 (pk0 , µk ) ≤ C λk −λk−1 ·                      −1
                                                           ck        µk−1
                                                                 Z (pk−1 )2
                                            λk −λk−1     ck−1        Tk−1
                                       =C              ·                      − 1.
                                                          ck          µk−1


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


But since χ2 (·, µk−1 ) is non-increasing under Langevin dynamics towards µk−1 , we find that
                                                             (pk−1 )2
                                                           Z
                             2 k             λk −λk−1 ck−1     0
                            χ (p0 , µk ) ≤ C         ·                −1
                                                       ck     µk−1
Proceeding recursively, we obtain
                                                      (p00 )2
                                                  Z
                                             c0
                      χ (pk0 , µk ) ≤ C λk ·
                        2
                                                              −1
                                             ck        µ0
                                             c0              1
                                  = C λk ·      − 1 = C λk ·    − 1 ≤ C λk − 1,
                                             ck              ck
where at the last step we use the fact that for all λ ∈ [0, 1], Jensen’s inequality implies that
                                          Z
                                    1
                                       = ν 1−λ (x)π λ (x)dx ≤ 1.
                                   cλ



Proof. For convenience, let us put
                                Vλ (x) := − log µλ (x),              λ ∈ [0, 1].

Define                                       
                                             0
                                                                    x<a
                                                1
                                   ψ(x) :=         (x − a)           x∈I
                                              b−a
                                             1                      x > b.
We write
                                                               i
                                                               X
                     π(ψ) − pkTk (ψ) = π(ψ) − ν(ψ) +                 pi−1         i
                                                                      Ti−1 (ψ) − pTi (ψ).
                                                               i=1
Observe
                                          π(ψ) ≥ π([b, ∞)).
On the other hand,
                      ν(ψ) ≤ ν([a, ∞)) = ν(I) + ν([b, ∞)) ≤ δ + ν([b, ∞)).
We thus find
                                                                        k
                                                                        X
               π(ψ) − pkTk (ψ) ≥ π([b, ∞)) − ν([b, ∞)) − δ +                  pi−1         i
                                                                               Ti−1 (ψ) − pTi (ψ).
                                                                        i=1

To reduce to a lower bound in total variation, we note that
                 π(ψ) − pkTk (ψ) ≤ π([a, ∞)) − pkTk ([b, ∞)) ≤ TV(pkTk , π) + π(I)
We finally obtain the lower bound
                                                                          k
                                                                          X
           TV(pkTk , π) ≥ π([b, ∞)) − π(I) − ν([b, ∞)) − δ +                    pTi−1
                                                                                   i−1
                                                                                       (ψ) − piTi (ψ).   (57)
                                                                          i=1


To conclude from Eq. 57, we study the above summands. Notice that by definition, pTi−1         i−1
                                                                                                   (ψ) =
pi0 (ψ), so that these terms are the difference of the expectation of ψ at the start and end of Langevin
dynamics run towards µi . Hence,
                                                      Z Tk
                           pk−1
                             Tk−1 (ψ) −  pk
                                          Tk (ψ) =  −      ∂t ⟨ψ, pkt ⟩L2 (µk ) dt.
                                                           0

Now, pkt evolves by the weighted Fokker-Planck operator
                               ∂t pkt = Lµk pkt := ∆pkt − ⟨∇Vλk , ∇pkt ⟩,


                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


so by self-adjointness of Lµk , we obtain
                        Z Tk                           Z Tk
                             ∂t ⟨ψ, pkt ⟩L2 (µk ) dt =      ⟨ψ, Lµk pkt ⟩L2 (µk ) dt
                              0                            0
                                                         Z Tk
                                                     =          ⟨Lµk ψ, pkt ⟩L2 (µk ) dt.
                                                           0

Notice that since ψ is linear where it is non-constant, we have
                                                         ®
                                                              1
                                                           − b−a ∂x Vλk (x) x ∈ I
                  Lµk ψ(x) = −⟨∇Vλk (x), ∇ψ(x)⟩ =
                                                           0                x∉ I.
Hence
                                                         Z b
                                                   −1
                        ⟨Lµk ψ, pkt ⟩L2 (µk ) =                ∂x Vλk (x)pkt (x)dµk (x)
                                                  b−a      a
                                                         Z b
                                                   B
                                             ≤                 pkt (x)dµk (x).
                                                  b−a      a
Now, we use Cauchy-Schwarz to observe that
                   Z b                             Z b                   1/2
                       pkt (x)dµk (x) ≤ µk (I)1/2      pkt (x)2 dµk (x)
                          a                                     a
                                             ≤ µk (I)1/2 (χ2 (pkt , µk ) + 1)1/2
                                               √
                                             ≤ δ(χ2 (pkt , µk ) + 1)1/2
                                               √
                                             ≤ δ(χ2 (pk0 , µk ) + 1)1/2 ,


where the last step follows because χ2 (·, µk ) is non-increasing along Langevin dynamics towards
µk . Hence
                                                                BTk √ 2 k
                                 Z Tk
         k−1          k
        pTk−1 (ψ) − pTk (ψ) = −       ⟨Lµk ψ, pkt ⟩L2 (µk ) ≥ −       δ(χ (p0 , µk ) + 1)1/2 .
                                  0                             b−a
Plugging this inequality into Eq. 57 yields the result.

D.2     L OWER BOUNDS FOR BIMODAL TARGET

In this section, we apply the general lower bound from Theorem 20 to prove Theorem 8, and ac-
cordingly throughout take ν and π to be as defined there. We begin by collecting some useful facts
about the geometric path between ν and π; the proof is included after that of Theorem 8.
Proposition 22 (Useful facts about the bi-modal example.) Let ν, π be as in Theorem 8 for m ≥ 11.
Then

      1. for all λ ∈ [0, 1], the normalizing constant cλ ∈ [1, 2].
      2. for each λ ∈ [0, 1],
                                                                            2
                                          µλ ([m/4, 3m/4]) ≤ 6e−m /32 .

      3. for all k ∈ [K] and t ∈ [0, Tk ],
                                                   χ2 (pkt , µk ) ≤ 1.

Proof of Theorem 8. We will apply Theorem 20 with I = [m/4, 3m/4]. An easy calculation shows
that we may take B = 2m for the first assumption, and Proposition 22 shows that λ0 = 1 and
          2
δ = 6e−m /32 suffice for the second assumption. We thus obtain
                                                        k
                                              2      √  X                             2
TV(pkTk , π) ≥ π([3m/4, ∞))−ν([3m/4, ∞))−12e−m /32 −4 6   Ti (χ2 (pi0 , µi )+1)1/2 e−m /64 .
                                                                                 i=1


                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Applying Proposition 22 to control the χ2 terms yields
                                                                  k
                                                                  X
                                                        2                 2
      TV(pkTk , π) ≥ π([3m/4, ∞)) − ν([3m/4, ∞)) − 12e−m /32 − 16   Ti e−m /32
                                                                             i=1
Note that by Mill’s ratio, we can bound using m ≥ 4 that
                                                        2           2
                              ν([3m/4, ∞)) ≤ e−9m /32 ≤ e−m /32 .
On the other hand,
                         π([3m/4, ∞)) = π([m/2, ∞)) − π([m/2, 3m/4])
                                        ≥ π([m/2, ∞)) − π([m/4, 3m/4])
                                           1
                                        = − π([m/4, 3m/4])
                                           2
                                           1         2
                                        ≥ − 6e−m /32 ,
                                           2
where at the last step we applied Proposition 22 one more time. Plugging in terms yields
                                                             k
                                      1          2
                                                           X            2
                       TV(pkTk , π) ≥ − 19e−m /32 − 16          Ti e−m /32 .
                                      2                     i=1
Now, we use our assumption that m ≥ 11 to observe that
                                   1           2        1
                                     − 19e−m /32 ≥        ,
                                   2                   20
and finally conclude.

Proof of Proposition 22. Proof of Fact 1. Note that Cauchy-Schwarz immediately implies that for
any λ ∈ [0, 1],                              Z
                                         1
                                           = ν 1−λ π λ ≤ 1.
                                        cλ
On the other hand, using the fact that 2π ≥ ν, we have that
                                   Z            Z
                             1                      π  λ          1
                               = ν 1−λ π λ =             ν ≥ 2−λ ≥ .
                            cλ                      ν             2
The claim about the normalizing constant follows.
Proof of Fact 2. We use the previous part to observe
                                           Z 3m/4
                   µλ ([m/4, 3m/4]) ≤ 2           ν 1−λ (x)π λ (x)dx
                                             m/4

                                      ≤ 2ν([m/4, 3m/4])1−λ π([m/4, 3m/4])λ
                                      = 2ν([m/4, 3m/4]),
where the last equality follows by symmetry. We then observe that by Mills’ ratio,
                                                                        2
                          ν([m/4, 3m/4]) ≤ ν([m/4, ∞)) ≤ 3e−m /32 .
The result follows.
Proof of Fact 3. The result follows immediately from Lemma 21 once we observe that ν ≤ 2π.

D.3   L OWER BOUNDS FOR UNIMODAL TARGET

In this section, we prove Theorem 4 as well as Theorem 9. Since these results concern the same
distributions
            √ with different mixture weights, in this section we generalize slightly to consider, for
some a ∈ [ 2 log 2/m, 1], the target
                                         2   2                  2   2
                          π = (1 − e−a m /2 )N (m, 1) + e−a m /2 um ,                           (58)
                      √                                                              √
By taking a = 1/ 2, we recover the setting of Theorem 4, and by taking a = 2 log 2/m we
recover the setting of Theorem 9. Note that when dealing with various numerical constants, we will
frequently use the assumption m ≥ 10 without comment. For both results, the following facts will
be useful.


                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 23 (Useful facts about the unimodal target) Let ν := N (0, 1) and π be as in Eq. 58 for
m ≥ 10. Then

       1. For all λ ∈ [0, 1],
                                                                        2   2                2   2
                     µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, m(1 − a)]) ≤ 5am2 cλ e−λa m /2−(1−λ)(1−a) m /8 .

       2. If 1 ≥ a + 2/m, then for all λ ∈ [0, 1],
                                                                             2   2
                                                                   cλ e−λa m /2
                                      µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2]) ≥                   .
                                                                       10m

       3. For all λ such that 1 ≤ a + 2λ − 2/m, we have
                                                                 cλ − 1 λ(1−λ)m2
                                     µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, ∞)) ≥         e 2          .
                                                                  2

       4. For all λ ∈ [0, 1]
                                              1                                      2   2
                                                   1        2
                                                                 ≤ cλ ≤ 10meλa m /2 .
                                4(e−λa2 m2 /2 + e− 2 λ(1−λ)m )

We also use the following.
Lemma 24 (Log-Sobolev constants of the unimodal target.) Let π be as in Eq. 58 for m ≥ 10. Then
                                                       81a2 m5
                                        CLS (π) ≤                   ,
                                                    1 − 2e−a2 m2 /2
                                                                        √
with the convention that the right-hand side is 324m3 when a =              2 log 2/m.

The proof of Lemma 24 requires a digression into log-Sobolev inequalities for mixtures and restric-
tions, so is deferred to the next section, Appendix D.4.
We first prove Theorems 4 and 9, then return to proving Proposition 23.

Proof of Theorem 4. The fact that CLS (ν) = 1 is the Gaussian log-Sobolev inequality,
                                                                                √ and the
bound CLS (π) ≤ 6m5 follows immediately from Lemma 24 upon plugging in a = 1/ 2.
For the lower bound on CP (µλ ), take λ ∈ [ 12 , 1] and let I := [m(1 − a)/2, m(1 − a)]; recall that
a ∈ [0, 1) is a free parameter controlling the mixture weights in Eq. 58. Put
                             
                             1
                                                                x < m(1 − a)/2,
                                       2
                    ψ(x) := 1 − (1−a)m      (x − m(1 − a)/2) x ∈ I,
                             
                             0                                  x > m(1 − a).

Then
                                                           4
                                    ∥∇ψ∥2L2 (µλ ) =               µλ (I).
                                                      m2 (1 − a)2
On the other hand,
           Varµλ (ψ) = µλ (ψ 2 ) − µλ (ψ)2
                      ≥ µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2]) − (µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2]) + µλ (I))2
                      = µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2])(1 − µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2])))
                      − 2µλ (I)µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2]) − µλ (I)2
                      ≥ µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2])(1 − µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2]))) − 3µλ (I)
                      = µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2])µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, ∞)) − 3µλ (I)


                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We obtain
                 Varµλ (ψ)
   CP (µλ ) ≥
                ∥∇ψ∥2L2 (µλ )
        m2 (1 − a)2                                                      3m2 (1 − a)2
   =                µλ (I)−1 µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2])µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, ∞)) −              . (59)
             4                                                                4
                                                √
We’ll now apply Proposition 23 with a = 1/ 2. With this choice of a and for λ ∈ [ 12 , 1], the
sufficient conditions are all verified, so that
                                                              1             2     2    1        2
µλ (I)−1 µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2])µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, ∞)) ≥              cλ e(1−λ)m (1−a) /8− 2 λ(1−λ)m .
                                                           100am3
Applying Proposition 23 once more, this time to control cλ , we obtain
                                                                               2     2    1           2
                                                                        e(1−λ)m (1−a) /8− 2 λ(1−λ)m
µλ (I)−1 µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2])µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, ∞)) ≥                               1         2
                                                                                                 .
                                                          400am3 (e−λa2 m2 /2 + e− 2 λ(1−λ)m )
                                                             √
To complete the proof of Theorem 4, we finally plug in a = 1/ 2, and observe that for λ ∈ [ 12 , 1]
                  2 2        1        2
it holds that e−λa m /2 ≤ e− 2 λ(1−λ)m , so that
                                                                              1          2
         µλ (I)−1 µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2])µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, ∞)) ≥                     e(1−λ)m /100 .
                                                                            800m3
Plugging into Eq. 59 we find
                                         √
                               m2 (1 − 1/ 2)2   1      (1−λ)m2 /100

                    CP (µλ ) ≥                       e              − 3  .
                                      4        800m3
              1
                         √
Observe that 12 ≤ (1 − 1/ 2)2 ≤ 1, so that

                              1           2       3m2        1          2
            CP (µλ ) ≥             e(1−λ)m /100 −     ≥        4
                                                                 e(1−λ)m /100 − m2 .
                         48 · 800m                 4    4 · 10 m



Proof of Theorem 9. The equality CLS (ν) = 1 is the Gaussian log-Sobolev inequality.√For the log-
Sobolev constant of π, the result is immediate from Lemma 24 upon plugging in a = 2 log 2/m.
For the lower bound in total variation, we will apply Theorem 20 using the interval I = [m(1 −
a)/2, m(1 − a)]; recall that a ∈ [0,
                                  √1) is a free parameter controlling the mixture weights in Eq. 58
that we will eventually set to a = 2 log 2/m.
In this case, it clear that we may bound the scores with B = m. The main issue is then to get control
on µλ (I), and for this we apply Proposition 23 to obtain
                                                                2       2
                                µλ (I) ≤ 50am3 e−(1−λ)(1−a) m /8 .
So for λ⋆ := λk , we may take
                                                            2       2
                                  δ := 50am3 e−(1−λ⋆ )(1−a) m /8 .
Theorem 20 then implies
     TV(pkTk , π) ≥ π([m(1 − a), ∞))−π([m(1 − a)/2, m(1 − a)]) − ν([m(1 − a), ∞)) − δ
                                              √  X    k
                                         2
                                     −       · δ·        Ti (χ2 (pi0 , µi ) + 1)1/2 .
                                        1−a          i=1

Next, we observe that 4mum (x) ≥ ν(x) for all x ∈ R, so that
                                            1           1
                                   π(x) ≥     um (x) ≥    ν(x).
                                            2          8m

                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence we may Lemma 21 with C = 8m to obtain
       TV(pkTk , π) ≥ π([m(1 − a), ∞))−π([m(1 − a)/2, m(1 − a)]) − ν([m(1 − a), ∞))
                                              √             k
                                             8 m √  X
                                       −δ−         · δ·        Ti .
                                             1−a           i=1
                                   √
Let us specialize to a =               2 log 2/m. In this case, Mills’ ratio implies
                                                                           2    2                  2
                                    ν([m(1 − a), ∞)) ≤ e−(1−a) m /2 ≤ e−2m /5 .
                                                                                            1          2
For the other two terms, let us adopt the notation gm := √12π e− 2 (x−m) , and then write

 π([m(1 − a), ∞))−π([m(1 − a)/2, m(1 − a)])
                     Z 2m                             Z m(1−a)
                              1         1                       1         1
                  ≥             gm (x) + um (x))dx −              gm (x) + um (x) dx
                      m(1−a) 2          2              m(1−a)/2 2         2
                       Z 2m                 Z m(1−a)              Z 2m
                     1                    1                     1
                  =            gm (x)dx −            gm (x)dx +             um (x)dx
                     2 m(1−a)             2 m(1−a)/2            2 m(1−a/2)
                     1 2m                 1 m(1−a)
                       Z                    Z
                  ≥            gm (x)dx −            gm (x)dx
                     2 m(1−a)             2 m(1−a)/2
                     Z m(1+a)            Z m+1
                                                        1
                  =           gm (x)dx ≥       gm (x) ≥ .
                      m(1−a)              m−1           4
We finally obtain
                                                                            √  X  k
                                                     1       2

                                TV(pkTk , π) ≥         − e−2m /5 − δ − 10m · δ ·     Ti .
                                                     4                           i=1

For this choice of a, note that
                                                                               2
                                                         δ ≤ 6m3 e−(1−λk )m /10 .
                                                                 2
By the restriction on m we know 1/4 − e−2m /5 ≥ 1/5, yielding the result.

                                                                                                   1           2
Proof of Prop. 23. For ease of notation, let us write gm (x) := √12π e− 2 (x−m) . Also, put um (x) =
       1        2
cum e− 2 d(x,Im ) for cum a normalizing constant and observe that
                        Z ∞                          √
                                1         2                        1          1
                 c−1
                  um =       e− 2 d(x,Im ) dx = 3m + 2π =⇒           ≤ cum ≤    .
                         −∞                                       4m         3m
Therefore,
                                                 2       2
                2       2                  e−a m /2  1
             e−a m /2 um (x) ≤                      ≤ gm (x),                       ∀x ∈ [m(1 − a), m(1 + a)],          (60)
                                             3m      m
and
                    2       2                2       2
   gm (x) ≤ e−a m /2 ≤ 4me−a m /2 um (x)                              ∀x ∈ [−m, m(1 − a)] ∪ [m(1 + a), 2m].             (61)

Proof of Fact 1. We use Eq. 61 to observe that
                                                                     Z m(1−a)
              µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, m(1 − a)]) = cλ                                      ν 1−λ π λ
                                                                      m(1−a)/2
                                                                                                Z m(1−a)
                                                                          λ −λa2 m2 /2
                                                              ≤ cλ (5m) e                                   ν 1−λ
                                                                                                 m(1−a)/2
                                                                                    2   2                  2        2
                                                              ≤ 5am2 cλ e−λa m /2 · e−(1−λ)m (1−a) /8 .


                                                                     39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Fact 2. We compute

                                       Z m(1−a)/2
       µλ ((−∞, m(1 − a)/2]) =                             cλ ν 1−λ π λ dx
                                        −∞
                                           Z m(1−a)/2
                                  ≥ cλ                          ν 1−λ π λ dx
                                            −m(1−a)/2
                                        e−a2 m2 /2  λ   1  1−λ Z m(1−a)/2        1 2
                                  ≥ cλ                 √                      e− 2 x (1−λ) dx
                                           4m            2π        −m(1−a)/2
                                        −λa2 m2 /2 Z m(1−a)/2
                                      e                          1 2
                                  ≥ cλ √                      e− 2 x (1−λ) dx
                                        4 2πm −m(1−a)/2
                                           2  2
                                      e−λa m /2 m(1−a)/2 − 1 x2
                                                   Z
                                  ≥ cλ √                      e 2 dx
                                        4 2πm −m(1−a)/2
                                           2  2
                                      e−λa m /2 1 − 1 x2
                                                   Z
                                  ≥ cλ √               e 2 dx
                                        4 2πm −1
                                                                2   2
                                       2e−1/2 e−λa m /2
                                  ≥ cλ      √
                                           4 2πm
                                                   2   2
                                       cλ e−λa m /2
                                  ≥                 .
                                           10m


Proof of Fact 3. We calculate,

                                           Z ∞
            µλ ([m(1 − a)/2, ∞)) =                             cλ ν 1−λ π λ dx
                                            m(1−a)/2

                                           cλ 2m
                                             Z
                                                        1     1     2  1      2
                                       ≥              √ e− 2 (1−λ)x − 2 λ(x−m) dx
                                           2
                                           m(1−a)/2     2π
                                                         Z 2m
                                        cλ 1          2             1     1     2
                                       = e− 2 λ(1−λ)m              √ e− 2 (x−λm) dx
                                         2                m(1−a)/2  2π
                                        cλ − 1 λ(1−λ)m2
                                       ≥ e   2          ,
                                         2

where we used the fact that under the hypothesis, we have m(1 − a)/2 ≤ λm − 1.
Proof of Fact 4. We compute


             1
                   Z ∞
                                               1    e−a2 m2 /2  λ Z m/2     1 2
               =         ν 1−λ π λ ≥   (1−λ)/2
                                                ·                ·       e− 2 x (1−λ) dx
            cλ     −∞              (2π)               4m            −m/2
                                        2 2       m/2
                                   e−λa m /2
                                              Z
                                                          1 2
                                  ≥ √                 e− 2 x (1−λ) dx
                                    4 2πm −m/2
                                        2 2
                                   e−λa m /2 m/2 − 1 x2
                                              Z
                                  ≥ √                 e 2 dx
                                    4 2πm −m/2
                                                           2    2
                                    2e−1/2 e−λa m /2
                                  ≥      √
                                        4 2πm
                                             2     2
                                       e−λa m /2
                                  ≥              .
                                         10m


                                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


On the other hand, we use Eq. 60 and Eq. 61 to bound
             Z ∞
       1
          =       ν 1−λ π λ
      cλ      −∞
             Z m(1−a)            Z m(1+a)            Z 2m
                        1−λ λ                1−λ λ
          =           ν     π +            ν    π +                                     ν 1−λ π λ
               −m                          m(1−a)                             m(1+a)
              Z −m                  Z ∞
          +          ν 1−λ π λ +           ν 1−λ π λ
              −∞                      2m
              Z m(1−a)                      Z m(1+a)                          Z −m                    Z ∞
                               1−λ λ                          1−λ λ                         1−λ λ
          ≤2               ν        π +                   ν         π +                 ν       π +         ν 1−λ π λ
                 −m                          m(1−a)                                −∞                 2m
                 5e−am2 /2  λ                1
                                                       Z m(1−a)
                                                                               1            2
          ≤2                     ·                                       e− 2 (1−λ)x dx
                      3              (2π)(1−λ)/2          −m
                     Z m(1+a)                                                  Z −m                 Z ∞
            2λ                      − 12 (1−λ)x2 − 12 λ(x−m)2
          +√                    e                                   dx +                ν 1−λ +           ν 1−λ
             2π       m(1−a)                                                       −∞               2m
                                                              Z ∞                                         Z −m
                 −λa2 m2 /2      2   1         2
                                                                            − 12 (x−λm)2          2                 1   2
          ≤ 4e                + √ e− 2 λ(1−λ)m                          e                   dx + √                e− 2 x dx
                                 2π                             −∞                                 2π      −∞
                 −λa2 m2 /2          − 21 λ(1−λ)m2            − 21 m2
          ≤ 4e                + 2e                     +e
                  −λa2 m2 /2        − 12 λ(1−λ)m2
          ≤ 4(e                +e                    ).

D.4   U PPER BOUNDS ON THE LOG -S OBOLEV CONSTANT OF THE UNIMODAL TARGET

In this section we prove Lemma 24 on the log-Sobolev constant of the unimodal target defined
in Eq. 17. We use the following result which controls the log-Sobolev constants of mixtures, and
appears as (Schlichting, 2019, Corollary 2).
Theorem 25 (Upper bounds on log-Sobolev constant of mixtures (Schlichting, 2019)) Suppose
Q0 , Q1 ∈ P(Rd ) are such that Q0 ≪ Q1 . For p ∈ [0, 1], consider the mixture Qp :=
pQ0 + (1 − p)Q1 . Then
       CLS (Qp ) ≤ max (1 + (1 − p)λp )CLS (Q0 ), (1 + pλp (1 + χ2 (Q0 , Q1 )))CLS (Q1 ) ,


for                                        ® log p−log(1−p)
                                                   2p−1                 p ∈ [0, 12 ) ∪ ( 21 , 1]
                                λp :=
                                            2                           p = 12 .

With this result in hand, we just need to get control on the the log-Sobolev constant of um . This is
accomplished in the following lemma.
Lemma 26 (Log-Sobolev constant of um ) We have
                                                  CLS (um ) ≤ 16m2 .

Proof of Lemma 26. We will apply the Holley-Stroock perturbation principle to a custom compari-
son distribution. Indeed, for a parameter r > 0 to be chosen later, let
                                 
                                    1         2
                                  2 (x − 2m)
                                                      x > 2m + r
                                            m  2
                      ϕr (x) := αr x − 2 + δr x ∈ [−m − r, 2m + r]
                                  1 (x + m)2
                                 
                                                       x < −m − r,
                                    2
where we take αr , δr to make ϕ continuously differentiable; in particular
                                                    r                               3mr2
                                     αr :=               ,              δr := −          .
                                                 2r + 3m                             8
Note that ϕr is αr strongly convex, so that CLS (e−ϕr ) ≤ α1r . On the other hand
                              1         1                3m     2
                          δr − r2 ≤ ϕr − d(x, Im )2 ≤ αr    + r + δr .
                              2         2                 2

                                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence
                                  1                  3m       2 r 2
                         osc(ϕ − d(·, Im )2 ) ≤ αr        +r + .
                                  2                    2           2
Hence by the Holley-Stroock perturbation principle Holley and Stroock (1987) we know that
                             3m    2 r 2                 1           3m    2 r 2
     CLS (um ) ≤ exp αr         +r +       CLS (e−ϕr ) ≤    · exp αr    +r +       .
                              2      2                   αr           2      2
Taking r = 1/m, we find
                                   1            1                    4   1
    CLS (um ) ≤ (2 + 3m2 ) exp       2
                                       (2m)2 +   2
                                                    = (2 + 3m2 ) exp   +     ≤ 16m2 .
                                  3m           2m                    3 2m2


With the result in hand, we can prove Lemma 24.

Proof of Lemma 24. We first compute χ2 (N (m, 1), um ).          For this, let us write um          =
       1 2
cum e− 2 d (x,Im ) , and note that
                                   Z ∞                    √
                                          1 2
                            c−1
                             um  =     e− 2 d (x,Im ) dx = 2π + 3m ≤ 4m.
                                  ∞

Hence
                                 Z ∞
                            2m                 2   1      2
 χ2 (N (m, 1), um ) + 1 ≤              e−(x−m) + 2 d(x,Im ) dx
                             π   −∞
                          2m −m −(x−m)2 + 1 d(x,Im )2        2m 2m −(x−m)2 + 1 d(x,Im )2
                             Z                                  Z
                        =          e         2          dx +        e        2           dx
                           π −∞                               π −m
                             Z ∞
                          2m            2  1         2
                        +        e−(x−m) + 2 d(x,Im ) dx
                           π 2m
                          2m −m −(x−m)2 + 1 (x+m)2          2m 2m −(x−m)2
                             Z                                 Z
                        =          e         2         dx +        e      dx
                           π −∞                              π −m
                          2m ∞ −(x−m)2 + 1 (x−2m)2
                             Z
                        +        e         2           dx
                           π 2m
                          2m −m − 1 (x−m)2          2m ∞ −(x−m)2
                             Z                           Z
                        ≤          e 2       dx +            e      dx
                           π −∞                       π −∞
                          2m ∞ − 1 (x−m)2
                             Z
                        +        e 2      dx
                           π 2m
                          2m √       √    √
                        ≤      2π + π + 2π ≤ 5m.
                           π
                                                                     2   2
Using Lemma 26 and plugging into Theorem 25, with p = 1 − e−a m /2 , we find
              CLS (π) ≤ max 1 + (1 − p)λp , 80m3 (1 + pλp ) ≤ 162m3 λp .


The result follows.

E    A DDITIONAL NUMERICAL ILLUSTRATIONS
The geometric path is often illustrated in a setup where the initialization is chosen in the middle of
a two symmetric modes: see for example Cabezas et al. (2023, Sampling Book, Tempered SMC)
or Maurais and Marzouk (2024, Fig. 1) or Chehab et al. (2024, Fig. 1). In this very specific setting,
the geometric path conveys a sense that it evolves particle positions. In a more general setting, we
can observe in Figure 4 that once the closer mode is reached, the path seems to evolve the particle
weights, which is problematic for Langevin dynamics.



                                                   42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Geometric path from a Gaussian to a Gaussian mixture. We observe that that this path
displaces mass “horizontally” to the nearest modes (left columns), and then “vertically” to the re-
maining modes (right columns). Intuitively, this second part is problematic for a Langevin sampler.


                                                43
