Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C RITIQUE - OUT-L OUD R EWARD M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Traditionally, reward models used for reinforcement learning from human feed-
             back (RLHF) are trained to directly predict preference scores without leveraging
             the generation capabilities of the underlying large language model (LLM). This
             limits the capabilities of reward models as they must reason implicitly about the
             quality of a response, i.e., preference modeling must be performed in a single
             forward pass through the model. To enable reward models to reason explicitly
             about the quality of a response, we introduce Critique-out-Loud (CLoud) reward
             models. CLoud reward models operate by first generating a natural language cri-
             tique of the assistant’s response that is then used to predict a scalar reward for
             the quality of the response. We demonstrate the success of CLoud reward models
             for both Llama-3-8B and 70B base models: compared to classic reward models
             CLoud reward models improve pairwise preference classification accuracy on Re-
             wardBench by 4.65 and 5.84 percentage points for the 8B and 70B base models
             respectively. Furthermore, CLoud reward models lead to a Pareto improvement
             for win rate on ArenaHard when used as the scoring model for Best-of-N. Finally,
             we explore how to exploit the dynamic inference compute capabilities of CLoud
             reward models by performing self-consistency decoding for reward prediction.


1       I NTRODUCTION

In reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Nguyen et al.,
2017), a reward model is trained as a proxy for human preferences. Such reward models are then
used to produce a human-preference aligned generation policy. Methods to do this include RL
training or generating multiple responses and selecting the highest scoring generation under the
reward model. In this work, we focus on improving the performance of reward models by training
them to critique responses before predicting a reward.
Generally, reward models are trained as simple LLM based classifiers of the user’s prompt and the
assistant’s response (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). Importantly, the language modeling
(LM) head of the underlying LLM is not used during reward modeling. We hypothesize that this
limits the performance of classic reward models as they cannot explicitly reason about the quality
of the response in a Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) like manner. Namely, without
generating reasoning traces, all reasoning in classic reward models must be performed implicitly in
the model within a single forward pass.
The utility of reasoning traces for preference modeling is demonstrated by the LLM-as-a-Judge
framework (Zheng et al., 2023), where a scoring rubric is provided to an LLM, and the LLM reasons
about how the provided response adheres to the rubric before scoring the quality of the response.
While LLM-as-a-Judge provides both the ability to define preferences at inference time through the
judging rubric and interpretable evaluation by inspecting the produced CoT reasoning, LLM-as-a-
Judge generally under-performs classic reward models at pairwise preference classification1 .
In this work, we investigate how to leverage the language generation capabilities of LLMs to improve
reward model performance. Adding the capacity for language generation to reward models enables
them to explicitly reason about the quality of the input via variable inference compute in a CoT like
manner. To this end, we propose Critique-out-Loud (CLoud) reward models: conditioned on the
user’s prompt and the assistant’s response, CLoud reward models first generate a detailed critique
    1
        https://huggingface.co/spaces/allenai/reward-bench


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          User Prompt:                                                Self-Generated Critique:

          How can we improve reward                      LM Head      While the options provided are
          models?                                                     correct, the response fails to
                                                                      mention generating critiques
                                                                      out loud.
          Assistant Response:

          Reward models can be                              Reward Head
          improved through higher
          quality preference data and
          improved preference models
                                        CLoud Reward
          such as Plackett-Luce.           Model
                                                                            Reward:     0.379


Figure 1: Overview of CLoud reward models. CLoud reward models augment classic reward
models with a language modeling (LM) head to provide critiques in addition to a scalar reward.
Given a user’s prompt and an assistant’s response as inputs, a CLoud reward model first generates
a critique describing the quality of the assistant’s response. Then, conditioned on the prompt, re-
sponse, and self-generated critique, the CLoud reward head produces a scalar reward.



about how well the response answers the user’s query. Then, as a function of the user’s prompt,
the assistant’s response, and the self-generated critique, the CLoud reward model produces a scalar
reward for the quality of the response. We present an overview of CLoud reward models in Figure 1.
By introducing language generation to classically trained reward models, our work provides the
groundwork to unify classic reward models and LLM-as-a-Judge and inherits the advantages of
both methods. To train CLoud reward models we assume access to a preference dataset composed
of prompts, responses, and oracle critiques of the responses. We train CLoud reward models to
both generate critiques by supervised finetuning (SFT) on the oracle critiques and to produce scalar
rewards based on the Bradley-Terry (BT) preference model (Bradley & Terry, 1952).
We also explore how to exploit the stochasticity in critique generation via multi-sample infer-
ence techniques to improve reward modeling performance. Specifically, we investigate self-
consistency (Wang et al., 2023a) for CLoud reward models and sample multiple (critique, reward)
predictions before marginalizing across critiques to produce a better estimate of the reward.


Contributions Our work makes the following contributions:

      • We introduce Critique-out-Loud (CLoud) reward models: reward models that are trained
        to explicitly reason about the quality of responses before scoring them. Through adding
        critique capabilities to reward models, CLoud lays the groundwork for unifying reward
        models and LLM-as-a-Judge.

      • We demonstrate that CLoud reward models improve pairwise preference classification ac-
        curacy on RewardBench by up to 4.65 and 5.84 percentage points for the 8B and 70B base
        models respectively (Figure 3). Additionally, we show that CLoud reward models lead
        to a Pareto improvement for win rate on ArenaHard when used as the scoring model for
        Best-of-N (Figure 4).

      • We ablate an important design choice in the training of CLoud reward models: on versus
        off-policy training. We show that on-policy training is essential for the success of CLoud
        reward models for both preference classification and for BoN (Figures 6 and 7).

      • We investigate self-consistency over critiques as a method to trade added inference com-
        pute for better reward modeling. We demonstrate that self-consistency over the critiques
        improves pairwise preference classification accuracy for reasoning tasks by up to 0.70 and
        0.49 percentage points for the 8B and 70B models respectively (Figure 7).


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Oracle Data
                                                                                             Notation
                      {x,y–, y+, c–, c+}
                                                                  Sample critiques        x: user’s prompt
    Pretrained LLM                         Finetuned LLM           ĉ–, ĉ+ to replace
                                                                                          y–, y+: assistant’s
                                                                   oracle critiques
      LM                                    LM                                                responses
      Head                                  Head                   Self-Gen Data       c–, c+: oracle critiques
                          SFT on
                         critiques                                {x,y–, y+, ĉ–, ĉ+}
      Base LLM                               Base LLM
                                                                                                Trained
                                                                                          CLoud Reward Model

                                            LM      R
                                            Head   Head         Train LM Head by
                        Initialize
                                                               SFT on critiques and
                     Reward (R) Head
                                             Base LLM          R Head by preference
                                                                    modeling


Figure 2: Overview of training CLoud reward models. CLoud reward models are trained using
a dataset that consists of user prompts, chosen and rejected assistant responses, and critiques of the
response quality generated by an oracle. We first train a pretrained LLM to generate critiques for
the responses by finetuning on the oracle critiques. We then rebuild the dataset by replacing oracle
critiques with critiques generated by the finetuned model. Finally, we initialize a scalar reward head
on top of the finetuned model and train on the new dataset composed of self-generated critiques to
minimize both a language modeling and a preference modeling loss.


2     M ETHODS

In this section, we review how classic reward models that model human preferences are trained and
we then extend this methodology to training CLoud reward models. We also detail how CLoud
reward models are used to score samples at inference time using both standard and self-consistency
decoding. Note, we will refer to the trunk of a pretrained LLM before the final language modeling
layer as the base model and the linear or shallow multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) that operate on the
output of the base model as heads.

2.1     C LASSIC REWARD MODELS

Typically, classic reward model consists of a base model and a shallow MLP reward head. Its
parameters are (θB , θR ), where θB and θR are the parameters of the base model and reward head
respectively. Given a user prompt x and an assistant response y, the classic reward model predicts
a scalar reward score R̂ = rθB ,θR (x, y). A classic reward model is initialized from a pretrained
base model and a randomly initialized reward head and then trained on a dataset of N examples,
D = {(x, y − , y + )i }N
                       i=1 . Here, x is a user’s prompt and the ys are two different assistant responses
to the prompt: y + is the chosen or preferred response and y − is the rejected response as judged by a
human or a more powerful model. Reward models are trained to predict a higher reward for y + than
for y − under the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952). This is achieved by minimizing:
             LRM (θB , θR , D) = −E(x,y− ,y+ )∼D [log(σ(rθB ,θR (x, y + ) − rθB ,θR (x, y − )))]
where σ(∗) is the sigmoid function.

2.2     CL OUD REWARD MODELS

In addition to the base model and reward head, CLoud reward models preserve the language mod-
eling head of the original pretrained LLM and are defined by parameters θ = (θB , θLM , θR ) where
θLM are the parameters of the language modeling head. CLoud reward models extend classic reward
models by first generating a critique of the assistant’s response and then predicting a scalar reward
conditioned on the critique (depicted in Figure 1). Formally, given a user prompt x and assistant
response y we first sample a critique ĉ ∼ p(∗|x, y; θB ; θLM ) and then predict a reward conditioned
on the prompt, the response, and the critique: R̂ = rθB ;θR (x, y, ĉ).


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Training CLoud reward models. CLoud reward models are trained with a dataset of N examples,
D = {(x, y − , y + , c− , c+ )i }N                                           − +
                                 i=1 , where we introduce oracle critiques, c , c , of the rejected and
                     − +
chosen responses y , y respectively. The critiques are reasoning traces that provide feedback on
the weaknesses of the responses and strategies for improving them. While ideally c− , c+ would be
human critiques of the responses, we use critiques generated by a more powerful model, specifically
Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), to approximate human critiques as done in prior
work (Bai et al., 2022b; Dubois et al., 2024). Further details on how these oracle critiques are
generated are provided in Appendix A.
To train CLoud reward models we: (1) train the base model and LM head to generate critiques via
supervised finetuning on the oracle critiques, (2) replace oracle critiques in the dataset with cri-
tiques generated by the finetuned model, and (3) train a reward head conditioned on self-generated
critiques. We choose to train the reward head on self-generated critiques as to minimizes the dis-
tribution shift in the critiques seen by the reward head between training and inference when oracle
critiques are not available. We present an overview of CLoud reward model training in Figure 2.
Before formally detailing the steps of CLoud reward model training, we introduce the following
objectives. First, we modify LRM to work with CLoud reward models as:

    LRM (θB , θR , D) = −E(x,y− ,y+ ,c− ,c+ )∼D [log(σ(rθB ,θR (x, y + , c+ ) − rθB ,θR (x, y − , c− )))]

where the reward estimator rθ (x, y, c) is now also conditioned on a critique c. Next, we introduce
the critique SFT loss, which is the negative log likelihood of the rejected and chosen critiques:
                                                        X
       LSF T (θB , θLM , D) = −E(x,y− ,y+ ,c− ,c+ )∼D [      log p(c−       − −
                                                                     t |x, y , c<t ; θB , θLM )
                                                           c−
                                                            t ∈c
                                                                 −

                                                                X
                                                           +            log p(c+      + +
                                                                               t |x, y , c<t ; θB , θLM )]
                                                               c+
                                                                t ∈c
                                                                    +



where c<t = c1 , ..., ct−1 is the prefix of the critique up to the tth token. Finally, we introduce a joint
SFT and RM loss as:

              LCLoud (θB , θLM , θR , D) = LRM (θB , θR , D) + λ · LSF T (θB , θLM , D)

where λ is a hyperparameter that weights the contribution of the language modeling loss.
To train CLoud reward models we first train (θB , θLM ) to generate critiques by minimizing LSF T
on the oracle critiques in the oracle dataset D and obtain parameters θ̃B , θ̃LM . We use the finetuned
model to modify our dataset with self-generated critiques that replace the oracle critiques. Specif-
ically, given the ith element from our dataset (x, y − , y + , c− , c+ ) = Di we sample new critiques
ĉ− ∼ p(∗|x, y − ; θ̃B , θ̃LM ) and ĉ+ ∼ p(∗|x, y + ; θ̃B , θ̃LM ). We then construct a new dataset as
Dself,i = (x, y − , y + , ĉ− , ĉ+ ). Finally, we obtain our CLoud reward model parameters by training
on our self-critique dataset:
                        ∗    ∗     ∗
                       θB , θLM , θR = arg min LCLoud (θB , θLM , θR , Dself )
                                         θB ,θLM ,θR


where θB , θLM are initialized to the finetuned parameters θ̃B , θ̃LM . We train CLoud reward models
on the joint loss LCLoud instead of LRM to preserve the critique generation capability of the CLoud
reward model and to prevent over-fitting to solely producing reward scores.

Self-consistent reward scores. Self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023a) is an inference technique
for computing the maximum marginal likelihood answer by sampling multiple (reasoning,
answer) tuples and marginalizing over the reasoning traces. It provides a simple method to
improve performance at the cost of added inference compute. In this work, we leverage self-
consistency to provide a better estimate of the reward by marginalizing over critiques.
Given a prompt x and response y to score, we first sample N critiques c1 , c2 , . . . , cN ∼
p(∗|x, y; θB ; θLM ; τ ), where τ is the sampling temperature. For each critique, we predict a reward
as R̂i = rθB ,θR (x, y, ci ). We then estimate the true reward as the mean of the individual rewards.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     R ESULTS
In this section we detail our experimental setup and provide evaluations of CLoud reward models in
the pursuit of answering the following research questions:

    RQ1: How does CLoud impact performance, both in terms of preference classification and the
         quality of the policy achievable by maximizing its reward (Figures 3 and 4)?
    RQ2: Is it necessary to train CLoud reward models in an on-policy manner via training on self-
         generated critiques (Figures 5 and 6)?
    RQ3: Does self-consistency decoding benefit the performance of CLoud reward models, and if
         so, under what distribution of inputs (Figures 7 and 8)?

3.1    S ETUP

Training. As base models we experiment with the Llama-3 family of models (Dubey et al., 2024).
Specifically, we train reward models starting from the Llama-3-8B and Llama-3-70B base models.
For both classic and CLoud reward models we perform a hyperparamater sweep over learning rate
and number of training epochs. For CLoud reward models we additionally sweep the SFT loss
weight λ. We provide further details on our hyperparamater sweep in Appendix B. We use a cosine
learning rate schedule (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with a warmup duration of 5% and a final decay
factor of 1%. Additionally, we use the Adam optimizer with decoupled weight decay (Loshchilov
& Hutter, 2019) with parameters β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95, ϵ = 1e-10. We train each model with two
random seeds. All models are trained using Nvidia H100 gpus and training is conducted using
MosaicML Composer (MosaicML, 2021).

Data. For training data we use a mix of the prompts from the UltraFeedback (Cui et al., 2023)
and UltraInteract (Yuan et al., 2024a) datasets. Together, UltraFeedback and UltraInteract contain a
diverse collection of prompts covering topics such as general chat, instruction following, reasoning,
etc. As UltraInteract is almost twice the size of UltraFeedback, we first uniformly sub-sample
UltraInteract to be the same size as UltraFeedback before merging the prompts in the two datasets.
We replace the chosen and rejected responses in the merged Ultra dataset with responses from
Llama-3-8B-Instruct. Specifically, for each prompt we sample two responses from Llama-3-8B-
Instruct and assign chosen and rejected labels through a pairwise judgement using Llama-3.1-405B-
Instruct as an oracle preference model. To perform the pairwise judgement we use the pairwise
judgement prompt from ArenaHard (Li et al., 2024b). We refer to the dataset composed of prompts
from UltraFeedback and UltraInteract but with responses from Llama-3-8B-Instruct as UltraLlama.
After labeling the chosen and rejected responses, we generate oracle critiques for each of the chosen
and rejected responses using Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct as the oracle. We do so by prompting the
oracle model to provide detailed, step-by-step feedback about the correct and incorrect elements of
each response. The prompt we use to generate oracle critiques can be found in Appendix A.

Evaluation. We evaluate the quality of reward models on both pairwise preference classification
accuracy and Best-of-N (BoN) win rate.
We evaluate pairwise preference classification on the RewardBench (Lambert et al., 2024) evaluation
suite, which is composed of 2, 985 examples and is organized into Chat, Chat-Hard, Safety, and
Reasoning categories. Each example contains a prompt and a chosen and rejected response and a
reward model is evaluated as to whether it predicts a greater reward for the chosen response. In
addition to the accuracy on each category, we report the average accuracy across all categories.
We evaluate BoN win rate performance on ArenaHard (Li et al., 2024b), an open-ended generation
benchmark consisting of five hundred prompts meant to reflect high-quality, real-world use cases of
LLMs. To preform BoN, for each user query we sample N potential responses from Llama-3-8B-
Instruct. Then, for a given reward model, we compute its reward on each of the N responses and
select the “best” response as the response with the highest reward. To evaluate the performance of the
BoN generations, we use the ArenaHard eval harness to compute the win rate of the BoN generations
as compared to greedy generations from Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct using Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct as
the judge. We evaluate BoN at N = 2, ..., 16 where responses are generated at a temperature of 1.0.


                                                  5
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                       CLoud vs. Classic on RewardBench
Pairwise Accuracy (%)                          Chat                    Chat-Hard                       Safety                           Reasoning                   Average
                        100                                     60                      85
                                                                                                                                95                   85
                        96                                      55                      80
                                                                                                                                90                   80
                        92                                      50                      75
                                                                                                                                85                   75
                        88                                      45                      70
                                                                                                                                80                   70
                                                                                        65
                                 8B                   70B              8B     70B                 8B                   70B              8B     70B             8B        70B
                                                                                         Classic                            CLoud

  Figure 3: Comparing pairwise preference classification accuracy of classic and CLoud re-
  ward models on RewardBench. Pairwise preference classification accuracy measures if the reward
  model correctly classifies the chosen and rejected responses. At both the 8B and 70B model scales,
  CLoud reward models significantly outperform classic reward models on all categories. This leads
  to a large increase in average accuracy for CLoud reward models.

                                                                        CLoud vs. Classic on ArenaHard
                                                            8B Reward Model BoN                                                     70B Reward Model BoN
                                                                                                                       35
                                               30
                                                                                                                       30
                                Win Rate (%)


                                                                                                        Win Rate (%)



                                               25
                                                                                                                       25
                                                                                      CLoud                                                               CLoud
                                               20                                                                      20
                                                                                      Classic                                                             Classic
                                                 2          5            9       13          16                         2           5        9       13        16
                                                                     # Responses                                                         # Responses

  Figure 4: Comparing Best-of-N (BoN) win rates using classic and CLoud reward models on
  ArenaHard. The shaded area represents ±1 standard error from the mean. To perform BoN we
  sample a given number of responses, compute the reward for each response, and then select the
  response with the highest score from the reward model. BoN serves as a proxy for the quality
  of a policy achievable under a reward model. At both model sizes, CLoud is a Pareto improvement
  meaning that it produces an equal or significantly higher win rate BoN policy than the classic reward
  model. For Best-of-16, CLoud improves the win rate by 1.84 and 0.89 percentage points for the 8B
  and 70B models respectively.


  Additionally, we found high variance in win rate based on the set of responses sampled, and as such,
  we average the BoN win rate for each N over four different seeds of responses.

   3.2                        C OMPARING CLASSIC AND CL OUD REWARD MODELS

  RQ1: Do critiques improve performance? To test whether critiques improve reward model per-
  formance we first compare classic reward models to CLoud reward models on RewardBench (Fig-
  ure 3). On RewardBench, we find that across both model sizes, CLoud reward models lead to large
  gains in pairwise preference accuracy, significantly outperforming the corresponding classic reward
  model on all categories. On average, we find that CLoud reward models outperform classic reward
  models by 4.65 and 5.84 percentage points for the 8B and 70B base models respectively. Further-
  more, on both the chat and safety categories, the 8B CLoud reward model even outperforms the 70B
  classic reward model. To better understand the critiques generated by CLoud reward models, we
  present critiques from examples in RewardBench in Appendix D.
  We next evaluate BoN with classic and CLoud reward models in Figure 4. We find that for all
  model sizes BoN with CLoud reward models is a Pareto improvement over BoN with classic reward


                                                                                                   6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      On vs. Off-Policy on RewardBench
Pairwise Accuracy (%)                        Chat                    Chat-Hard                       Safety                           Reasoning                Average
                        100                                   64                                                               96
                                                                                      88                                                           88
                         95                                   56                                                               88
                                                                                      80                                                           80
                         90                                   48                                                               80                  72
                         85                                                           72
                                                              40                                                               72
                         80                                                           64                                                           64
                               8B                   70B              8B     70B                 8B                   70B              8B    70B           8B        70B
                                                                                    Off-Policy                            On-Policy

  Figure 5: Comparing pairwise classification accuracy between CLoud reward models trained
  on-policy and off-policy on RewardBench. In this experiment, we ablate the importance of self-
  generating critiques for training CLoud reward models. For CLoud off-policy, the reward head is
  trained on the oracle critiques. For CLoud on-policy, the reward head is trained on self generated
  critiques. For both model sizes, training in an off-policy manner leads to a significant drop in
  performance. This highlights the importance of matching the distribution of critiques seen by the
  reward head during training and inference.

                                                                       On vs. Off-Policy on ArenaHard
                                                          8B Reward Model BoN                                                   70B Reward Model BoN
                                                                                                                     35
                                             30
                                                                                                                     30
                              Win Rate (%)


                                                                                                      Win Rate (%)


                                             25
                                                                                                                     25
                                             20                               On-Policy                                                           On-Policy
                                                                              Off-Policy                             20                           Off-Policy
                                               2          5            9       13          16                         2          5        9       13      16
                                                                   # Responses                                                        # Responses

  Figure 6: Comparing BoN win rates on ArenaHard of CLoud reward models trained on and
  off-policy. The shaded area represents ±1 standard error from the mean. At both model sizes, we
  find that the win rate from performing BoN with CLoud reward models trained on-policy is a Pareto
  improvement over those trained off-policy. For Best-of-16, training off-policy decreases the win
  rate by 3.31 and 1.56 percentage pooints for the 8B and 70B models respectively, highlighting the
  importance of training on-policy CLoud reward models for defining better downstream policies.


  models, meaning that for each number of responses, the BoN win rate with CLoud is equal to or
  better than that of classic. Selecting from sixteen responses with CLoud reward models leads to a
  win rate improvement of 1.84 and 0.89 percentage points as compared to classic reward models for
  the 8B and 70B base models respectively.
  These results suggest that adding the capability for the reward models to generate critiques leads to
  significant performance gains in preference modeling. Furthermore, the improvements in preference
  modeling transfer to improving the quality a generation policy.


  RQ2: Is on-policy training necessary? In our setup for training CLoud reward models, we mod-
  ify the original dataset by replacing all oracle critiques with self-generated critiques before training
  the reward head. We do so to mitigate the distribution shift between the critiques the reward head is
  trained on and the critiques available at inference. To determine whether this on-policy training is
  necessary, we train an off-policy CLoud reward model by training on oracle critiques instead of self-
  generated critiques. Namely, we train our off-policy CLoud reward model by minimizing LCLoud
  over the original oracle critique labeled dataset, instead of the self-critique dataset.


                                                                                                 7
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 Effect of Self-Consistency on RewardBench
                                                Chat                      Chat-Hard                       Safety                  Reasoning                   Average
             Pairwise Accuracy (%)                               47                          77                          88                          77
                                     97
Llama3-8B

                                                                 46
                                                                                             76                          87                          76
                                                                 45
                                     96
                                                                 44                          75                          86                          75
                                          1       8         16        1       8         16        1         8       16        1       8         16        1       8         16
             Pairwise Accuracy (%)


                                     98                          59                          85                          95                          84
Llama3-70B


                                     97                          58                          84                          94                          83

                                     96                          57                          83                          93                          82
                                          1       8         16        1       8         16        1         8       16        1       8         16        1       8         16
                                              # Critiques                 # Critiques                 # Critiques                 # Critiques                 # Critiques
                                                                                             Greedy                 T = 0.5

  Figure 7: Effect of self-consistency decoding on performance of CLoud reward models on
  RewardBench. The shaded area represents ±1 standard error from the mean. For each prompt
  and response input, we sample multiple (critique, reward) tuples from the CLoud reward model
  and average the reward over the critiques to provide a better estimate of the reward. While self-
  consistency does not improve the performance for most categories, on the reasoning category it is
  an effective method to trade added inference compute for increased performance.


  We plot the pairwise preference modeling accuracy for on-policy and off-policy CLoud reward mod-
  els in Figure 5. CLoud trained on-policy significantly outperforms CLoud trained off-policy on all
  categories except for chat-hard at the 70B base model scale. Off-policy training leads to a 5.60 and
  3.03 percentage point drop in average performance for the 8B and 70B base models respectively.
  We plot the BoN win rate for on-policy and off-policy CLoud reward models in Figure 6. We find
  that CLoud reward models trained on-policy are a Pareto improvement in BoN win rate over models
  trained off-policy. Specifically, selecting from sixteen responses with the off-policy reward model
  leads to a 3.31 and 1.56 percentage point decrease in win rate as compared to the on-policy reward
  models for the 8B and 70B base models respectively.
  These results suggests that training CLoud reward models in an on-policy manner is necessary to
  achieve strong performance.


  3.3                            S ELF - CONSISTENCY FOR CL OUD REWARD MODELS

  RQ3: Do CLoud reward models benefit from added inference compute? To test whether
  CLoud reward models benefit from added inference compute, we examine how accuracy changes
  when using self-consistency decoding. For each response in RewardBench, we sample up to sixteen
  critiques at a temperature of 0.5. We plot the performance of self-consistency decoding on Reward-
  Bench for 8B and 70B CLoud reward models in Figure 7. We find that reasoning is the only category
  that benefits from additional inference compute in the form of self-consistency. Specifically, we find
  that self-consistency leads to an improvement in preference classification accuracy of up to 0.70
  and 0.49 percentage points for the 8B and 70B base models respectively. Furthermore, that we do
  not see a gain in self-consistency for non-reasoning categories agrees with the results of Lee et al.
  (2024). We also evaluate the effect of self-consistency reward modeling for BoN on ArenaHard.
  Unlike RewardBench, we do not find any gain in BoN win rate from self-consistent rewards. For the
  sake of brevity we present these results in Appendix C. Our self-consistency results provide initial
  evidence that in specific situations, added inference compute can improve the performance of CLoud


                                                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             # Reasoning Steps Effect On Self-Consistency
                                                   1-2 steps          5-6 steps
                                    3              3-4 steps          7+ steps


                 Pairwise Acc (%)
                                    2
                                    1
                                    0
                                    1
                                        1   4      8            12                16
                                                # Critiques
Figure 8: The dependence of performance gain from self-consistency on the number of rea-
soning steps in the assistant’s response. We find that prompts that require only 1-2 reasoning
steps observe a significant lift in performance as the number of critiques increases, while all other
groups of reasoning steps actually degrade in performance past eight critiques. This result shows
that self-consistency with CLoud reward models enables better judgement of response quality for
short horizon tasks.

reward models, but that it is important to know the distribution of tasks being scored as not all task
categories benefit.

RQ3: When is self-consistency useful? To better understand when self-consistency improves
pairwise preference classification accuracy, we investigate the effect that a response’s reasoning
horizon has on self-consistency’s performance. We do so on the reasoning split of RewardBench
and we approximate the number of reasoning steps required for a problem as the average number
of sentences in the chosen and rejected response. We bin the number of reasoning steps as 1-2,
3-4, 5-6, and 7+ steps. We plot the performance gain from self-consistency grouped by reasoning
steps for CLoud 8B on the reasoning split of RewardBench in Figure 8. We find that only problems
requiring 1-2 steps see a consistent gain in pairwise preference classification accuracy as the number
of critiques increases, while the performance on problems with a greater number of steps actually
decreases after eight critiques. This result provides initial evidence that CLoud + self-consistency
may be a strong combination when evaluating solutions with short reasoning horizons.

4   R ELATED W ORK
Classic reward models. In RLHF, reward models have traditionally modeled human preferences
after ranking models such as the Bradley-Terry (BT) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022b;a; Dubey et al., 2024) or the Plackett-Luce model (Plackett, 1975; Luce,
1959; Zhu et al., 2023). Recent work has showed shortcomings of these models when handling
intransitive preferences (Munos et al., 2023; Swamy et al., 2024). Another line of work directly
models the probability of one response being preferred over the other (Jiang et al., 2023; Zhao et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2024; Swamy et al., 2024). Finally, another line of work aims
to model rewards over multiple objectives (Wang et al., 2023b; 2024b;a). The improvements of
CLoud reward models are orthogonal to the above methods as CLoud is agnostic to the preference
modeling objective. Future work should explore the composition of CLoud reward models with
more complex reward model objectives. Recently, Yang et al. (2024) proposed to maintain the LM
head of a reward model, and train the LM head on the chosen and rejected responses as a form of
regularization. While CLoud also maintains and further trains the LM head, we do so for the purpose
of generating critiques.

Critique-based feedback. There is a large body of work that concerns providing feedback in the
form of natural language critiques. In settings where oracle critiques or signals for critique quality
do not exist, past works have explored using the model itself to generate critiques that are then either


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


referenced to improve generation quality or directly leveraged as a preference signal (Bai et al.,
2022b; Shinn et al., 2024; Ganguli et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024b; Ramji et al.,
2024; Kim et al., 2024). While our work also leverages self-generated critiques at inference, our
work differs in that we aim to train better reward models when human preference data is available as
opposed to bootstrapping preferences from the model itself. Lee et al. (2024) extend self-generated
critiques for preference modeling by leveraging additional inference compute via self-consistency
to improve preference modeling performance. While they find that self-consistency does not help
for the tasks they examine, we demonstrate that self-consistency does help for reward modeling on
reasoning tasks (Section 3.3).
Previous works have also explored the setting where oracle critiques are available for training. Saun-
ders et al. (2022); Akyurek et al. (2023) teach an LLM to critique by performing SFT on oracle cri-
tiques and McAleese et al. (2024) teach an LLM to critique by performing RLHF on human-labeled
critique preferences. Other works leverage access to oracle feedback (e.g., human, error traces, etc.)
to generate refined answers conditioned on the critiques (Gao et al., 2023; Scheurer et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024; Gou et al., 2024). Our work differs from the above as our goal is to leverage
critiques to train better reward models. Most similar to our work is that of Ye et al. (2024) which
explores improving reward model performance by training reward models on human preferences
conditioned on critiques generated by other models. While their work similarly demonstrates the
advantages of reward scores conditioned on critiques, our work differs in that we investigate train-
ing the reward model to generate its own critiques. As such, CLoud reward models can perform
inference without requiring access to a larger model.



LLM-as-a-Judge. In the LLM-as-a-Judge framework, an LLM scores responses based on a user
provided grading rubric (Gilardi et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2024a). While similar to methods above such as Constitutional AI, LLM-as-a-Judge differs
in that the objective is to evaluate responses, not revise responses. Similar to CLoud reward models,
LLM-as-a-Judge produces chain-of-thought reasoning about how the grading rubric applies to the
response before producing a score. However, CLoud differs from LLM-as-a-Judge as our models
maintain a scalar reward head and as such can be trained according to classic reward modeling ob-
jectives such as the BT model. Our work takes a first step towards unifying the classic reward model
and LLM-as-a-Judge methods for preference modeling. Future work should investigate how the hu-
man crafted grading rubrics used in LLM-as-a-Judge can be integrated with the critique process of
CLoud reward models.



5   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we propose Critique-out-Loud (CLoud) reward models which preserve the language
modeling capabilities of the underlying LLM while additionally training a scalar reward head. To
perform inference with CLoud reward models, we first sample a critique of the response from the
reward model before predicting a scalar reward. Through generating critiques, CLoud reward mod-
els can explicitly reason about the quality of a response while classic reward models must reason
implicitly. We demonstrate on the RewardBench evaluation suite that, as compared to classic reward
models, CLoud reward models can improve average pairwise preference modeling accuracy by up
to 4.64 and 5.84 percentage points for 8B and 70B base models respectively. Similarly, we demon-
strate that performing Best-of-N decoding with CLoud reward models is a Pareto improvement over
classic reward models for ArenaHard win-rate. We further investigate how CLoud reward models
can leverage additional inference compute via multi-sample decoding strategies. Specifically, we
evaluate self-consistency decoding for CLoud reward models where we marginalize over sampled
critiques to provide a better estimate of the reward. We find that CLoud reward models only benefit
from self-consistency on reasoning problems and demonstrate that self-consistency is predominantly
useful when assigning rewards to responses with short reasoning horizons. CLoud reward models
establish a new paradigm for reward models by unifying language generation with preference mod-
eling and open new avenues for improving reward models through variable inference compute.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Afra Feyza Akyurek, Ekin Akyurek, Ashwin Kalyan, Peter Clark, Derry Tanti Wijaya, and Niket
  Tandon. RL4F: Generating natural language feedback with reinforcement learning for repairing
  model outputs. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 7716–7733, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.427. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.427.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022a.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952. ISSN 00063444, 14643510. URL
  http://www.jstor.org/stable/2334029.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models
  to self-debug. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=KuPixIqPiq.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.01377, 2023.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Bo Pang, Haoxiang Wang, Han Zhao, Yingbo Zhou, Nan Jiang, Doyen
  Sahoo, Caiming Xiong, and Tong Zhang. Rlhf workflow: From reward modeling to online rlhf.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07863, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Yann Dubois, Chen Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for
  methods that learn from human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024.
Deep Ganguli, Amanda Askell, Nicholas Schiefer, Thomas I Liao, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Anna Chen,
  Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Catherine Olsson, Danny Hernandez, et al. The capacity for
  moral self-correction in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07459, 2023.
Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan,
  Vincent Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, and Kelvin Guu. RARR: Researching
  and revising what language models say, using language models. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 16477–16508, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.910. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.910.
Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. Chatgpt outperforms crowd workers for text-
  annotation tasks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(30):e2305016120, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, yelong shen, Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen.
  CRITIC: Large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=Sx038qxjek.
Fan Huang, Haewoon Kwak, and Jisun An. Is chatgpt better than human annotators? potential and
  limitations of chatgpt in explaining implicit hate speech. In Companion proceedings of the ACM
  web conference 2023, pp. 294–297, 2023.
Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models
  with pairwise ranking and generative fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02561, 2023.
Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Seungone Kim, Jamin Shin, Yejin Cho, Joel Jang, Shayne Longpre, Hwaran Lee, Sangdoo Yun,
  Seongjin Shin, Sungdong Kim, James Thorne, et al. Prometheus: Inducing fine-grained evalua-
  tion capability in language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2023.
Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
  Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, et al. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward
  models for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13787, 2024.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Thomas Mesnard, Johan Ferret, Kellie Ren Lu,
  Colton Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, Abhinav Rastogi, and Sushant Prakash. RLAIF vs.
  RLHF: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with AI feedback. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=uydQ2W41KO.
Junlong Li, Shichao Sun, Weizhe Yuan, Run-Ze Fan, hai zhao, and Pengfei Liu. Generative judge
  for evaluating alignment. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gtkFw6sZGS.
Tianle Li, Wei-Lin Chiang, Evan Frick, Lisa Dunlap, Tianhao Wu, Banghua Zhu, Joseph E. Gon-
  zalez, and Ion Stoica. From crowdsourced data to high-quality benchmarks: Arena-hard and
  benchbuilder pipeline, 2024b.
Tianqi Liu, Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, Peter J Liu, and
  Jialu Liu. Statistical rejection sampling improves preference optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.06657, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In In-
   ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.
   net/forum?id=Skq89Scxx.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   Bkg6RiCqY7.
R Duncan Luce. Individual choice behavior, volume 4. Wiley New York, 1959.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Nat McAleese, Rai Michael Pokorny, Juan Felipe Ceron Uribe, Evgenia Nitishinskaya, Maja Tre-
  bacz, and Jan Leike. Llm critics help catch llm bugs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00215, 2024.
MosaicML. composer. https://github.com/mosaicml/composer/, 2021.
Rémi Munos, Michal Valko, Daniele Calandriello, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland,
   Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Yunhao Tang, Matthieu Geist, Thomas Mesnard, Andrea Michi, et al. Nash
   learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00886, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Khanh Nguyen, Hal Daumé III, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. Reinforcement learning for bandit neu-
  ral machine translation with simulated human feedback. In Martha Palmer, Rebecca Hwa, and
  Sebastian Riedel (eds.), Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 1464–1474, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1153. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/D17-1153.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Robin L Plackett. The analysis of permutations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C:
  Applied Statistics, 24(2):193–202, 1975.
Keshav Ramji, Young-Suk Lee, Ramón Fernandez Astudillo, Md Arafat Sultan, Tahira Naseem,
  Asim Munawar, Radu Florian, and Salim Roukos. Self-refinement of language models from
  external proxy metrics feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00827, 2024.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan
 Leike. Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802,
 2022.
Jérémy Scheurer, Jon Ander Campos, Tomasz Korbak, Jun Shern Chan, Angelica Chen, Kyunghyun
    Cho, and Ethan Perez. Training language models with language feedback at scale. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2303.16755, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Gokul Swamy, Christoph Dann, Rahul Kidambi, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Alekh Agarwal. A
  minimaximalist approach to reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.04056, 2024.
Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. Interpretable preferences
  via multi-objective reward modeling and mixture-of-experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12845,
  2024a.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
Zhilin Wang, Yi Dong, Jiaqi Zeng, Virginia Adams, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Daniel Egert,
  Olivier Delalleau, Jane Polak Scowcroft, Neel Kant, Aidan Swope, et al. Helpsteer: Multi-
  attribute helpfulness dataset for steerlm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09528, 2023b.
Zhilin Wang, Yi Dong, Olivier Delalleau, Jiaqi Zeng, Gerald Shen, Daniel Egert, Jimmy J Zhang,
  Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, and Oleksii Kuchaiev. Helpsteer2: Open-source dataset for training
  top-performing reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08673, 2024b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Rui Yang, Ruomeng Ding, Yong Lin, Huan Zhang, and Tong Zhang. Regularizing hidden states
  enables learning generalizable reward model for llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10216, 2024.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zihuiwen Ye, Fraser Greenlee-Scott, Max Bartolo, Phil Blunsom, Jon Ander Campos, and Matthias
  Gallé. Improving reward models with synthetic critiques. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20850, 2024.
Lifan Yuan, Ganqu Cui, Hanbin Wang, Ning Ding, Xingyao Wang, Jia Deng, Boji Shan, Huimin
  Chen, Ruobing Xie, Yankai Lin, et al. Advancing llm reasoning generalists with preference trees.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02078, 2024a.
Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Xian Li, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu,
 and Jason E Weston. Self-rewarding language models. In Forty-first International Conference on
 Machine Learning, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0NphYCmgua.
Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu. Slic-hf:
  Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10425, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=uccHPGDlao.
Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, and Jiantao Jiao. Principled reinforcement learning with human feed-
  back from pairwise or k-wise comparisons. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 43037–43067. PMLR, 2023.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Oracle Critique Generation Prompt
    System Prompt:

    Please act as an expert in providing feedback. You will be given a user’s prompt and an
    assistant’s response to the prompt. Your job is to think step by step and provide a thoughtful
    and detailed analysis of how well the response answers the user’s query.

    When providing feedback, consider if the assistant’s answer is helpful, relevant, and con-
    cise. Helpful means the answer correctly responds to the prompt or follows the instructions.
    Relevant means all parts of the response closely connect or are appropriate to what is being
    asked. Concise means the response is clear and not verbose or excessive. Finally, iden-
    tify any missing important information in the assistants’ answers that would be beneficial to
    include when responding to the user prompt.

    It is not necessary to be polite when providing feedback. Think deeply to identify all the
    good and bad parts of the answer.

    Do not numerically score the response when evaluating it. Think deeply and provide lin-
    guistic feedback and analysis only.


    User Prompt

    Here is the user’s prompt and the assistant’s response.

    <|User Prompt |>{user’s prompt}<|End of User Prompt|>

    <|The Start of the Assistant’s Answer|>{answer}<|The End of the Assistant’s Answer|>


          Figure 9: Prompt used to construct oracle critiques during dataset construction.


A    G ENERATING O RACLE C RITIQUES
To approximate human critiques when constructing our dataset we generate oracle critiques using
Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024). The exact prompt we use to generate oracle critiques
is displayed in Figure 9.

B    T RAINING H YPERPARAMETER S WEEP
For fair comparison, we sweep over the parameters of both the classic and CLoud reward models.
For 8B models, we first evaluate learning rates of 1e-6, 5e-6, and 1e-5. Then, using the
best learning rate, evaluate training for 1, 2, and 3 epochs. For CLoud reward models we also
evaluate the SFT loss weight λ at 43 , 1, and 54 . For the 8B base model, we find the best performing
parameters for classic reward models are {lr=5e-6, epochs=2} and that the best performing
parameters for CLoud reward models are {lr=1e-6, epochs=1,λ = 54 }. We perform a similar
sweep for 70B models, evaluating learning rates of 1e-6, and 5e-6. All 70B models are trained
for only 1 epoch. For CLoud reward models we again evaluate λ at 43 , 1, and 54 . We find the
best performing parameters for classic reward models are {lr=5e-6} and the best performing
parameters for CLoud reward models are {lr=1e-6, λ = 34 }.

C    S ELF -C ONSISTENCY F OR B O N
In this section we explore the effect of self-consistency decoding for CLoud reward models on BoN
win rate for ArenaHard. For each number of responses that we are performing BoN over, we sample
sixteen critiques at a temperature of 0.5 that we average the reward over. We plot the BoN win rate


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Effect of Self-Consistency on ArenaHard
                             8B Reward Model BoN                                    70B Reward Model BoN
                                                                               35
                        30
                                                                               30
         Win Rate (%)


                                                                Win Rate (%)
                        25
                                                                               25
                                        Greedy                                                  Greedy
                        20              Self-Consistency                       20               Self-Consistency
                         2   5       9       13       16                        2   5        9       13       16
                                 # Responses                                             # Responses

Figure 10: Comparing BoN win rates on ArenaHard of CLoud reward models using greedy
and self-consistency decoding. The shaded area represents ±1 standard error from the mean. To
perform self-consistency for BoN, we sample sixteen critiques of each response and average the
reward across critiques. At both model sizes, we find no difference in BoN win rates between
greedy and self-consistency decoding.


for greedy and self-consistency decoding in Figure 10. For both model sizes, we find that the BoN
win rate is the same for greedy reward scoring and for self-consistency reward scoring, meaning that
there there is no observed advantage in the BoN policy for performing self-consistency to predict
the reward on ArenaHard.

D    E XAMPLE R EWARD P REDICTIONS O N R EWARD B ENCH
In this section we present examples of the reward prediction process for CLoud reward models
on RewardBench. We randomly sample an example from the chat and reasoning categories, and
evaluate both the 8B and 70B CLoud reward models on these examples. For each example, we
present the user’s query, the preferred and non-preferred responses, the corresponding critiques,
and the predicted rewards. We present the 8B CLoud critiques on the preferred and non-preferred
chat responses in Figures 11 and 12 respectively, and the 8B CLoud critiques on the preferred and
non-preffered reasoning responses in Figures 13 and 14 respectively. We present the 70B CLoud
critiques on the preferred and non-preferred chat responses in Figures 11 and 12 respectively, and the
70B CLoud critiques on the preferred and non-preffered reasoning responses in Figures 13 and 14
respectively.


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   User query

   I’ve recently started playing the turn-based strategy game Into the Breach. I have read online that
   the game is considered to have ’perfect information’. What is meant by ’perfect information’ in this
   context?

   Preferred Response

   In the context of Into the Breach and other strategy games, ”perfect information” refers to a situation
   where all players have complete knowledge of the game state, including information about the enemy’s
   units, abilities, and intentions. In other words, there is no hidden information that could affect the
   player’s decision-making.
   In Into the Breach, this means that you, as the player, have access to all the information you need to
   make informed decisions about how to deploy your units, which enemies to target, and how to plan
   your attacks. This includes knowledge of the enemy’s unit types, their strengths and weaknesses, their
   movement patterns, and their attack ranges.
   This is in contrast to games with ”imperfect information,” where players may not have access to all the
   information they need to make optimal decisions. For example, in a game with fog of war, players may
   not be able to see enemy units that are hiding behind walls or in other areas of the map. In games with
   imperfect information, players must use their intuition, deduction, and experience to make informed
   decisions despite the lack of complete information.
   The designers of Into the Breach have chosen to design the game with perfect information to create
   a focus on strategic planning and decision-making, rather than on reacting to unexpected events or
   hidden information. This allows players to concentrate on optimizing their moves and planning for the
   long-term, rather than worrying about sudden surprises or unknown threats.


   Critique of Preferred Response

   The assistant’s response provides a clear and concise explanation of what ”perfect information” means
   in the context of Into the Breach. The answer accurately defines perfect information as a situation
   where all players have complete knowledge of the game state, including information about the enemy’s
   units, abilities, and intentions.
   The response effectively uses a contrast with imperfect information to illustrate the concept, highlight-
   ing the differences between games with and without perfect information. The example of fog of war
   is a good choice, as it is a common concept in strategy games that is easily relatable to the concept of
   perfect information.
   The explanation of how perfect information affects the gameplay in Into the Breach is also clear and
   relevant. The assistant explains that the game’s design choice of perfect information allows players to
   focus on strategic planning and decision-making, rather than reacting to unexpected events or hidden
   information.
   However, the response could benefit from a more detailed explanation of how perfect information is
   achieved in Into the Breach. For example, the assistant could explain how the game’s interface and
   mechanics provide players with all the necessary information to make informed decisions. This could
   include details about the game’s user interface, such as the use of overhead maps, unit health bars, and
   other visual indicators that provide players with a clear understanding of the game state.
   Additionally, the response could benefit from a more nuanced discussion of the implications of perfect
   information on the gameplay experience. While the assistant mentions that perfect information allows
   players to focus on strategic planning and decision-making, it could also be argued that this can lead
   to a more predictable and less engaging gameplay experience. A more detailed discussion of these
   implications could provide a more comprehensive understanding of the concept of perfect information
   in Into the Breach.
   Overall, the assistant’s response provides a solid foundation for understanding the concept of perfect
   information in Into the Breach, but could benefit from additional details and nuance to provide a more
   complete explanation.


                                 Preferred Response Reward: 0.0170

Figure 11: Reward prediction process for an 8B CLoud reward model on the preferred response of
an example from the chat category of RewardBench.



                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   User query

   I’ve recently started playing the turn-based strategy game Into the Breach. I have read online that
   the game is considered to have ’perfect information’. What is meant by ’perfect information’ in this
   context?

   Non-Preferred Response

   Perfect information refers to a condition in which all players in a game have access to the same in-
   formation at the same time. In the case of Into the Breach, this means that both the player and the
   AI opponent have a complete understanding of the board state at all times, including the location and
   strength of all units, the status of buildings and other structures, and the current turn order.
   Perfect information is a desirable trait in games because it ensures that all players have an equal oppor-
   tunity to make informed decisions and to react to the actions of their opponents. It also eliminates the
   possibility of one player having an unfair advantage due to hidden information or lack of knowledge.
   Into the Breach is a unique game in that it blends the turn-based strategy of chess with the mecha-fueled
   destruction of a disaster-management simulation. The game’s ’perfect information’ design ensures that
   each player has access to the same information at all times, which makes for a fair and challenging
   gameplay experience.


   Critique of Non-Preferred Response

   The assistant’s response provides a clear and concise explanation of what perfect information means
   in the context of Into the Breach. The answer accurately defines perfect information as a condition
   where all players have access to the same information at the same time, which is a crucial aspect of
   the game’s design.
   The response is relevant to the user’s query, as it directly addresses the question and provides additional
   context about the benefits of perfect information in games. The explanation of how Into the Breach
   implements perfect information is also relevant, as it helps to clarify the game’s mechanics and design.
   However, the second paragraph, while providing some additional context about the benefits of perfect
   information, feels somewhat extraneous to the user’s question. The user specifically asked about the
   meaning of perfect information in the context of Into the Breach, and the second paragraph could be
   seen as a tangential explanation. A more concise response might have focused solely on the definition
   and implementation of perfect information in the game.
   The third paragraph, while providing some interesting background information about the game, feels
   like an unnecessary addition. The user did not ask about the game’s design or its unique features, and
   this paragraph could be seen as an attempt to provide additional context rather than a direct answer
   to the question. A more focused response would have stuck to the definition and implementation of
   perfect information.
   One important piece of information that is missing from the response is an explanation of how the
   game’s perfect information is achieved. For example, the response could have mentioned that the
   game’s turn-based nature and the fact that all units and structures are visible on the board at all times
   contribute to the perfect information design. This would have provided a more complete understanding
   of how the game’s mechanics support the concept of perfect information.


                              Non-Preferred Response Reward: -0.0215

Figure 12: Reward prediction process for an 8B CLoud reward model on the non-preferred response
of an example from the chat category of RewardBench.


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   User query

   What is the smallest number which is one less than twice its reciprocal?


   Preferred Response

   The question is asking us to find the smallest value of x such that x = 2 · x1 − 1. We multiply
   through by x to clear the fraction, then rearrange terms: x2 + x − 2 = 0. This can be factored as
   (x + 2)(x − 1) = 0. We could also use the quadratic formula to find x:
                                                  p
                                            −1 ± 12 − 4(1)(−2)
                                       x=                          .
                                                        2
   Either way, we find that x = 1 or x = −2. Since we want the smallest value of x, our answer is −2 .


   Critique of Preferred Response

   The assistant’s response is generally helpful in answering the user’s query. It correctly identifies the
   problem as finding the smallest number that is one less than twice its reciprocal and provides a clear
   step-by-step solution. The response is also concise, directly addressing the problem without unneces-
   sary information.
   The response is relevant, as it uses algebraic manipulation to solve the equation and provides a clear
   explanation of the steps involved. The use of the quadratic formula is also a good approach, as it
   provides an alternative method for solving the equation.
   However, there are a few areas where the response could be improved. The response assumes that the
   user is familiar with algebraic manipulation and the quadratic formula, which may not be the case for
   all users. A brief explanation of the quadratic formula and its application would be beneficial for users
   who may not be familiar with it.
   Additionally, the response does not explicitly state that the solution is a negative number, which may
   be important for users who are not familiar with the concept of negative numbers. A brief explanation
   of why the solution is negative would be helpful in this case.
   Furthermore, the response does not provide any context or explanation of the problem beyond the alge-
   braic solution. Providing some context or explanation of why this problem is important or interesting
   would make the response more engaging and helpful for users.
   In terms of clarity, the response is generally clear, but some of the sentences could be rephrased for
   better clarity. For example, the sentence ”We could also use the quadratic formula to find x” could be
   rephrased as ”Alternatively, we can use the quadratic formula to find x”.
   Overall, the response is helpful and relevant, but could benefit from additional explanations and context
   to make it more accessible and engaging for a wider range of users.


                                 Preferred Response Reward: 0.0027

Figure 13: Reward prediction process for an 8B CLoud reward model on the preferred response of
an example from the reasoning category of RewardBench.


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   User query

   What is the smallest number which is one less than twice its reciprocal?


   Non-Preferred Response

   I want to find a number x such that x = 2(1/x) − 1. To make the equation easier to work with, I can
   multiply both sides by x and get x2 = 2 − x. This is a quadratic equation, so I can use the quadratic
   formula to find the possible values of x. The quadratic formula says that x = (−b + / − sqrt(b2 −
   4ac))/2a, where a, b, and c are the coefficients of the quadratic equation ax2 +bx+c = 0. In this case,
   a = 1, b = -1, and c = -2, so I can plug these values into the formula and get x = (1+/−sqrt(1+8))/2.
   Simplifying, I get x = (1 + / − 3)/2, which means x = 2 or x = -1. These are the only two possible
   numbers that satisfy the equation, but I want the smallest one, so I choose x = -1 as my answer.


   Critique of Non-Preferred Response

   The assistant’s response is generally helpful in that it provides a step-by-step solution to the problem.
   However, there are a few areas where the response could be improved.
   Firstly, the response assumes that the user is familiar with the quadratic formula, which may not be
   the case. A brief explanation of the quadratic formula and its application would be beneficial for users
   who are not familiar with it.
   Additionally, the response does not explicitly state that the equation x = 2(1/x) - 1 is a quadratic
   equation, which is an important step in the solution. This could be clarified by stating that the equation
   can be rearranged to form a quadratic equation.
   The response also does not provide any explanation for why the quadratic formula is used or why it is
   the most suitable method for solving this type of problem. A brief explanation of the reasoning behind
   the choice of method would be helpful.
   Furthermore, the response does not check the validity of the solutions obtained. In this case, the
   solutions x = 2 and x = -1 are both valid, but it would be good to explicitly state that x = 2 does not
   satisfy the original equation, and therefore x = -1 is the only valid solution.
   The response is concise and to the point, but could benefit from a few more explanatory sentences to
   clarify the reasoning and methodology. The use of the quadratic formula is a good approach, but the
   response could be improved by providing more context and explanation.
   In terms of relevance, the response is generally relevant to the prompt, but could benefit from a clearer
   connection to the original question. The response jumps straight into the solution without rephrasing
   the question or providing context.
   One important piece of information that is missing from the response is a check of the solution. The
   response should include a step to verify that x = -1 satisfies the original equation, to ensure that it is
   indeed the correct solution.
   Overall, the response is a good start, but could benefit from more explanation, context, and verification
   of the solution.

                              Non-Preferred Response Reward: -0.0149

Figure 14: Reward prediction process for an 8B CLoud reward model on the non-preferred response
of an example from the reasoning category of RewardBench.


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   User query

   I’ve recently started playing the turn-based strategy game Into the Breach. I have read online that
   the game is considered to have ’perfect information’. What is meant by ’perfect information’ in this
   context?

   Preferred Response

   In the context of Into the Breach and other strategy games, ”perfect information” refers to a situation
   where all players have complete knowledge of the game state, including information about the enemy’s
   units, abilities, and intentions. In other words, there is no hidden information that could affect the
   player’s decision-making.
   In Into the Breach, this means that you, as the player, have access to all the information you need to
   make informed decisions about how to deploy your units, which enemies to target, and how to plan
   your attacks. This includes knowledge of the enemy’s unit types, their strengths and weaknesses, their
   movement patterns, and their attack ranges.
   This is in contrast to games with ”imperfect information,” where players may not have access to all the
   information they need to make optimal decisions. For example, in a game with fog of war, players may
   not be able to see enemy units that are hiding behind walls or in other areas of the map. In games with
   imperfect information, players must use their intuition, deduction, and experience to make informed
   decisions despite the lack of complete information.
   The designers of Into the Breach have chosen to design the game with perfect information to create
   a focus on strategic planning and decision-making, rather than on reacting to unexpected events or
   hidden information. This allows players to concentrate on optimizing their moves and planning for the
   long-term, rather than worrying about sudden surprises or unknown threats.


   Critique of Preferred Response

   The assistant’s response provides a clear and concise explanation of what ”perfect information” means
   in the context of Into the Breach and other strategy games. The response effectively contrasts perfect
   information with imperfect information, providing examples to illustrate the difference.
   The response is helpful in that it directly addresses the user’s question and provides relevant informa-
   tion about the game’s design and the implications of perfect information on gameplay. The explanation
   of how perfect information allows players to focus on strategic planning and decision-making is par-
   ticularly useful in understanding the game’s design choices.
   However, the response could benefit from a more detailed explanation of how perfect information af-
   fects the gameplay experience. For example, the response could elaborate on how the lack of hidden
   information changes the way players approach the game, or how it affects the balance of power be-
   tween the player and the enemy. Additionally, the response could provide more specific examples
   of how perfect information is implemented in Into the Breach, such as the game’s use of turn-based
   combat or the way it presents information to the player.
   The response is well-structured and easy to follow, but some of the sentences could be tightened up for
   clarity. For example, the sentence ”This is in contrast to games with ’imperfect information,’ where
   players may not have access to all the information they need to make optimal decisions” could be
   rephrased to ”In contrast, games with imperfect information often require players to make decisions
   without complete information, such as in games with fog of war.”
   One potential issue with the response is that it assumes the user is familiar with the concept of ”fog
   of war” and other game design terms. While the response does a good job of explaining perfect
   information, it may be helpful to provide a brief explanation of these terms for users who are not
   familiar with them.
   Overall, the response is well-written and provides a clear explanation of perfect information in the
   context of Into the Breach. With some additional details and clarifications, it could be even more
   effective in helping users understand the concept and its implications for gameplay.


                                 Preferred Response Reward: 0.0352

Figure 15: Reward prediction process for a 70B CLoud reward model on the preferred response of
an example from the chat category of RewardBench.


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   User query

   I’ve recently started playing the turn-based strategy game Into the Breach. I have read online that
   the game is considered to have ’perfect information’. What is meant by ’perfect information’ in this
   context?

   Non-Preferred Response

   Perfect information refers to a condition in which all players in a game have access to the same in-
   formation at the same time. In the case of Into the Breach, this means that both the player and the
   AI opponent have a complete understanding of the board state at all times, including the location and
   strength of all units, the status of buildings and other structures, and the current turn order.
   Perfect information is a desirable trait in games because it ensures that all players have an equal oppor-
   tunity to make informed decisions and to react to the actions of their opponents. It also eliminates the
   possibility of one player having an unfair advantage due to hidden information or lack of knowledge.
   Into the Breach is a unique game in that it blends the turn-based strategy of chess with the mecha-fueled
   destruction of a disaster-management simulation. The game’s ’perfect information’ design ensures that
   each player has access to the same information at all times, which makes for a fair and challenging
   gameplay experience.


   Critique of Non-Preferred Response

   The assistant’s response provides a clear and concise explanation of what ’perfect information’ means
   in the context of the game Into the Breach. The response accurately defines perfect information as a
   condition where all players have access to the same information at the same time, which is a crucial
   aspect of the game’s design.
   The response also provides additional context by explaining the benefits of perfect information in
   games, such as ensuring fair play and eliminating unfair advantages. This helps to give the user a
   deeper understanding of why perfect information is an important aspect of the game.
   However, the response could be improved by providing more specific examples of how perfect infor-
   mation is implemented in Into the Breach. For instance, the response mentions that the player and AI
   opponent have a complete understanding of the board state, but it would be helpful to elaborate on
   what this means in practice. For example, the response could explain that the player can see the exact
   location and health of all enemy units, as well as the status of buildings and other structures.
   Additionally, the final sentence of the response feels somewhat disconnected from the rest of the ex-
   planation. While it is true that Into the Breach is a unique game that blends turn-based strategy with
   disaster-management simulation, this sentence does not add much to the explanation of perfect infor-
   mation. It would be more effective to use this sentence to provide a more detailed analysis of how
   perfect information contributes to the game’s overall design and gameplay experience.
   Furthermore, the response could benefit from a more nuanced discussion of the implications of perfect
   information in Into the Breach. For example, the response could explore how perfect information
   affects the player’s decision-making process, or how it influences the game’s overall difficulty level.
   This would provide a more comprehensive understanding of the role of perfect information in the
   game.
   Overall, the response provides a solid foundation for understanding perfect information in Into the
   Breach, but could be improved with more specific examples and a more detailed analysis of the game’s
   design and gameplay experience.


                              Non-Preferred Response Reward: -0.0153

Figure 16: Reward prediction process for a 70B CLoud reward model on the non-preferred response
of an example from the chat category of RewardBench.


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   User query

   What is the smallest number which is one less than twice its reciprocal?


   Preferred Response

   The question is asking us to find the smallest value of x such that x = 2 · x1 − 1. We multiply
   through by x to clear the fraction, then rearrange terms: x2 + x − 2 = 0. This can be factored as
   (x + 2)(x − 1) = 0. We could also use the quadratic formula to find x:
                                                  p
                                            −1 ± 12 − 4(1)(−2)
                                       x=                          .
                                                        2
   Either way, we find that x = 1 or x = −2. Since we want the smallest value of x, our answer is −2 .


   Critique of Preferred Response

   The assistant’s response is generally helpful in that it provides a step-by-step solution to the problem.
   However, there are a few areas where the response could be improved.
   Firstly, the initial equation x = 2 · x1 − 1 is not entirely accurate. The correct equation should be
   x = 2 · x1 − 1, but the assistant should have explicitly stated that this is the equation being solved,
   rather than simply presenting it as a given.
   The steps to solve the quadratic equation are clear and concise, and the use of both factoring and the
   quadratic formula is a good way to provide alternative solutions. However, the assistant could have
   provided more explanation for why the quadratic formula is being used, especially since the equation
   can be easily factored.
   The final answer is correct, but the assistant could have provided more context for why x = −2 is the
   smallest value. A brief explanation of why x = 1 is not the smallest value would have been helpful.
   One important piece of information that is missing from the response is a check to ensure that the
   solution is valid. The assistant should have plugged the value of x = −2 back into the original
   equation to verify that it satisfies the condition.
   Additionally, the response could benefit from a brief explanation of the concept of reciprocals and how
   it relates to the problem. This would provide context for the solution and help the user understand the
   underlying math behind the problem.
   Overall, the assistant’s response is clear and concise, but could benefit from additional explanations
   and context to make the solution more comprehensive and accessible to the user.


                                 Preferred Response Reward: 0.0193

Figure 17: Reward prediction process for a 70B CLoud reward model on the preferred response of
an example from the reasoning category of RewardBench.


                                                      23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   User query

   What is the smallest number which is one less than twice its reciprocal?


   Non-Preferred Response

   I want to find a number x such that x = 2(1/x) − 1. To make the equation easier to work with, I can
   multiply both sides by x and get x2 = 2 − x. This is a quadratic equation, so I can use the quadratic
   formula to find the possible values of x. The quadratic formula says that x = (−b + / − sqrt(b2 −
   4ac))/2a, where a, b, and c are the coefficients of the quadratic equation ax2 +bx+c = 0. In this case,
   a = 1, b = -1, and c = -2, so I can plug these values into the formula and get x = (1+/−sqrt(1+8))/2.
   Simplifying, I get x = (1 + / − 3)/2, which means x = 2 or x = -1. These are the only two possible
   numbers that satisfy the equation, but I want the smallest one, so I choose x = -1 as my answer.


   Critique of Non-Preferred Response

   The assistant’s response is generally helpful in that it provides a step-by-step solution to the problem.
   However, there are a few areas where the response could be improved.
   Firstly, the initial equation x = 2(1/x) - 1 is not entirely accurate. The correct equation should be x =
   2(1/x) - 1, which simplifies to x = 2/x - 1, and then to x2 = 2 − x. However, the assistant correctly
   multiplies both sides by x to get x2 = 2 − x.
   The assistant then correctly identifies the equation as a quadratic equation and uses the quadratic
   formula to find the possible values of x. However, the explanation of the quadratic formula is somewhat
   verbose and could be condensed for clarity.
   The assistant correctly plugs the values of a, b, and c into the quadratic formula and simplifies the
   expression to get x = (1 +/- 3)/2. However, the explanation of the simplification process could be more
   detailed.
   The final answer, x = -1, is correct, but the assistant could provide more context or explanation for
   why this is the smallest possible value. For example, the assistant could note that x = 2 is not a valid
   solution because it would result in a negative value for x, and therefore x = -1 is the smallest possible
   value.
   One important piece of information that is missing from the assistant’s response is a check to ensure
   that the solution x = -1 actually satisfies the original equation. The assistant could plug x = -1 back
   into the original equation to verify that it is indeed a solution.
   Additionally, the response could benefit from a clearer and more concise conclusion that summarizes
   the main steps and the final answer. The use of the hashtag ”# Answer” at the end of the response is
   unnecessary and could be removed.
   Overall, the assistant’s response is generally helpful but could benefit from some refinements to im-
   prove clarity, concision, and completeness.


                              Non-Preferred Response Reward: 0.0046

Figure 18: Reward prediction process for a 70B CLoud reward model on the non-preferred response
of an example from the reasoning category of RewardBench.


                                                      24
