Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ReGen: G ENERATIVE ROBOT S IMULATION VIA
I NVERSE D ESIGN
 Phat Nguyen1 , Tsun-Hsuan Wang1 , Zhang-Wei Hong1 , Erfan Aasi1 , Andrew Silva2 ,
 Guy Rosman2 , Sertac Karaman1 , Daniela Rus1∗
 1                                            2
   Massachusetts Institute of Technology        Toyota Research Institute
 {peterng,tsunw,zwhong,eaasi,sertac,rus}@mit.edu
 {andrew.silva,guy.rosman}@tri.global



                                              A BSTRACT

         Simulation plays a key role in scaling robot learning and validating policies, but
         constructing simulations remains a labor-intensive process. This paper introduces
         ReGen, a generative simulation framework that automates simulation design via
         inverse design. Given a robot’s behavior—such as a motion trajectory or an ob-
         jective function—and its textual description, ReGen infers plausible scenarios
         and environments that could have caused the behavior. ReGen leverages large
         language models to synthesize scenarios by expanding a directed graph that en-
         codes cause-and-effect relationships, relevant entities, and their properties. This
         structured graph is then translated into a symbolic program, which configures
         and executes a robot simulation environment. Our framework supports (i) aug-
         menting simulations based on ego-agent behaviors, (ii) controllable, counterfac-
         tual scenario generation, (iii) reasoning about agent cognition and mental states,
         and (iv) reasoning with distinct sensing modalities, such as braking due to faulty
         GPS signals. We demonstrate ReGen in autonomous driving and robot manipu-
         lation tasks, generating more diverse, complex simulated environments compared
         to existing simulations with high success rates, and enabling controllable gener-
         ation for corner cases. This approach enhances the validation of robot policies
         and supports data or simulation augmentation, advancing scalable robot learn-
         ing for improved generalization and robustness. Please check our website here:
         https://regen-sim.github.io/.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Simulated environments play a vital role in validating robotic systems and provide platforms for
robots to acquire complex skills, including autonomous driving (car, 2020; Amini et al., 2022;
Gulino et al., 2024), manipulation (Zhu et al., 2020; James et al., 2020; Nasiriany et al., 2024a), and
locomotion (Rudin et al., 2022; Makoviychuk et al., 2021). Unlike real-world learning or testing,
simulations offer access to privileged states, enable unlimited exploration, and support large-scale
parallel computation—all without the need for heavy investment in robotic hardware. Classical
simulation methods often rely on manually crafted environments and predefined scenarios, which
require significant human expertise and effort in both setup and maintenance Brockman (2016);
Müller et al. (2018). These traditional approaches, while effective, are often limited in flexibility
and scalability compared to the newer techniques. A more recent paradigm, generative simulation,
leverages generative artificial intelligence (AI) to automate the creation of simulations, greatly re-
ducing the human effort and tedious process typically involved. Promising progress has been made
in asset generation (Wang et al., 2023a; Siddiqui et al., 2024), scene layout design (Höllein et al.,
2023; Yang et al., 2024), and task and environment creation (Wang et al., 2024d; 2023c).
Generative simulation offers the potential to create infinite environments for robots to learn and
be tested in. However, previous methods often encounter significant limitations in generating low-
level control—such as a trajectory—from high-level textual descriptions, constraining the diversity
   ∗
     This work is supported by Toyota Research Institute (TRI). It, however, reflects solely the opinions and
conclusions of its authors and not TRI or any other Toyota entity.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Ego-agent Behaviors                         Inverse Design                    Simulated Environments


   The vehicle stopped
abruptly at an intersection   Stop for a car running a red light    Yield to ambulance          Brake for a fallen box      Halt for a police chase


        The robot
     opened the door                 Check for delivery            Allow the pet to enter   Open the door for ventilation       See off guest


Figure 1: Given a robot behavior (such as a trajectory or an underlying objective function) and its
textual description, ReGen generates simulated environments that could have caused the behavior.

and complexity of the robot simulations. For instance, these approaches often require training a
new policy for each simulation based on a newly generated reward function, making this process
the primary computational bottleneck. We leverage the insight that behaviors are relatively limited
compared to the diverse environments in which they occur. For instance, the abrupt stopping of
a self-driving car can apply to various contexts, such as a red traffic light, a pedestrian stepping
into the road, or an approaching police car with its siren on (see Figure 1). To address this, we
draw inspiration from inverse design (Molesky et al., 2018), a concept widely used in computational
design that starts with desired properties or outcomes. For example, given a target flow pattern,
the geometry of a fluidic device is optimized accordingly. In generative simulation, we propose
generating or designing environments conditioned on the agent’s behavior. The benefits of this
framework can be investigated from different perspectives:
A validation perspective. Generative simulation via inverse design enables the conditional genera-
tion of simulated environments based on specific robot behaviors. This approach facilitates the unit
testing of robotic systems, where the unit is defined at the behavior level1 . By tailoring environments
to specific behaviors, we can systematically evaluate how well a robot performs under a controlled
set of diverse yet relevant contexts, rather than relying on random or uncontrolled scenarios.
An augmentation perspective. A natural extension from validation is to incorporate failed test
cases into the robot’s learning pipeline as a form of data augmentation. This approach strengthens
the robustness of the robot’s behavior across diverse and relevant environmental contexts. Addition-
ally, this inverse approach can be seen as a method for augmenting existing simulated environments.
Given a simulated environment and a robot policy exhibiting a relevant behavior, inverse design en-
ables the sensible addition or removal of entities based on the context. This is achieved by reasoning
backward from the robot’s behavior to identify what elements in the environment are relevant.
In this work, we propose an inverse design approach for generative simulation. Given a robot’s
behavior—such as a motion trajectory or an objective function—along with their textual descrip-
tion, our method generates relevant simulated environments. We represent the environment as a
directed graph, where nodes correspond to events, entities, or properties, while edges capture causal
relationships (e.g., a car stopping “due to” an ambulance) or dependencies (e.g., a siren on an ambu-
lance). This structured representation is then transformed into a symbolic program that configures
and executes a robot simulation environment. In summary, we contribute:

• An inverse design approach for generative simulation demonstrated in autonomous driving and
  manipulation with abilities to (i) augment simulations based on ego-agent behaviors, (ii) generate
  controllable, counterfactual scenarios, (iii) reason about agent cognition and mental states, and (iv)
  handle distinct sensing modalities, such as braking due to faulty GPS signals.
• A method for synthesizing simulatable scenarios using LLM-guided graph search to construct a
  directed graph that encodes causal relationships, entities, and properties, which is then converted
  into an executable symbolic program for robot simulation.
• Extensive experiments that showcase greater diversity of generated environments compared to ex-
  isting simulations, controllable generation of corner cases for safety-critical applications like driv-
  ing, and superior complexity of generated environments, which produces vision-language-action
  datasets that are more challenging to vision language models (VLMs) than existing datasets.
   1
     The level of granularity at which the behavior should be defined is beyond the scope of this paper and
remains an open research question for future exploration.


                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Graph Expansion
    Input: vbehavior ∈ Vevent Output: G ∈ G
    procedure POTENTIALLY CONNECT TO NODE(G,v, . . . )
        vcandidate = node proposal(v, . . . )
        G, edge added = edge construction(v, vcandidate , G)
        return G, vcandidate , edge added
    end procedure
    Initialize: G = {} ∈ G; G ← vbehavior
    while ∃ input degree(v ∈ G) < 1 do
        vevent ∼ {v | input degree(v ∈ G) < 1}
             ′
        G, vevent , = potentially connect to node(G, vevent , . . . )
        break whenever by the user.
    end while
    for {vevent | v ∈ G, v ∈ Vevent } do
        G, ventity , edge added = potentially connect to node(G, vevent , . . . )
        if edge added then
            for All possible property types do
                 G, vproperty , = potentially connect to node(G, ventity , . . . )
            end for
        end if
    end for

2     M ETHOD
We present ReGen, a framework that takes as inputs a behavior B = {τ, R}, where τ is a motion
trajectory—generated using motion primitives—and a reward function R, along with its textual
description and a graph-based representation of the simulator database Dasset , to generate plausible
simulations. For example, given “vehicle changed lanes,” our method simulates scenarios such as
yielding to an ambulance, overtaking a slow truck, and merging into an open lane. We assume
access to a simulation engine, such as CARLA (car, 2020) for autonomous driving or PyBullet
(Coumans & Bai, 2016–2021) for manipulation, along with a database Dasset . For further details on
implementation, see (Appendix A.1).
At a high level, the method begins by synthesizing plausible scenarios through graph search using
an LLM, where a directed graph is iteratively expanded by introducing new plausible contexts and
fine-grained details, such as entities and their properties (Section 2.1). Next, for a scenario generated
through the graph, we leverage an LLM to generate a symbolic program that formulates high-level
constraints, serving as a verifier to ground the scenario in simulation (Section 2.2).

2.1    I NVERSE D ESIGN VIA G RAPH E XPANSION

The inverse design process in Algorithm 1 begins by representing the input behavior description
as a leaf node. The graph G is then expanded backward through two atomic steps: node pro-
posal and edge construction, applied to different types of nodes and edges. Both steps employs the
gpt-4o-2024-08-06 model with parameters temp=0 and top-p=0. A key perspective is that graph
expansion systematically explores the LLM’s knowledge space, uncovering and organizing latent
information into a structured graph.
Node Proposal is the process of generating candidate nodes Vcandidate = {Vevent , Ventity , Vproperty }
that may connect to the existing graph via a source node vsource . We consider three types of nodes:
event, entity, and property nodes. First, event nodes vevent represent causal variables (e.g., an event
“yielding to an ambulance” is a cause of another event “ego-vehicle stopping”). We use an LLM
to propose candidate event nodes LLM (v ∈ Vevent |vsource , prior), treating the source node as the
effect. The prior is an optional natural language description that injects additional context and can
be sourced from various inputs, such as user preferences or another LLM. Next, entity nodes ventity
represent static objects (e.g, debris) or dynamic actors (e.g., an ambulance) and are proposed from
a fixed set of supported assets Dasset in the simulation engine v ∈ Ventity ⊆ Dasset . Lastly, property
nodes vproperty define attributes for each entity, including elements proposed by an LLM, such as


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


location (e.g. “in front of the ego”), or possible states retrieved from Dasset . For example, candidate
property nodes for a traffic light represent all its possible states in the simulator, such as “red,”
“green,” “yellow”, and “off”. These proposed nodes serve as candidates for the edge construction
step. See Appendix A.1.2 for examples and full prompts in Appendix A.5.1.
Edge Construction determines which candidate nodes should be connected to a source node
vsource by evaluating possible connections simultaneously, rather than pairwise (Jiralerspong et al.,
2024). Formally, it involves mapping LLM : (vsource , Vcandidate ) → {True, False}, where Vcandidate =
{v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } represent the sets of candidate nodes from the node proposal step. Edges are then
constructed for all {vi ∈ Vcandidate : LLM(vsource , vi ) = True}. This mapping leverages an LLM
as a general classifier to evaluate the plausibility of each candidate connection in the context of
the source node. Our graph expansion considers three types of edge constructions: event-to-event,
entity-to-event, and property-to-entity, with the order indicating the direction. For event-to-event
edges, the LLM validates direct causal relationships using common-sense reasoning—for example,
an emergency vehicle behind the ego-vehicle may cause the ego to pull over, while one ahead may
not. For entity-to-event edges, the LLM selects relevant entities, while for property-to-entity edges,
connections are determined by supported properties relevant to the entity’s role. The edge con-
struction process performs rejection sampling by discarding implausible connections and ensuring
only edges corresponding to an available entity or property in Dasset are added to the graph. See
Appendix A.1.3 for examples and Appendix A.5.2 for full prompts.
Graph Expansion is an iterative process that augments the graph through successive node propos-
als and edge construction. The process begins with the initialization of the graph G = (V, E), where
the initial sets of nodes V = {LB } contains the input behavior description LB ∈ Vevent . In the
node proposal stage, candidate event nodes are generated for all event nodes that lack an incoming
edge, i.e., nodes without a defined cause. Edges are then established by assessing the plausibility
of connections between nodes. This staged approach incorporates new context into the graph, pro-
moting scenario diversity, while enforcing logical correctness through common-sense reasoning. At
this stage, the graph contains only event nodes, forming a causal graph with a directed acyclic struc-
ture. Users can specify a stopping criterion, such as a maximum number of nodes or graph depth;
otherwise, the process continues indefinitely. Subsequent steps involve adding entity and property
nodes to incorporate fine-grained details into the graph through a similar graph expansion process.
The complete graph expansion process is outlined in Algorithm 1.

2.2   G ROUNDING TO S IMULATED E NVIRONMENT
Given a subgraph g ⊆ G that forms a unique sequence of event nodes connected by event-to-event
edges, the goal is to generate a simulation that specifies: (i) the initial state of the environment q0 ,
defined by the preconditions Pinit , (ii) the motions of all dynamic actors, governed by the transition
function δ : Q × Σ → Q of the abstract states Q, and (iii) the terminal conditions, characterized by
the post conditions Pterm that define the symbolic constraints for the final states, including success
or failure criteria, represented by the accepting states F ⊆ Q. Inspired by other work (Nguyen
et al., 2024), we convert g into a FSM configured with the same model and hyperparameters as in
the graph expansion step. The FSM, formally defined as a tuple FSM = (Q, Σ, δ, q0 , F ), serves as
a symbolic representation of the task plan and is used to (i) verify its feasibility prior to execution,
and (ii) trigger state changes based on simulation context, such as opening a car door when the
ego-vehicle is nearby.
The set of abstract states Q are high-level code abstractions, which bridges abstract reasoning with
low-level simulation states. These abstractions are implemented as executable code compatible with
the simulation engine. For example, an abstract state such as “yielding to ambulance” provides
an abstraction for checking whether the ambulance is nearby and whether the ego-vehicle is sta-
tionary: check car1 near car2(‘ambulance’, ‘ego’) && is stationary(‘ego’). For further
examples see Appendix A.2.

3     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we start in Section 3.2 with qualitative analysis that demonstrates examples and
capabilities of the inverse design approach; in Section 3.3, we compare diversity of the generated
simulation against existing benchmarks or simulations; in Section 3.4, we showcase ReGen can
be used for effective corner case generation; in Section 3.5, we demonstrate that the complexity


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Ego-vehicle Changes Lanes
      Drive forward          Drive forward                Change lane            Let ambulance pass                Drive forward     Slow vehicle ahead           Change lane            Overtake slow truck


                               Yielding for an emergency vehicle                                       T                               Overtaking a slow-moving truck                                          T
      Drive forward       Detect lane closure            Change lane               Drive forward                   Drive forward       Detect debris              Change lane              Drive forward


                                  Merging into an open lane                                            T                                  Avoiding debris on the road                                          T
    Ego-vehicle Slows Down                                                                                        Ego-vehicle Stops Abruptly
      Drive forward     Car ahead changes lane   Slows down to avoid collision     Drive forward                    Drive forward       Drive forward         Detect a door opening        Stops abruptly


                       Avoiding collision with a car cutting in front                                  T                             Halting for a sudden opening car door                                     T

Figure 2: ReGen for driving. Given a behavior such as “changing lanes,” our method can generate
diverse simulated environments in which the behavior could have occurred, such as changing lanes
to “yield for an emergency vehicle”, “overtaking a truck”, “merging into an open lane”, or “avoiding
debris.” The bottom row illustrates additional cases: “ego-vehicle slows down ← avoids collision”
and “ego-vehicle stops ← halts for an opening car door.”
      Turn on the faucet
  Collect water from the tap                                                                       T           Rinse the dish              Thaw frozen vegetable                Water the plant


      Close the window


 Block outside odor                          T    Protect plant from sun                           T           Trap candle’s scent                        T   Keep out unwanted gaze                           T

Figure 3: ReGen for manipulation. Given a robot manipulator behavior such as “turning on the
faucet,” our method generates diverse simulated environments with contextually appropriate scenar-
ios, including “collecting water,” “rinsing a dish,” and “watering a plant.” In cases where certain
physical effects—such as temperature changes in the “thawing frozen vegetables” scenario—are not
explicitly modeled, our method simplifies the process by retrieving and appropriately placing ob-
jects in the environment.
of our generated environments allows us to create vision-language-action datasets that pose greater
challenges to VLMs compared to existing datasets.


3.1       E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Driving. For autonomous driving, we utilize the CARLA simulator (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017). We
selected six key ego-motion behaviors: driving forward, changing lanes, stopping at an intersection,
stopping abruptly in the middle of the road, and stopping after making a right turn. Each behav-
ior is defined in natural language and mapped to a predefined route, encoded in an XML file that
defines the start location, target waypoints, and speed. The ego-vehicle follows this route gener-
ated by an A∗ search algorithm, with longitudinal and lateral PID controllers for speed and steering
control. To simulate other agents, we use motion primitives such as stationary(location) and
drivingforward(start, speed). These agents also use A∗ for path planning and PID controllers
for low-level control. Parameter values (e.g., start locations, speeds) are determined using Google’s
CP-SAT solver (Perron & Furnon, 2019) to ensure compliance with the FSM’s constraints.
Manipulation. For manipulation tasks, we use the PyBullet simulator (Coumans & Bai, 2016–2021)
and selected 10 example reward functions from RoboGen (Wang et al., 2024d) for general tasks
such as closing the window and opening the door. In PyBullet, behavior is limited to stationary
interactions as the environment consists of non-articulated meshes that do not support dynamic
motion. We use Google’s the CP-SAT solver to determine parameter values (e.g. object location),
and employ Soft Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) for policy training.

                                                                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 1. Mental State (e.g. Distracted Driver)                                                                               3. Counterfactual Generation
         t=0s                         t=5s                          t=10s                          t=15s             Brake lights on                     Brake lights off

            Green light                   Green light


                          The driver ahead remains distracted despite the green light.
                                                                                                                     What if the vehicle in front stops without brake lights?
 2. Reasoning in different sensing modalities: (e.g. GPS Jamming)
                                                                                                                      Different lane                      In same lane
         t=0s                        t=10s                            t=20s                     Simulated GNSS
                                                                                                                 Ego-vehicle                         Ego-vehicle


                The driver abruptly stops after realizing a wrong turn caused by GPS jamming.                        What if the emergency vehicle was in the same lane?



Figure 4: Emergent capabilities of ReGen. (1) Our method can simulate scenarios that capture the
mental states or decision-making process of actors—for example, a distracted driver failing to move
despite a green light. (2) Our method can model reasoning across different sensing modalities, such
as simulating a scenario with GPS jamming with noisy GNSS measurements in CARLA. (3) Our
method enables counterfactual scenario generation by perturbing the constructed graph with “what-
if” questions—for example, changing from “the front car stops with brake lights” to “the front car
with broken brake light stops and thus brake light being off.”


3.2    Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

Generative Simulation via Inverse Design. We demonstrate the inverse design approach of ReGen
by generating diverse simulations from a single behavior, showcasing qualitative results across driv-
ing and manipulation domains. As shown for driving in Figure 2, when provided with a behavior
such as “changing lanes,” our method can simulate scenarios such as “yielding for the ambulance,”
“overtaking a slow vehicle,” or “avoiding debris on the road.” Unlike prior methods, which often re-
quired extensive data collection or expert-curated policies to create such scenarios, we demonstrate
that our approach can generate these variations by simply reconfiguring the environmental context
with respect to the given robot behavior. For instance, as shown in Figure 7 in the Appendix shows
that ChatScene primarily generates collision avoidance scenarios, while DriveCoT and DriveLM
focus mainly on general driving scenarios. In contrast, ReGen supports diverse task scenarios, in-
cluding “picking up passengers,” “stopping for pedestrians,” and “yielding to emergency vehicles.”
This capability can potentially be applied to augment the simulation of the original robot learning
pipeline, further enhancing the robustness of the learned behaviors.
Similarly, in the manipulation domain as in Figure 3, given an input such as “turn on the faucet,”
our method can infer new action verbs and their corresponding purposes, such as “thawing frozen
vegetables,” “watering a plant,” or “washing dishes.” This capability extends beyond simulating
actions to also capturing the underlying intent or goal behind each action.
Simulating Mental States. Accurately capturing subtle mental states and decision-making pro-
cesses from real-world driving datasets is inherently challenging. ReGen provides a framework
for simulating nuanced mental states, such as a distracted driver at an intersection (see Figure 4
(1)). Previous work, like DriveCoT (Wang et al., 2024c), employs rule-based expert policies to
control vehicles and generate ground truth labels for reasoning processes. However, this approach
can introduce extraneous variables that obscure causal relationships. For example, in a DriveCoT
scenario labeled as yielding at an intersection, 16/17 annotations correctly attributed the stop to a
traffic sign, but missed the emergency vehicle’s influence as a contributing factor. ReGen mitigates
this by reusing scenes and applying targeted interventions to simulate distinct cognitive processes,
providing greater control in modeling mental states.
Reasoning with Different Sensing Modalities. ReGen extends its capabilities by reasoning over
multiple data modalities, including vision, language, and other distinct sensor inputs such as GNSS
(see Figure 4 (2)). By leveraging large language models (LLMs), ReGen can provide reasoning over
these different modalities to simulate complex scenarios that influence the decision-making of the
ego-driver. For instance, invoking functions such as add gnss noise() allow for the simulation of
GPS jamming, connecting sensor noise to abstract concepts such as signal interference.


                                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Method                           Number of Scenarios    Embedding Diversity ↑   SelfBleu Diversity ↑
 NHTSA Crash Report                       24                   0.1381                   0.4350
 Zero-shot (gpt-3.5-turbo-0125)          30                 0.1509 ± 0.01           0.0945 ± 0.03
 Zero-shot (gpt-4o-2024-08-06)            30                0.1680 ± 0.02           0.6082 ± 0.13
 Zero-shot (top-p=1, temp=1)              30                0.1767 ± 0.04          0.7814 ± 0.06
 Zero-shot (top-p=0, temp=0)              30                0.1493 ± 0.01           0.4143 ± 0.02
 ChatScene                                40                   0.1214                   0.2945
 DriveLM                                 696                0.1135 ± 0.00           0.4731 ± 0.01
 ReGen (Ours)                             24                   0.2268                   0.7377

Table 1: Simulation diversity for driving. The baselines include NHTSA typology (National High-
way Traffic Safety Administration, 2007), a zero-shot LLM method, ChatScene (Zhang et al., 2024)
(few-shot), and DriveLM (Sima et al., 2024). Apart from expert driving or exclusively safety-critical
scenarios, our method can generate a broader range of environments, e.g., yielding to emergency ve-
hicles, navigating intersections with malfunctioning traffic light, thus achieving better diversity.
 Methods                    # Environments     Unique Reward Functions       Embedding Diversity ↑
 Behavior-100                     100                   100                     0.5513 ± 0.01
 RLBench                          106                   106                     0.5819 ± 0.01
 GenSim                           152                   152                     0.4350 ± 0.01
 RoboGen (manipulation)            46                    46                     0.5787 ± 0.01
 RoboGen (subset)                 10                     10                         0.5536
 ReGen (Ours)                     38                     10                         0.6560

Table 2: Simulation diversity for manipulation. We compare to Behavior-100 (Srivastava et al.,
2021), RLBench (James et al., 2019), GenSim (Wang et al., 2024b), and RoboGen (Wang et al.,
2024d). Our method augment simulation in an orthogonal axis that changes environmental context,
e.g., “opening the door to let the pet in” or “opening the door to pick up delivery”, as opposed to
purely skill-driven environments, e.g., “opening the door”, thus achieving better diversity.

Counterfactual Generation. Our method can generate counterfactuals, such as modifying brake
lights or adjusting the initial location of surrounding vehicles, to improve explainability in multi-
modal foundation models (Figure 4 (3)). For example, by altering brake lights, we can test whether
the model infers speed from visual motion cues or relies on brake lights as a shortcut, addressing the
limitation of multimodal foundation models identified in prior work (Sreeram et al., 2024).

3.3   S IMULATION D IVERSITY

In this section we conduct a series of experiments to evaluate the diversity of generated simulations
against extensive baselines in Table 1 and 2. To quantify the diversity in terms of task semantics and
scene configurations, we use text diversity metrics, following approaches from (Wang et al., 2024d;
Nguyen et al., 2024). Specifically, we assess diversity using metrics such as Self-BLEU (Zhu et al.,
2018; Papineni et al., 2002) and embedding similarity with Sentence-BERT (Reimers & Gurevych,
2019). For each method, we sample a set equal to the smallest sample size among the baselines and
compute their similarity score, repeating this process 10 times and reporting their average diversity
score as 1 − similarity.
Driving. Table 1 shows the scenario diversity results in the driving domain. We compare our method
against CARLA Leaderboard 2.0. scenarios, which cover traffic scenarios based on the NHTSA ty-
pology (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2007). ChatScene (Zhang et al., 2024)
employs few-shot prompting of large language models to generate diverse safety-critical scenarios,
while DriveLM (Sima et al., 2024) provides graph annotations from the NuScenes dataset (Caesar
et al., 2020). Additionally, we evaluate the diversity of zero-shot methods across varying top-p
and temperature settings, as well as with different LLM models, including gpt-4o-2024-08-06
and gpt-3.5-turbo-0125. Our method consistently outperforms all baselines in scenario diver-
sity, as measured by embedding similarity and Self-BLEU scores. Methods like ChatScene focus
exclusively on safety-critical scenarios, while DriveLM is limited to general driving scenarios. Al-
though increasing the top-p and temperature settings slightly improves diversity for the zero-shot
baseline, our method achieves superior diversity even with conservative settings (top-p = 0 and
temperature = 0), demonstrating that the improvements are not merely a result of tuning these pa-


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                  Base Traffic Scenarios
                                                       Metric   Method
                                                                               SO     TO     LaneC VP
                                                                LC             0.30 0.09       0.87   0.83
                                                                AdvSim         0.51 0.33       0.86   0.87
                                                                CS             0.45 0.61       0.89   0.87
                                                       CR ↑
                                                                AdvTraj        0.50 0.31       0.78   0.82
                                                                ChatScene      0.89 0.70       0.95   0.79
                                                                ReGen (ours)   0.90 0.83       0.96   0.77

                                                   Table 3: Collision Rate in SafeBench. SO means
                                                   Straight Obstacle. TO means Turning Obstacle.
                                                   LaneC means Lane Changing. VP means Vehicle
                                                   Passing. Baselines include LC (Ding et al., 2020),
Figure 5: Diversity of Corner Cases. Com-          AdvSim (Wang et al., 2023b), CS (Wang et al.,
pared to ChatScene (Zhang et al., 2024), our       2023b), AdvTraj(Cao et al., 2022), and ChatScene
method generates more diverse corner cases         (Zhang et al., 2024). Our method can produce cor-
via reasoning about different causes.              ner cases that lead to a higher collision rate (CR).
rameters. In contrast to the baselines, our approach can simulate a broader range of scenarios, such
as yielding to emergency vehicles or navigating intersections with malfunctioning traffic lights. The
success rate of our scenario generation is 80%, with a detailed breakdown provided in Table 6 in
the Appendix. Most failure cases are due to overly strict FSM constraints that require multiple con-
ditions to be satisfied simultaneously. Although semantically correct, it imposes unnecessary strict
satisfiability requirements. Further discussion can be found in Appendix A.4.2.
Manipulation. Table 2 shows the simulation diversity in the manipulation domain. Since the task
descriptions were short we only report the embedding diversity since n-gram based metrics are
not applicable. We compare our results against baselines such as RoboGen (Wang et al., 2024d),
GenSim (Wang et al., 2024b), Behavior-100 (Srivastava et al., 2021), and RLBench (James et al.,
2019). In prior work, generating a manipulation simulation often required learning a new task
either through reward design (Wang et al., 2024d) or by using expert demonstrations (Wang et al.,
2024b). We demonstrate using our inverse design framework that we can generate simulations
by reusing learned behaviors from these methods to simulate new scenarios. We use 10 reward
functions from RoboGen, each generating 5 variants of environments. With success rate of 78%,
we end up having 38 environments. The most failure cases are invalid reasoning of articulated
objects, e.g., a shelf-opening event with the asset not being able to open. Among all baselines, our
method achieve the highest diversity. This is mainly because prior works mostly focus on simulating
environment corresponding to a single skill, often within similar contexts – e.g., “open the door”
and “close the door”, while our method augments simulation in an orthogonal axis such as “open
the door to let the pet in.” However, unlike driving where fine-grained control on many entities
especially dynamic actors is possible, our approach simplifies manipulation tasks by limiting actions
to retrieving and placing entities in contextually appropriate locations (e.g., the dog has to be outside
the door). Elements not supported by the simulation engine – such as simulating the motion of a pet
walking in – are skipped. We leave these (better articulated objects and more flexibility of simulation
engine for manipulation) as future research.

3.4   C ORNER C ASE G ENERATION

In Figure 5, we demonstrate our method’s ability to generate diverse corner case scenarios for test-
ing in safety critical scenarios, as detailed in Table 3. We highlight ReGen’s ability to reuse an
existing adversarial policy behavior in more diverse context. For comparison, we evaluated against
ChatScene (Zhang et al., 2024), which uses LLM few-shot prompting and converts text into simula-
tion via text-to-scenic. For fair comparison, we use the same adversarial policy behavior as theirs but
change the context of the environment. We consistently achieved greater diversity than ChatScene
across all adversarial policy behaviors. While ChatScene introduces only minor variations, such as
a pedestrian crossing in front of a car or vending machine, our method captures a broader range
of cause-and-effect relationships. For the “pedestrian walking” behaviors, our method generates
unique causes, such as a group of protesters causing a collision or a single pedestrian forcing an-
other vehicle to stop abruptly in front of the ego-vehicle. These scenarios underscore the greater
diversity enabled by our approach. We observe that both methods achieve greatest diversity for the
behavior “drive forward,” as it can be applied in a broader range of contexts, such as driving fast or


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  Accuracy (%) ↓
                      Method
                                     GPT-4o     GPT-4-Turbo Claude 3.5 Sonnet
                   DriveCoT           0.87         0.80           0.80
                   DriveLM            0.90         0.83           0.77
                   ReGen (Ours)       0.63         0.53           0.50

Table 4: Complex Vision-language-action Dataset from Our Simulated Environments. We com-
pare with existing driving-related reasoning datasets, DriveCoT (Wang et al., 2024c) and DriveLM
(Sima et al., 2024). The accuracy of reasoning about the correct ego-vehicle actions is reported.
Our dataset consists of more complex scenarios compared to baselines with mostly urban driving
maneuvers, thus posing greater challenges to existing VLMs.

slow, accelerating, and decelerating. In contrast, both methods exhibit lower diversity for left and
right turns, as these scenarios offer fewer plausible contextual variations.
We then evaluated these generated scenarios against ChatScene and other adversarial policy learning
baselines including Learn-to-Collide (LC) (Ding et al., 2020), AdvSim (Wang et al., 2023b), Carla
Scenario Generator (CS) (Wang et al., 2023b), Adversarial Trajectory Optimization (Cao et al.,
2022) to test whether the corner-case simulations led to higher collision rates. The results, presented
in, Table 3, only includes the collision rates, as the final score incorporates driving infractions,
which fall outside the scope of generating collision scenarios. To run the benchmark, we converted
our scenarios into scenic files, required in the SafeBench benchmark (Xu et al., 2022). This process
was done manually as generating scenic files is outside the scope of our work.
Both our method and ChatScene outperform other baselines by leveraging LLMs to intelligently
spawn adversarial agents. We further validate by human inspection that all generated environments
do not place actors in the locations that cause inevitable collision, namely too close to the ego-car.
However, our method surpasses ChatScene by diversifying the underlying causes of challenging
scenarios. While ChatScene primarily generates scenarios where an object crosses in front of the
ego-vehicle (e.g., a pedestrian crossing or a car merging), our method introduces more complex
variations, such as a group of pedestrians or a vehicle traveling in the opposite direction. Empirically,
these scenarios are significantly more challenging for the driving policies, such as requiring larger
steering adjustments to avoid groups of pedestrians.

3.5   P ROBING M ULTIMODAL F OUNDATION M ODELS

In this section, we evaluate how well the state-of-the-art vision language models (VLMs) can reason
about the vision-language-action dataset produced by the generated simulation from our methods,
compared to existing datasets. We aim to (i) demonstrate a scalable possibility of multi-modal data
synthesis with complex reasoning and (ii) use the complexity of the produced dataset as an indirect
measure to demonstrate the complexity of the generated simulation. We conduct experiment in the
driving domain; the goal of the VLMs is to process a sequence of images along with textual context
and question, and answer most plausible actions to be taken by the ego-vehicle. Specifically, we
assess the VLMs’ ability to infer the desired action in our generated driving scenarios and compare
their performance with two literature baselines: DriveCoT (Wang et al., 2024c) and DriveLM (Sima
et al., 2024). In DriveCoT the authors used rule-based expert policies to control ego and generated
ground-truth labels for reasoning processes, while in DriveLM they employed graph annotations
on NuScenes dataset (Caesar et al., 2020) as a large scale real-world driving dataset. From each
dataset, we randomly select 30 simulation traces, together with the ground-truth desired ego action
for each one. As part of the preprocessing, we extract three consecutive key frames from each
simulation trace, where the last key frame corresponds to the timepoint where the desired ego action
has been recorded. Since here we are solely evaluating the planning capability of VLMs, we also
provide some privileged information, such as the location and speed of all entities in the scene, to
the VLMs. Therefore, the three key frames, along with their corresponding privileged information
that are parsed from the recorded log files, are provided to the VLMs, and they are prompted to
identify the desired action for ego. The VLMs tested in this evaluation include GPT-4o (OpenAI,
2024), GPT-4-turbo (Achiam et al., 2023), and Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2024). The success
rates of the VLMs in inferring the desired actions are presented in Table 4. As shown in Table 4,
the success rate of VLMs in inferring the desired ego actions for our dataset is significantly lower
compared to the DriveCoT and DriveLM datasets. This difference is due to the greater diversity of


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


scenarios generated by our method compared to those in DriveCoT and DriveLM. In the baseline
datasets, the desired ego actions are primarily common urban driving maneuvers, such as stopping
or moving forward, whereas our method produces scenarios with a wider range of ego actions.
We observed that VLMs frequently responded with deceleration as the default action, consistent
with findings in prior work (Sreeram et al., 2024). For instance, in lane change scenarios such
as “avoiding debris”, “overtaking a slow vehicle”, “merging into an open lane”, or “swerving to
avoid a wrong-way driver” the VLM often suggested that the ego-vehicle should brake and stop
behind obstacles instead of performing a logical lane change to avoid them. These outcomes suggest
that VLMs generally struggle in environments with nuanced spatial and situational reasoning. In
contrast, DriveCoT (also using the CARLA simulator) generates scenarios where objects appear
directly in the ego-vehicle’s path, requiring a deceleration response. In such cases, the VLMs’
biases align with the expected behaviors for those scenarios. These observed failures underscore
a limitation of off-the-shelf VLMs in reasoning about complex driving scenarios. Conversely, the
scenarios in DriveLM were less challenging for VLMs, as they mostly comprised general driving
scenarios, as shown in Appendix A.4.1.

4   R ELATED W ORK
Robot Simulation. Simulation has played a critical role for general robotics. Simulated environ-
ments for driving (car, 2020; Amini et al., 2022; Gulino et al., 2024), manipulation (Zhu et al., 2020;
James et al., 2020; Nasiriany et al., 2024a), and locomotion (Rudin et al., 2022; Makoviychuk et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2023d), have each contributed significantly to their robotic subfield. Their use for
verification has its own community and field of research (Kleijnen, 1995; Pace, 2004; Corso et al.,
2021), in parallel to significant efforts for leveraging such approaches for policy training (Muratore
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Loquercio et al., 2019). Our work focuses on a new paradigm of
robot simulation that uses generative models for more scalable simulation construction.
Generative Simulation. Generative simulation methods have emerged as a powerful tool for auto-
matically creating diverse and realistic scenarios in robot manipulation (Wang et al., 2023c; Man-
dlekar et al., 2023) and more general robotic tasks (Wang et al., 2024d; Nasiriany et al., 2024b). Our
work shares the same goal of automating the process of constructing simulation with the power of
generative AI. Uniquely, we follow an inverse design approach which is more tailored for validation
and augmentation use cases, complementing existing approaches with an orthogonal axis.
LLMs for simulation. Specific approaches for diverse data generation (Shiroshita et al., 2020;
Sinha et al., 2020) within simulation environments, including those that leverage language models
(Zhong et al., 2023; Elmaaroufi et al., 2024; Aasi et al., 2024) are playing an important role in how
simulation environments are used for both verification and system training. More broadly, our work
relates to the rich set of different approaches harnessing LLMs for reasoning about, and planning in,
domains such as robotics (Zeng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a) and autonomous driving (Cui et al.,
2023). These include aspects such as language-based planners (Song et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023;
Mao et al., 2023), and simulation environments (Zala et al., 2024), among others.

5   C ONCLUSION
We present an inverse design approach for generative simulation, demonstrated in autonomous driv-
ing and manipulation. Using LLMs and simulation engines, we construct and expand graphs that
capture cause-and-effect relationships and relevant entities, which are then converted into simu-
lated environments. With the extensive experiments, we demonstrate capabilities of our method via
qualitative analysis, superior diversity compared to existing simulation, more effective corner-case
generation, and more complex vision-language-action dataset synthesis than current dataset.
Limitation. There are properties that our method can reason about but are not fully simulatable due
to limitations of the simulation engine. For example, without simulating temperature, we cannot
measure the progress of “thawing the frozen vegetable”. This limitation is more common in manip-
ulation tasks than in driving, where robots primarily interact with other actors, allowing for more
flexible simulation. Another challenge is handling articulated objects, such as reasoning about open-
ing a shelf, which cannot be simulated with the available assets; more details in Appendix A.4.2.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
CARLA leaderboard 2.0 scenarios, 2020. URL https://leaderboard.carla.org/scenarios/.
 Accessed: 2024-09-29.
Erfan Aasi, Phat Nguyen, Shiva Sreeram, Guy Rosman, Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus. Gen-
  erating out-of-distribution scenarios using language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2411.16554.
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Alexander Amini, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Igor Gilitschenski, Wilko Schwarting, Zhijian Liu, Song Han,
  Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus. Vista 2.0: An open, data-driven simulator for multimodal sens-
  ing and policy learning for autonomous vehicles. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2419–2426. IEEE, 2022.
Anthropic. Claude 3.5 sonnet. https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-3-5-sonnet, 2024.
  Accessed: September 15, 2024.
G Brockman. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H. Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush
  Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for
  autonomous driving, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.11027.
Yulong Cao, Chaowei Xiao, Anima Anandkumar, Danfei Xu, and Marco Pavone. Advdo: Realistic
  adversarial attacks for trajectory prediction, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.08744.
Anthony Corso, Robert Moss, Mark Koren, Ritchie Lee, and Mykel Kochenderfer. A survey of algo-
  rithms for black-box safety validation of cyber-physical systems. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 72:377–428, 2021.
Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games,
  robotics and machine learning. http://pybullet.org, 2016–2021.
Can Cui, Yunsheng Ma, Xu Cao, Wenqian Ye, Yang Zhou, Kaizhao Liang, Jintai Chen, Juanwu
  Lu, Zichong Yang, Kuei-Da Liao, Tianren Gao, Erlong Li, Kun Tang, Zhipeng Cao, Tong Zhou,
  Ao Liu, Xinrui Yan, Shuqi Mei, Jianguo Cao, Ziran Wang, and Chao Zheng. A survey on multi-
  modal large language models for autonomous driving. arXiv [cs.AI], November 2023.
Wenhao Ding, Baiming Chen, Minjun Xu, and Ding Zhao. Learning to collide: An adaptive safety-
 critical scenarios generating method, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.01197.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An
  open urban driving simulator, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.03938.
Karim Elmaaroufi, Devan Shankar, Ana Cismaru, Marcell Vazquez-Chanlatte, Alberto Sangiovanni-
  Vincentelli, Matei Zaharia, and Sanjit A Seshia. Generating probabilistic scenario programs from
  natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03709, 2024.
Cole Gulino, Justin Fu, Wenjie Luo, George Tucker, Eli Bronstein, Yiren Lu, Jean Harb, Xinlei Pan,
  Yan Wang, Xiangyu Chen, et al. Waymax: An accelerated, data-driven simulator for large-scale
  autonomous driving research. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor, 2018. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/1801.01290.
Lukas Höllein, Ang Cao, Andrew Owens, Justin Johnson, and Matthias Nießner. Text2Room: Ex-
  tracting textured 3D meshes from 2D text-to-image models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7909–7920, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J. Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark and learning environment, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.
  12271.
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):3019–
  3026, 2020.
Thomas Jiralerspong, Xiaoyin Chen, Yash More, Vedant Shah, and Yoshua Bengio. Efficient causal
  graph discovery using large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
  01207.
Jack PC Kleijnen. Verification and validation of simulation models. European journal of operational
  research, 82(1):145–162, 1995.
Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
  Llm+p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11477.
Antonio Loquercio, Elia Kaufmann, René Ranftl, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Vladlen Koltun, and Davide
  Scaramuzza. Deep drone racing: From simulation to reality with domain randomization. IEEE
  Transactions on Robotics, 36(1):1–14, 2019.
Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayara-
  man, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via
  coding large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12931.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
Ajay Mandlekar, Soroush Nasiriany, Bowen Wen, Iretiayo Akinola, Yashraj Narang, Linxi Fan,
  Yuke Zhu, and Dieter Fox. Mimicgen: A data generation system for scalable robot learning using
  human demonstrations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17596.
Jiageng Mao, Yuxi Qian, Junjie Ye, Hang Zhao, and Yue Wang. Gpt-driver: Learning to drive with
   gpt, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01415.
Sean Molesky, Zin Lin, Alexander Y Piggott, Weiliang Jin, Jelena Vucković, and Alejandro W
  Rodriguez. Inverse design in nanophotonics. Nature Photonics, 12(11):659–670, 2018.
Matthias Müller, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Bernard Ghanem, and Vladlen Koltun. Driving policy transfer
 via modularity and abstraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09364, 2018.
Fabio Muratore, Fabio Ramos, Greg Turk, Wenhao Yu, Michael Gienger, and Jan Peters. Robot
  learning from randomized simulations: A review. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 9:799893, 2022.
Soroush Nasiriany, Abhiram Maddukuri, Lance Zhang, Adeet Parikh, Aaron Lo, Abhishek Joshi,
  Ajay Mandlekar, and Yuke Zhu. Robocasa: Large-scale simulation of everyday tasks for gener-
  alist robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02523, 2024a.
Soroush Nasiriany, Abhiram Maddukuri, Lance Zhang, Adeet Parikh, Aaron Lo, Abhishek Joshi,
  Ajay Mandlekar, and Yuke Zhu. Robocasa: Large-scale simulation of everyday tasks for gener-
  alist robots, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02523.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Pre-crash scenario typology for crash avoidance
  research. Technical report, United States Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic
  Safety Administration, April 2007. URL https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.gov/files/
  pre-crash scenario typology-final pdf version 5-2-07.pdf.
Phat Nguyen, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Zhang-Wei Hong, Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus. Text-
  to-drive: Diverse driving behavior synthesis via large language models, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.04300.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/, 2024. Accessed: Septem-
  ber 13, 2024.
Dale K Pace. Modeling and simulation verification and validation challenges. Johns Hopkins APL
  technical digest, 25(2):163–172, 2004.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Pierre Isabelle, Eugene Charniak, and Dekang Lin (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
  311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, July 2002. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.3115/1073083.1073135. URL https://aclanthology.org/P02-1040.
Laurent Perron and Vincent Furnon.             Or-tools.   https://developers.google.com/
  optimization/, 2019.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1908.10084.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using
  massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 91–100.
  PMLR, 2022.
Shinya Shiroshita, Shirou Maruyama, Daisuke Nishiyama, Mario Ynocente Castro, Karim Hamza-
  oui, Guy Rosman, Jonathan DeCastro, Kuan-Hui Lee, and Adrien Gaidon. Behaviorally diverse
  traffic simulation via reinforcement learning. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
  Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 2103–2110. IEEE, 2020.
Yawar Siddiqui, Tom Monnier, Filippos Kokkinos, Mahendra Kariya, Yanir Kleiman, Emilien Gar-
  reau, Oran Gafni, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, Roman Shapovalov, et al. Meta 3d assetgen:
  Text-to-mesh generation with high-quality geometry, texture, and pbr materials. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.02445, 2024.
Chonghao Sima, Katrin Renz, Kashyap Chitta, Li Chen, Hanxue Zhang, Chengen Xie, Jens
  Beißwenger, Ping Luo, Andreas Geiger, and Hongyang Li. Drivelm: Driving with graph visual
  question answering, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14150.
Aman Sinha, Matthew O’Kelly, Russ Tedrake, and John C Duchi. Neural bridge sampling for eval-
 uating safety-critical autonomous systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 33:6402–6416, 2020.
Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M. Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su. Llm-
  planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04088.
Shiva Sreeram, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Alaa Maalouf, Guy Rosman, Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus.
  Probing multimodal llms as world models for driving, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2405.05956.
Sanjana Srivastava, Chengshu Li, Michael Lingelbach, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Fei Xia, Kent
  Vainio, Zheng Lian, Cem Gokmen, Shyamal Buch, C. Karen Liu, Silvio Savarese, Hyowon
  Gweon, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Behavior: Benchmark for everyday household activities in
  virtual, interactive, and ecological environments, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.
  03332.
Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jaco-
  bian chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12619–12629, 2023a.
Jiaqi Wang, Zihao Wu, Yiwei Li, Hanqi Jiang, Peng Shu, Enze Shi, Huawen Hu, Chong Ma, Yiheng
   Liu, Xuhui Wang, Yincheng Yao, Xuan Liu, Huaqin Zhao, Zhengliang Liu, Haixing Dai, Lin
   Zhao, Bao Ge, Xiang Li, Tianming Liu, and Shu Zhang. Large language models for robotics:
   Opportunities, challenges, and perspectives. arXiv [cs.RO], January 2024a.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jingkang Wang, Ava Pun, James Tu, Sivabalan Manivasagam, Abbas Sadat, Sergio Casas, Mengye
   Ren, and Raquel Urtasun. Advsim: Generating safety-critical scenarios for self-driving vehicles,
   2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.06549.
Lirui Wang, Yiyang Ling, Zhecheng Yuan, Mohit Shridhar, Chen Bao, Yuzhe Qin, Bailin Wang,
  Huazhe Xu, and Xiaolong Wang. Gensim: Generating robotic simulation tasks via large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01361, 2023c.
Lirui Wang, Yiyang Ling, Zhecheng Yuan, Mohit Shridhar, Chen Bao, Yuzhe Qin, Bailin Wang,
  Huazhe Xu, and Xiaolong Wang. Gensim: Generating robotic simulation tasks via large language
  models, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01361.
Tianqi Wang, Enze Xie, Ruihang Chu, Zhenguo Li, and Ping Luo. Drivecot: Integrating chain-of-
  thought reasoning with end-to-end driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16996, 2024c.
Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Alexander Amini, Wilko Schwarting, Igor Gilitschenski, Sertac Karaman, and
  Daniela Rus. Learning interactive driving policies via data-driven simulation. In 2022 Interna-
  tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7745–7752. IEEE, 2022.
Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Pingchuan Ma, Andrew Everett Spielberg, Zhou Xian, Hao Zhang, Joshua B
  Tenenbaum, Daniela Rus, and Chuang Gan. Softzoo: A soft robot co-design benchmark for
  locomotion in diverse environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09555, 2023d.
Yufei Wang, Zhou Xian, Feng Chen, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Yian Wang, Katerina Fragkiadaki, Zack-
  ory Erickson, David Held, and Chuang Gan. RoboGen: Towards unleashing infinite data for
  automated robot learning via generative simulation. In Proceedings of the 41st International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 51936–51983. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024d. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/
  wang24cc.html.
Chejian Xu, Wenhao Ding, Weijie Lyu, Zuxin Liu, Shuai Wang, Yihan He, Hanjiang Hu, Ding Zhao,
  and Bo Li. Safebench: A benchmarking platform for safety evaluation of autonomous vehicles.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:25667–25682, 2022.
Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu,
  Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna, Lingjie Liu, et al. Holodeck: Language guided generation of 3d
  embodied ai environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 16227–16237, 2024.
Abhay Zala, Jaemin Cho, Han Lin, Jaehong Yoon, and Mohit Bansal. Envgen: Generating and
  adapting environments via llms for training embodied agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2403.12014.
Fanlong Zeng, Wensheng Gan, Yongheng Wang, Ning Liu, and Philip S Yu. Large language models
  for robotics: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07226, 2023.
Jiawei Zhang, Chejian Xu, and Bo Li. Chatscene: Knowledge-enabled safety-critical scenario gen-
   eration for autonomous vehicles, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14062.
Ziyuan Zhong, Davis Rempe, Yuxiao Chen, Boris Ivanovic, Yulong Cao, Danfei Xu, Marco Pavone,
  and Baishakhi Ray. Language-guided traffic simulation via scene-level diffusion. In Conference
  on Robot Learning, pp. 144–177. PMLR, 2023.
Yaoming Zhu, Sidi Lu, Lei Zheng, Jiaxian Guo, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. Texygen:
  A benchmarking platform for text generation models, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1802.01886.
Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Abhishek Joshi, Soroush Nasiri-
  any, and Yifeng Zhu. robosuite: A modular simulation framework and benchmark for robot
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     G RAPH E XPANSION D ETAILS

A.1.1    A SSET DATABASE

The simulator database, Dasset = (V, E), is represented as a directed graph, where each node v ∈ V
corresponds to a simulatable asset, such as sensors (e.g. GPS, temperature, humidity), agents (enti-
ties with a dynamic model), objects (static entities without a dynamic model), properties (e.g., siren,
car door, light color), and behaviors of other agents (e.g., driving forward, standing still, walking).
Each edge e ∈ E represents a relationship between two assets, such as (siren → ambulance), in-
dicating that the siren is a property of the ambulance. A property is a node that has at least one
outgoing edge, while agents and objects only have incoming edges. We provide an example of Dasset
for the CARLA simulator and PyBullet:


    Code Example 1: Asset Database for CARLA Simulator (Dasset )
    node["vehicles"] = ["bicycle", "sedan", "ambulance"]
    node["traffic"] = ["traffic light"]
    node["behavior"] = ["constant speed/stationary/change Lanes..."]
    node["traffic light"] = ["red/green/yellow/off"]
    node["ambulance"] = ["siren", "behavior"]
    node["bicycle"] = ["behavior"]
    node["sedan"] = ["behavior", "front door"]
    node["siren"] = ["on/off"]
    node["front door"] = ["open/closed"]
    node["constant speed"] = ["ending location", "starting location",
    "target speed"]
    ...


Here, an entity such as an ambulance, has properties such as [‘siren’ , ‘behavior’]. In CARLA, th
siren property can have states—on or off—indicated by /. Meanwhile, the behavior property, such
as constant speed, includes an ending location property. This location, for example, ‘in front of the
ego-vehicle,’ can be queried from the LLM.


    Code Example 2: Asset Database for PyBullet (Dasset )
    node["static objects"] = ["desk lamp", "tv", "trash can", "ceramic cup", "book",
        "toy", "children", "adult", ...]
    node["behavior"] = ["stationary/stationary"]
    node["stationary"] = ["location"]
    ...


In the PyBullet simulator, the behavior is limited to stationary because the environment consists
soley of non-articulated meshes, which do not support dynamic motion.


A.1.2    N ODE P ROPOSAL

Event nodes. Candidate nodes can be generated either by an LLM or provided by the user. For
instance, in Example 1, given a source node, the LLM generates plausible events, such as ‘stopping
because there is a jaywalker.’ In another example, if the prior involves a ‘police car,’ the generated
events might include scenarios like a ‘police chase.’ However, not all nodes proposed during the
node proposal stage are valid causes. For instance, ‘animal on the road’ might be invalid if it
is not simulatable, or ‘a jaywalker in another city’ would be logically implausible. During edge
construction, each proposed node is validated to ensure it represents a plausible cause of the source
node.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Example 1: Event nodes (Vevent )
    Source node: "The ego-vehicle stopped abruptly"
    ***Example #1***
    Prior: null
    Candidate event nodes (proposed by LLM): ["a jaywalker walked in front", "animal
        on the road", "emergency vehicle approaching from behind", "debris ahead"]

    ***Example #2***
    Prior: "police car"
    Candidate event nodes (prosposed by LLM): ["road block", "police chase",
        "arrest", ...]

    ***Example #3***
    Candidate event nodes (proposed by user): ["a tree fell in front", "a jaywalker
        in another city", "a cyclist changed lanes"]

Entity nodes From the asset database Dasset , the candidate nodes include all entities listed in Dasset ,
starting from the node node[‘‘vehicles"]. In the implementation, we also append additional
entities, such as pedestrians and static objects. The appropriate vehicle for the source node will be
selected during the edge proposal stage, detailed in Appendix A.1.3.

    Example 2: Entity nodes (Ventity )
    Source node: "Emergency vehicle approaching from behind"
    Candidate event nodes: ["bicycle", "ambulance", "sedan"]

Property nodes In Example 1, we verify whether the variable exists in the databaes. For instance,
the variable ‘siren’ is found in Dasset , allowing us to retrieve its values such as ‘on’ and ‘off,’ as
detailed in Appendix A.1.1. In Example 2, the variable ‘location’ does not have predefined values
(i.e. no ‘location’ key in node) so we query the LLM to generate all possible locations. However, not
all generated locations may be valid. The appropriate nodes are selected during the edge proposal
stage.

    Example 3: Property nodes (Vproperty )
    Event-to-event graph: "ego-vehicle stopped abruptly <- emergency vehicle
        approaching from behind"
    Entity-to-event graph: "emergency vehicle approaching from behind <- ambulance"

    ***Example 1***
    Source node: "siren"
    Candidate event nodes (from asset database): ["on", "off"]

    ***Example 2***
    Source node: "start location"
    Candidate event nodes (proposed by LLM): ["behind the ego-vehicle on adjacent
        lane", "behind the ego-vehicle on same lane", "in front of ego-vehicle on
        adjacent lane", "in front of ego-vehicle on same lane"]


A.1.3    E DGE C ONSTRUCTION

Given a list of candidate nodes (from Appendix A.1.2), the edge construction process is used to
select plausible nodes and eliminate unlikely ones. For event-to-event edges, a node such as “a
jaywalker in another city” can be excluded because the causal relationship “ego-vehicle stopping
abruptly ← a jaywalker in another city” is implausible. For entity-to-event edges, only nodes such
as “ambulance” are selected from the available entities, as they are relevant to the source node
“emergency vehicle approaching from behind.” In cases where the source node is “tree falls in
front,” and no corresponding “tree” entity exists in the simulator, no edges are created. Finally,
for property-to-entity edges, relevant simulatable properties are selected, such as “siren” for an
ambulance.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Example 4: Event-to-event (Eevent )
   Source node: "ego-vehicle stopped abruptly"
   Candidate nodes: ["a jaywalker walked in front", "animal on the road",
       "emergency vehicle approaching from behind", "debris in the road", "a tree
       fell in front", "a jaywalker in another city", "a cyclist changed lanes"]

   **Chosen nodes**: ["a jaywalker walked in front", "animal on the road",
       "emergency vehicle approaching from behind", "debris in the road", "a tree
       fell in front", "a cyclist changed lanes"]
   **Nodes not chosen**: ["a jaywalker in another city"]
   **Generated graphs**:
       1. ego-vehicle stopped abruptly <- a jaywalker walked in front
       2. ego-vehicle stopped abruptly <- animal on the road
       3. ego-vehicle stopped abruptly <- emergency vehicle approaching from behind
       4. ego-vehicle stopped abruptly <- debris in the road
       5. ego-vehicle stopped abruptly <- a tree fell in front
       6. ego-vehicle stopped abruptly <- cyclist changed lanes



   Example 5: Entity-to-event (Eentity )
   ***Example 1***
   Source node: "Emergency vehicle approaching from behind"
   Candidate event nodes: ["bicycle", "ambulance", "sedan"]

   *Chosen nodes*: ["ambulance"]
   *Nodes not chosen*: ["bicycle", "sedan"]
   *Generated graphs*:
       1. emergency vehicle approaching from behind <- ambulance

   ***Example 2***
   Source node: "Tree fell in front"
   *Chosen nodes*: []
   *Nodes not chosen*: ["bicycle", "ambulance", "sedan"]
   Return that this event cannot be simulated in CARLA



   Example 6: Property-to-entity (Eproperty )
   Event-to-event graph: "ego-vehicle stopped abruptly <- emergency vehicle
       approaching from behind"
   Entity-to-event graph: "emergency vehicle approaching from behind <- ambulance"

   ***Example 1***
   Source node: "siren"
   Candidate event nodes (from asset database): ["on", "off"]

   *Chosen nodes*: ["on"]
   *Nodes not chosen*: ["off"]
   *Generated graphs*:
       1. ambulance <- siren

   ***Example 2***
   Source node: "start location"
   Candidate event nodes (proposed by LLM): ["behind the ego-vehicle on adjacent
       lane", "behind the ego-vehicle on same lane", "in front of ego-vehicle on
       adjacent lane", "in front of ego-vehicle on same lane"]

   *Chosen nodes*: ["behind the ego-vehicle on adjacent lane"]
   *Nodes not chosen*: ["behind the ego-vehicle on same lane", "in front of
       ego-vehicle on adjacent lane", "in front of ego-vehicle on same lane"]
   *Generated graphs*:
       1. behind the ego-vehicle on same lane <- starting location <-- ambulance ...


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2    G ROUNDING TO S IMULATION D ETAILS

The graph expansion process produces a graph that defines an environment and describes the sce-
nario. This graph serves as input to the LLM to generate the Low-Level State Translator (LLST),
which bridges abstract reasoning with physical state transitions in order to track states. This tracking
is crucial for defining constraints that align with the intended scenario we aim to simulate. For ex-
ample, the abstract state “Ambulance Approaching” defines a constraint that requires the ambulance
to be behind the ego-vehicle and in motion.

    Code Example 3: Generated Graph
    causal_graph = [’Ambulance approaching from behind’, ’Ego-vehicle abruptly
        stopped on left lane’]

    entities = [{’name’: ’ambulance1’, ’type’: ’agent’, ’entity_name’: ’ambulance’,
        ’behavioral_properties’: {’action’: ’Vehicle drives straight the entire
        time’, ’starting location’: ’behind the ego vehicle in the right lane’,
        ’ending location’: ’in front of ego vehicle in the right lane’}},
    {’name’: ’ego-vehicle’, ’type’: ’agent’, ’entity_name’: ’ego-vehicle’,
        ’behavioral_properties’: {’action’: ’Vehicle drives straight and suddenly
        stops’}}]


    Code Example 4: Low-Level State Translator
      def _agent_state_tracker(self, agent_name) -> None:
         if agent_name == "ambulance1":
             # State: Ambulance Approaching
             if behind_vehicle(agent_name, "ego-vehicle") and
         is_currently_moving(agent_name):
                 self._update_state("Ambulance Approaching", agent_name, True)

             # State: Ambulance Close to Ego
             if are_close_by(agent_name, "ego-vehicle") and
         is_currently_moving(agent_name):
                 self._update_state("Ambulance Close to Ego", agent_name, True)

        ...

These abstract states are subsequently used to construct a finite state machine (FSM), incorporating
transitions that capture the temporal dynamics of the scenario and encode temporal logic. For ex-
ample, in this scenario, the abstract state “Ambulance Approaching” must occur and must precede
the state “Ambulance Passing Ego.”

    Code Example 5: Finite State Machine
        fsm = [[(’ambulance1’, ’Ambulance Approaching’), (’ego-vehicle’, ’Ego
        Driving Steady’)],
           [(’ambulance1’, ’Ambulance Close to Ego’)],
           [(’ego-vehicle’, ’Ego Braking’)],
           [(’ego-vehicle’, ’Ego Stopped Abruptly’)],
           [(’ambulance1’, ’Ambulance Passing Ego’)]]

Given a FSM, we use Google’s CP-SAT solver to find solutions for the variables such as the x, y
coordinates of the start and end positions (x0 , y0 , xT , yT ), as well as the speed, such that it satis-
fies the constraints imposed by the FSM. For instance, the behavior of the ambulance, defined as
“drive straight,” is generated as: DriveStraight(’ambulance’, x0 , y0 , xT , yT , speed). The
simulation considered valid only if it terminates in a state that satisfies the terminal condition of the
FSM.

    start": {"x": -25, "y": 4}, "end": {"x": 80, "y": 4}, "speed": 40,

Full Config Example. We provide the full example of the generated scenario config file below:


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Code Example 6: Scenario Config Example
   narrative = "An ambulance approached from behind, prompting the ego vehicle to
       stop abruptly, allowing the ambulance to pass safely."

   entities = [{’name’: ’ambulance1’, ’type’: ’agent’, ’entity_name’: ’ambulance’,
       ’behavioral_properties’: {’action’: ’Vehicle drives straight the entire
       time’, ’starting location’: ’behind the ego vehicle in the right lane’,
       ’ending location’: ’in front of ego vehicle in the right lane’}}, {’name’:
       ’ego-vehicle’, ’type’: ’agent’, ’entity_name’: ’ego-vehicle’, ’properties’:
       {}, ’behavioral_properties’: {’action’: ’Vehicle drives straight and
       suddenly stops’}}]

   vehicles = [{"name": "ambulance1",
           "start": {"x": -25, "y": 4}, "end": {"x": 80, "y": 4},
           "speed_range": [40, 40],
           "blueprint_id": "vehicle.ford.ambulance",
           "driving_policy": "drive forward",
           "type": "dynamic",
           "heading": 0}]

   causal_graph = [’Ambulance approaching from behind’, ’Ego-vehicle abruptly
       stopped on left lane’]

   fsm = [[(’ambulance1’, ’Ambulance Approaching’), (’ego-vehicle’, ’Ego Driving
       Steady’)],
          [(’ambulance1’, ’Ambulance Close to Ego’)],
          [(’ego-vehicle’, ’Ego Braking’)],
          [(’ego-vehicle’, ’Ego Stopped Abruptly’)],
          [(’ambulance1’, ’Ambulance Passing Ego’)]]

   class StateManager(StateManagerBase):
       def __init__(self, obj_name, world):
           super().__init__(obj_name, get_object_states(), world)

       def _agent_state_tracker(self, agent_name) -> None:
           if agent_name == "ambulance1":
               # State: Ambulance Approaching
               if behind_vehicle(agent_name, "ego-vehicle") and
       is_currently_moving(agent_name):
                   self._update_state("Ambulance Approaching", agent_name, True)

                # State: Ambulance Close to Ego
                if are_close_by(agent_name, "ego-vehicle") and
        is_currently_moving(agent_name):
                    self._update_state("Ambulance Close to Ego", agent_name, True)

                # State: Ambulance Passing Ego
                if right_in_front(agent_name, "ego-vehicle") and
        is_currently_moving(agent_name):
                    self._update_state("Ambulance Passing Ego", agent_name, True)

            elif agent_name == "ego-vehicle":
                # State: Ego Driving Steady
                if is_ego_driving_steady(agent_name):
                    self._update_state("Ego Driving Steady", agent_name, True)

                # State: Ego Braking
                if is_braking(agent_name):
                    self._update_state("Ego Braking", agent_name, True)

                # State: Ego Stopped Abruptly
                if is_currently_stopped(agent_name):
                    self._update_state("Ego Stopped Abruptly", agent_name, True)
            return None


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   A BLATION

Accuracy of edge creation. In Table 5, we present an ablation study evaluating the accuracy of
edge creation during the graph expansion stage. For event-to-event edges, we assess whether the
LLM can correctly identify causal and non-causal variables given the input behavior, testing only
at a depth of 1. For entity-to-event edges, we evaluate whether the LLM can accurately identify
simulatable events and select corresponding assets from the database. The results shown in Table 5
consistently demonstrate high performance for event-to-event and entity-to-event edges across both
domains, with accuracy exceeding 0.90. The consistency in LLM responses across trials can be
attributed to the temperature and top-p hyperparameters being set to 0. Failure cases for entity-
to-event stem from the LLM’s misunderstanding of the simulator’s capabilities, as described in
Dasset . For example, given a graph such as “ego-vehicle stopping ← flood to knees,” the LLM might
propose changing the weather (treated as an entity) to “flooding.” While this is valid in general, it
misaligns with the constraints of the simulation engine. Finally, for property-to-entity edges, we
evaluate the LLM’s ability to select the most plausible location. While the LLM performs well on
simpler properties, such as determining whether a siren should be on, its accuracy decreases for
properties requiring complex spatiotemporal reasoning. In our driving experiment, the LLM was
tasked with selecting end locations for two entities across two scenarios, with each entity having 8
possible locations. We observed significantly higher variance in its responses.

                                        Accuracy        Precision        Recall        F1 Score
                      Driving          0.98 ± 0.04     1.00 ± 0.00    0.97 ± 0.06     0.98 ± 0.03
  Event-to-Event
                      Manipulation     0.98 ± 0.04     1.00 ± 0.00    0.97 ± 0.04     0.98 ± 0.02
                      Driving          0.91 ± 0.02     0.86 ± 0.02    0.98 ± 0.03     0.92 ± 0.01
  Entity-to-Event
                      Manipulation     0.94 ± 0.02     1.00 ± 0.00    0.89 ± 0.03     0.94 ± 0.02
                      Driving          0.81 ± 0.09     0.73 ± 0.11    0.90 ± 0.03     0.80 ± 0.08
  Property-to-Event
                      Manipulation     1.00 ± 0.00     1.00 ± 0.00    1.00 ± 0.00     1.00 ± 0.00

                               Table 5: Accuracy of Edge Creation


                                     Figure 6: Controllability

Eliciting Diversity & Controllability. Figure 6 shows the pairwise diversity distribution of gener-
ated scenarios, measured as the proportion of scenarios with unique event-to-event nodes, excluding
the input behavior node. A value of 100% indicates that all compared scenarios have distinct causes,
while 0% means they share the same cause but vary in properties, such as their start location or
behavior. We observe that scenario diversity increases as the causes vary. Notably, the bimodal
distribution suggests that introducing a new causal graph introduces greater diversity by exploring
broader cause-and-effect relationships, while changes to the property graph result in more subtle
variations. By explicitly introducing new causal variables, we guide the model to explore a more
diverse range of plausible outcomes, uncovering interactions that are otherwise not immediately
apparent, but are entirely plausible.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Re-usability. Beyond generating diverse simulations, our method allows for the efficient reuse
of existing behaviors. In Table 2, we show that the diversity of manipulation tasks generated by
our method surpasses all baselines, even with the use of only 10 reward functions—a subset of
RoboGen tasks. Although RoboGen supports a broad range of tasks, our method further increases
task diversity by 18.50%. Previous methods encountered a bottleneck in simulating actions from
text due to the need to design a unique reward function for every task (Wang et al., 2024d; Ma et al.,
2024; Nguyen et al., 2024). Our method addresses this by changing the context to reflect different
higher-level goals, enabling the creation of new tasks while reusing the same task-specific reward
function. For instance, the task “opening a door” can be augmented to convey new narratives such
as “ventilating a room,” “letting the guest out,” or “letting the pet in.” This contextual dimension is
a unique capability of ours that addresses the limitations of simulating actions from text.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4     C ASE S TUDY

A.4.1    G ENERATED S CENARIOS
Driving. Our method provides broader coverage of driving scenario categories than existing ap-
proaches, as shown in Figure 7. While methods like ChatScene primarily focuses on safety-critical
scenarios and DriveLM covers general driving tasks, our approach generates a diverse range of sce-
narios that encompass both safety-critical and general driving situations, such as “yielding to an
emergency vehicle” or “picking up a passenger.”


                            Figure 7: Categories of Scenarios (driving)


A.4.2    FAILURE M ODES
Most failures in simulating the scenarios are from overly strict FSM constraints that required mul-
tiple conditions to be satisfied simultaneously. For example, in the scenario “an object falling off
a truck causing the ego-vehicle to stop,” we successfuly found solutions where the box falls to the
ground and the ego-vehicle brakes. However, the scenario became infeasible because the FSM also
required the delivery truck to exit the scene at the exact moment the ego-vehicle stopped. While this
requirement is not inherently incorrect, relaxing the constraint—allowing the delivery truck’s exit to
occur after the ego-vehicle stopped—would make the scenario feasible.

    Code Example 7: Failure case (driving)
    fsm = [[(’delivery_truck’, ’Approaching Intersection’), (’box’, ’On Truck’),
        (’ego_vehicle’, ’Driving Steady’)],
       [(’delivery_truck’, ’In Intersection’), (’box’, ’Falling’)],
       [(’box’, ’On Ground’), (’ego_vehicle’, ’Braking’)],
       [(’delivery_truck’, ’Exiting Intersection’), (’ego_vehicle’, ’Stopped’)]]

Scenarios involving the ambulance posed additional challenges due to the constraints imposed by
its vehicle dynamics. Specifically, the ambulance’s slower acceleration made it difficult to overtake
another vehicle within a short distance.
In the manipulation domain, most failures occurred in scenarios requiring objects to be placed inside
articulated objects. For example, all scenarios involving the behavior “the robot opens the table
door” failed because objects could not be placed inside the table closet. Unlike in the driving
domain, manipulation scenarios did not involve dynamic actors. Consequently the FSM constraints
in manipulation were less complex, avoiding the issues encountered in driving.
However, the manipulation domain presents unique challenges and limitations to manipulation. For
instance, scenarios scenarios such as “rotate lamp head to remove screen glare” require determin-
ing object orientations—an open problem due to the arbitrary canonical orientations of meshes in
simulation. Similarly, simulating other modalities like temperature or sound is not currently feasi-
ble in PyBullet. For example, tasks such as “thawing frozen vegetables” cannot simulate changes
in temperature. While our method correctly identifies relevant objects to retrieve, such as “frozen
vegetables,” these limitations underscore gaps in current simulation capabilities.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Input Behavior                   Scenario Name                                     Feasible/Infeasible of FSM
                                                1.1) Traffic light malfunction                              Feasible
                                                1.2) Distracted driver late start                           Feasible
 Driving forward from being stationary          1.3) Intersection congestion                                Feasible
                                                1.4) Pedestrian jaywalking                                  Feasible
                                                1.5) Let emergency vehicle pass at intersection             Feasible
                                                2.1) Traffic congestion due to lane closure                 Feasible
                                                2.2) Letting emergency vehicle pass                        Infeasible
 Slowing down                                   2.3) A large truck ahead stopped abruptly                   Feasible
                                                2.4) A vehicle cutting in                                   Feasible
                                                2.5) Speed enforcement                                      Feasible
                                                3.1) Road assistance                                        Feasible
                                                3.2) Elder walking on the street                            Feasible
 Stop abruptly while driving forward            3.3) Accident ahead                                         Feasible
                                                3.4) Yield to ambulance                                     Feasible
                                                3.5) Parked car door open                                   Feasible
                                                4.1) Protest on the streets                                Infeasible
                                                4.2) Parked car at intersection corner                      Feasible
 Stop abruptly after taking a turn              4.3) Police checkpoint                                      Feasible
                                                4.4) Letting the ambulance pass                            Infeasible
                                                4.5) Picking up a passenger                                 Feasible
                                                5.1) Ambulance entering intersection                        Feasible
                                                5.2) Sudden traffic signal change                           Feasible
 Stop abruptly while crossing an intersection   5.3) Another vehicle running a red light                    Feasible
                                                5.4) Object falling out of truck                           Infeasible
                                                5.5) Police chase                                           Feasible
                                                6.1) Debris in front                                        Feasible
                                                6.2) Slow traffic                                          Infeasible
 Changing lanes while driving forward           6.3) Yielding for an emergency vehicle                     Infeasible
                                                6.4) Lane closure                                           Feasible
                                                6.5) Driver going in the wrong direction                   Infeasible

                             Table 6: Breakdown of scenario feasibility for driving


                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Input Behavior                       Scenario Name                                                Feasible/Infeasible of FSM
                                                       1.1) Block unpleasant odor                                             Feasible
                                                       1.2) Minimize outside noise to watch a movie                           Feasible
                                                       1.3) Control ambient lighting                                          Feasible
 The robot closes the window                           1.4) Block outside construction site noise                             Feasible
                                                       1.5) Avoid prying eyes                                                 Feasible
                                                       1.6) Ensure confidentiality during a private conversation             Infeasible
                                                       1.7) Block direct sunlight to protect indoor plants                    Feasible
                                                       2.1) Improve air ventiliation                                          Feasible
                                                       2.2) Check delivered package                                          Infeasible
 The robot opens the door
                                                       2.3) Bid farewell and let the guest out                                Feasible
                                                       2.4) Allow a pet to enter                                              Feasible
                                                       3.1) Bake a cake                                                       Feasible
                                                       3.2) Roast vegetables                                                  Feasible
 The robot adjusts the oven temperature
                                                       3.3) Preheating the oven                                              Infeasible
                                                       3.4) Warming a ceramic cup                                            Infeasible
                                                       4.1) Clean dirty dishes                                                Feasible
                                                       4.2) Watering plants                                                   Feasible
                                                       4.3) Filling a water bottle                                            Feasible
                                                       4.4) Thawing frozen vegetables                                         Feasible
 The robot adjusts the water flow
                                                       4.5) Washing mixed fruits in a bowl                                    Feasible
                                                       4.6) Soaking a sponge                                                  Feasible
                                                       4.7) Wash off broccoli in sink                                         Feasible
                                                       4.8) Cleaning a coffee mug                                             Feasible
                                                       5.1) Looking for a cereal box                                         Infeasible
                                                       5.2) Showing table content to someone                                 Infeasible
 The robot open the table doors
                                                       5.3) Retrieve a pet toy kept out of sight                             Infeasible
                                                       5.4) Look for a hiding pet                                            Infeasible
                                                       6.1) Clearing the floor after playtime                                 Feasible
                                                       6.2) Put away toys as guest arrive                                     Feasible
 The robot is storing an item into storage furniture
                                                       6.3) Removing choking hazard near pets                                 Feasible
                                                       6.4) Store detergent out of children’s reach                           Feasible
                                                       7.1) Retrieve ingredients for cooking                                 Infeasible
 The robot is retrieving an item from a fridge         7.2) Clearing expired items                                           Infeasible
                                                       7.3) Offering food for a visitor                                       Feasible
                                                       8.1) Brighten the desk to read a book                                  Feasible
                                                       8.2) Showcase an artwork                                               Feasible
 The robot is turning on a lamp
                                                       8.3) Setting up a small photography shoot to avoid shadows             Feasible
                                                       8.4) Setup working environment                                         Feasible
                                                       9.1) Remove glare from display screen                                  Feasible
 The robot tilt the display screen
                                                       9.2) Sharing a presentation during a meeting                           Feasible
                                                       10.1) Searching for an item                                           Infeasible
 The robot pull a drawer out                           10.2) Looking for documents                                           Infeasible
                                                       10.3) Finding a pencil                                                Infeasible
                                                       11.1) Unpacking boxes                                                  Feasible
                                                       11.2) Checking content of box                                         Infeasible
 The robot is retrieving an item from a box
                                                       11.3) Inspection at warehouse                                          Feasible
                                                       11.4) Retrieving an item for a person                                 Infeasible
                                                       12.1) Transporting soil for gardening                                 Infeasible
 The robot is carrying a bucket                        12.2) Fetching water for mopping the floor                             Feasible
                                                       12.3) Grabbing a bucket to fill sand                                   Feasible

                             Table 7: Breakdown of scenario feasibility for manipulation


                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5     F ULL P ROMPTS

A.5.1    N ODE P ROPOSAL

   Prompt: Event Node Proposal Prompt
   Input variables: causal_graph
   ˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜
   Prompt:
   You are an expert in driving scenarios.

   In this scenario there is {causal_graph}.

   Please provide a list of all the plausible scenarios that caused
       {causal_graph[-1]}. Make sure it is precise. Provide the final answer as a
       comprehensive list of plausible scenarios in the following format within
       the tags <Answer>...</Answer>:

         - cause_name: cause description

   Answer: Let’s think step by step.



   Example 7: Event Node Proposal LLM Response
   **Input**:
   causal_graph = ["ego-vehicle stopping abruptly"]

   **Output**:
   Sure, lets think through plausible scenarios step by step.
   ...
   <Answer>
   - **Pedestrian crossing**: A pedestrian unexpectedly crosses in front of the
       ego-vehicle.
   - **Vehicle cutting in**: Another vehicle unexpectedly cuts in front of the
       ego-vehicle.
   ...
   - **Mechanical failure**: A sudden internal failure such as brake malfunction
       leads to abrupt stopping.
   - **Emergency vehicle**: An emergency vehicle suddenly appears or signals the
       ego-vehicle to yield.
   - **Cyclist lane violation**: A cyclist suddenly moves into the ego-vehicles
       path.</Answer>



   Prompt: Property Node Proposal Prompt
   Input variables: node_name, candidate_values,
   ˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜
   Prompt:
   You are an expert in driving scenarios.

   In this scenario there is {causal_graph}. The entities in the scenario are:
   {entities_name}

   Please provide a list of all the possible {node_name}s for the entities in the
       scenario, excluding the ego-vehicle. Make sure it is precise. Provide the
       final answer as a comprehensive list of possible {node_name}s in the
       following format within the tags <Answer>...</Answer>:

         - entity_name: [’{node_name}1’, ’{node_name}2’, ...]

   Answer: Let’s think step by step.



                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Example 8: Property Node Proposal LLM Response
   **Input**:
   node_name = "starting location"
   causal_graph = ["emergency vehicle", "ego-vehicle stopping abruptly"]
   entities = [{’name’: ’ambulance1’,
               ’type’: ’agent’,
               ’entity_name’: ’ambulance’,
               ’behavioral_properties’: {}},
              {’name’: ’ego-vehicle’,
               ’type’: ’agent’,
               ’entity_name’: ’ego-vehicle’,
               ’behavioral_properties’: {’action’: ’Vehicle drives straight and
       suddenly stops’}}]


   **Output**:
   Sure, lets think through plausible locations step by step.
   ...
   <Answer>
   - ambulance1: [’in the right lane behind the ego-vehicle’, ’in the right lane in
       front of the ego-vehicle’, ’in the left lane behind the ego-vehicle’, ’in
       the left lane in front of the ego-vehicle’]</Answer>


A.5.2   E DGE C REATION

   Prompt: Property Node Proposal Prompt
   Input variables: node_name, candidate_values, entities
   ˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜˜
   Prompt:
   You are an expert in driving scenarios.

   The possible {node_name}s for each entity are:
   {candidate_values[entity["name"]] for entity in entities}

   What are all the possible {node_name}s for each entity in the scenario? To
       answer this, first, please summarize the details of each entities in the
       scenario. Then, check each to see if it is the possible outcome given what
       is known. For each, start by stating everything that is known about all the
       entities, then check if it is plausible given what is known, finally give
       your conclusion. Think step by step. You must not assume additional actions
       beyond what is explicitly described in the behavior. You must also assume
       that the actions are executed fully. Your evaluation needs to be in the
       following format:

   1. **Name of {node_name}**
   - Known:
   - Analysis: (think step by step)
   - Contradictions to what is known: (think step by step)
   - Conclusion:

   Finally, provide the final answer as a list of locations in the following
       formats within the tags <Answer>...</Answer>.
   - entity_name: [’{node_name}1’, ’{node_name}2’, ...]

   Here are some tips to help you answer the question:
   - You may assume that the vehicles can break traffic rules as long as it is
       plausible in real life (realistic). However, the vehicles action must not
       violate the behavior described.
   - The {node_name}s selected can only be from the list of possible {node_name}s
       provided.

   Answer: Let’s think step by step.



                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Example 9: Property Node Proposal LLM Response
   **Input**:
   node_name = "starting location"
   causal_graph = ["emergency vehicle", "ego-vehicle stopping abruptly on left
       lane"]
   entities = [{’name’: ’ambulance1’,
               ’type’: ’agent’,
               ’entity_name’: ’ambulance’,
               ’behavioral_properties’: {}},
              {’name’: ’ego-vehicle’,
               ’type’: ’agent’,
               ’entity_name’: ’ego-vehicle’,
               ’behavioral_properties’: {’action’: ’Vehicle drives straight and
       suddenly stops’}}]
   candidate_values = {"ambulance1": [’in the right lane behind the ego-vehicle’,
       ’in the right lane in front of the ego-vehicle’, ’in the left lane behind
       the ego-vehicle’, ’in the left lane in front of the ego-vehicle’]}

   **Output**:
   Sure, lets think through plausible locations step by step.
   ...
   <Answer>
   - ambulance1: [’in the right lane behind the ego-vehicle’]</Answer>


                                               27
