Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E MERGENCE OF META - STABLE CLUSTERING IN MEAN -
FIELD TRANSFORMER MODELS

 Giuseppe Bruno1∗ Federico Pasqualotto2 Andrea Agazzi1∗
 1
   Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Bern
 2
   Department of Mathematics, University of California, San Diego



                                                A BSTRACT

          We model the evolution of tokens within a deep stack of Transformer layers as a
          continuous-time flow on the unit sphere, governed by a mean-field interacting par-
          ticle system, building on the framework introduced in (Geshkovski et al., 2023).
          Studying the corresponding mean-field Partial Differential Equation (PDE), which
          can be interpreted as a Wasserstein gradient flow, in this paper we provide a math-
          ematical investigation of the long-term behavior of this system, with a particu-
          lar focus on the emergence and persistence of meta-stable phases and clustering
          phenomena, key elements in applications like next-token prediction. More specif-
          ically, we perform a perturbative analysis of the mean-field PDE around the iid
          uniform initialization and prove that, in the limit of large number of tokens, the
          model remains close to a meta-stable manifold of solutions with a given structure
          (e.g., periodicity). Further, the structure characterizing the meta-stable manifold
          is explicitly identified, as a function of the inverse temperature parameter of the
          model, by the index maximizing a certain rescaling of Gegenbauer polynomials.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The transformers architecture (Vaswani, 2017), widely used in large language models, has played a
pivotal role in fueling the recent AI revolution. A key element of this architecture are self-attention
modules (Bahdanau, 2014), allowing to capture long-range relationships within the data, e.g., in sen-
tences where the number of tokens is large. However, despite the impact of transformers and the key
role played by this mechanism, the theoretical understanding of these models is still in an embryonic
stage. In particular, a mathematical description of the representations developed by these models,
and of the effect of different choices of hyperparameters on such representations is still lacking.
Recently, the work (Geshkovski et al., 2023) introduced a simplified model for the dynamics of
tokens through the layers of the transformer architecture. This model consists of a nonlinear Partial
Differential Equation (PDE) modeling the evolution of the tokens – interpreted as N interacting
particles – through the layers of the network. As showcased by the authors in their work, this model
displays clustering dynamics of the tokens through the layers, a feature indicating the emergence of
representations in the network (e.g., the emergence of concepts/consensus in next-word predictions).
Despite its simplicity, this model – which, in its simplest form, results from the choice of specific
value, key and query matrices in the self-attention mechanism – displays a number of dynamical
properties that have not been fully understood. In particular, while the mathematical description
of the emergence of clusters was proven by studying the long-time (infinite depth) behavior of the
token dynamics, which can be shown to generically converge to a single cluster as time (depth) goes
to infinity, numerical simulations show that this phase of total collapse is preceded by several phases
of partial clustering, which long-time results fail to characterize. Characterizing this phenomenon is
crucial for understanding how representations develop in deep models: on the one hand, deep models
are expected to produce more diverse and rich representations of the data, leading to improved
generalization and performance. On the other hand, due to the finite depth of transformer models
and the prohibitive computational and memory cost required to reach the single-cluster regime,
  ∗
    Part of this work was carried out while at the University of Pisa.
Contacts: {giuseppe.bruno,andrea.agazzi}@unibe.ch,                       fpasqualotto@ucsd.edu


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


these intermediate clustering phases are likely to play a crucial role in the model’s effectiveness,
highlighting the need for a deeper understanding of their meta-stable behavior.

Contributions In this paper we study the clustering dynamics of the model developed in
(Geshkovski et al., 2023) in the intermediate time range, i.e., between initialization and the emer-
gence of the first set of clusters. To do so, we give a detailed mathematical description of the
dynamics of the network in the large-context regime, i.e., when the number of tokens on which the
transformer acts is large, characterizing the intermediate, meta-stable phase of the network before it
collapses to the single-cluster limit. More specifically we prove the following:

      1. We rigorously prove the convergence, as the number of tokens N becomes large, to the dy-
         namics of the limiting law under the mean-field PDE. We further show that this convergence
         is non-uniform in time, justifying the more refined metastability analysis carried out below.
      2. We characterize the evolution of the N -particle measure close to initialization, identifying
         an initial phase where a certain number of clusters starts to form. We explicitly characterize
         the structure of the solution forming in this first phase – e.g., its periodicity – as a function
         of the temperature parameter, the number of tokens and the embedding dimension d.
      3. We perform an in-depth analysis of the dynamics on longer time scales to prove that the
         periodicity developed in the first phase is maintained over time intervals of length O(ln N ).
         This proves the existence of a meta-stable phase where the network learns a richer repre-
         sentation of the data, before the total collapse phase predicted by (Geshkovski et al., 2023).

We note that the above characterization has important practical implications, as it clarifies the rela-
tionship between hyperparameters such as the temperature parameter, the number of tokens or the
embedding dimension and the emergence of representations in transformers by providing quantita-
tive estimates on the “richness” of such representation and on the depth required to achieve it.

Related works This paper is closely related to the works (Sander et al., 2022; Geshkovski et al.,
2023), where the model we study here was developed. In (Geshkovski et al., 2023), the authors
highlight the problem of investigating the dynamic meta-stability of such models, a problem that, to
the best of our knowledge, remains open to this day. In this setting, the clustering phenomenon was
studied in (Markdahl et al., 2017) in d > 2 and in (Criscitiello et al., 2024) for d = 2. These works
give sufficient conditions for the occurrence of the collapse of the dynamics for finite number N of
tokens to a single cluster, which occurs with probability 1 over the initial conditions of the system.
These results, however, only hold in the t → ∞ limit, while our work provides a more detailed
analysis, in the large N limit, capturing the meta-stable properties of the dynamics as it approaches
slow manifolds of intermediate representations in the form of structured solutions before reaching
the ultimate single-mode collapse. The dynamic meta-stability of mean-field transformers was also
studied in the complementary setting of well-separated configurations in (Geshkovski et al., 2024a).
The approach taken in this paper is closely connected to the one developed in (Chen et al., 2018;
E, 2017), where the dynamics of the network’s state through its depth are modeled by a differential
equation. In our case, however, the state of the network can be broken down in N “particles” (as
opposed to one in (Chen et al., 2018)) that interact in a mean-field way through a nonlinear PDE.
More generally, this paper connects to a vast literature on mean-field models for neural networks,
pioneered by the papers (Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Mei et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018),
later extended to more general settings and more quantitative estimates (e.g., in (Agazzi & Lu, 2021;
De Bortoli et al., 2020)). While those papers also model the state of the network as an empirical
measure whose evolution is described by a mean-field PDE, in this series of works the dynamics
describe the training of the model and not the evolution of the model’s state through its depth.
Furthermore, in these cases the propagation of chaos estimates are established on bounded time
intervals, while we extend these estimates on O(log N ) time intervals.
Another line of related works studies the fluctuations around the mean-field limit of nonlinear PDEs
such as the one discussed in this work. In a more general setting, (Carrillo et al., 2020) analyzed the
connection between Fourier coefficients of a given potential and the stability of the homogeneous
steady state for general McKean-Vlasov equations on the torus, (Lancellotti, 2009) characterized the
fluctuations in the linear regime, and (Grenier, 2000) devised a general method for investigating the
instability of the Euler and Prandtl equations.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Structure of the paper In Section 2 we introduce the framework and some notation. In Section
3 we present the large-N convergence results. In Section 4 we discuss the long-time analysis of
the dynamics and the corresponding meta-stability results. In Section 5 we present some numerical
simulations and in Section 6 the conclusions.

2       F RAMEWORK AND NOTATION
We start by introducing the models under consideration in this paper. These were first derived
in (Sander et al., 2022; Geshkovski et al., 2023; 2024b), by considering the transformer architecture
as a discrete-time dynamical system describing the evolution of N tokens {xi (t)}i=1,...,N , given by
        (                             PN β⟨Qxi (k),Kxj (k)⟩
                                  1
          xi (k + 1) = N xi + Zβ,i       j=1 e                 V xj (k) , k = 0, ..., L − 1
                                                                                             ,    (1)
          xi (0) = xi
where N : Rd → Sd−1 denotes the normalization operator and Zβ,i is a normalization factor. The
dynamics depend on (matrix) parameters Q, K, V (query, key, value) whose significance is inherited
from the transformer architecture. For simplicity, (Geshkovski et al., 2023) set Q = K = V = Id
and introduce the following continuous-time, simplified model problem describing the dynamics of
xi (t) : [0, ∞) → Sd−1 as a (layer-wise) limit of (1) in the spirit of (Chen et al., 2018):
                                                                                
                                                      N
                                              1      X
                        ẋi (t) = Pxi (t)               eβ⟨xi (t),xj (t)⟩ xj (t) .         (SA)
                                            Zβ,i (t) j=1

Here, Px y is the projection onto Tx Sd−1 given by Px y = y − ⟨x, y⟩x, ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the Eu-
clidean inner product in Rd , Zβ,i (t) is a layer-wise normalization term defined by Zβ,i (t) =
Pn       β⟨xi (t),xk (t)⟩
   k=1 e                  and β > 0 is a positive constant, identified throughout as the inverse tem-
perature. They also introduce a related model problem1
                                                                               
                                                     N
                                                  1 X
                              ẋi (t) = Pxi (t)        eβ⟨xi (t),xj (t)⟩ xj (t) ,            (USA)
                                                  N j=1
modifying the normalization factor of the sum in (SA).
It is convenient to parametrize the dynamics (SA) and (USA) by “modding out” permutation invari-
                                                                     PN
ance. This is classical and can be achieved by setting µ(t) := N1 i=1 δxi (t) , where we denote by
δx the Dirac delta distribution at the point x. This yields the continuity equation2 :
                               ∂t µ + div(χ[µ]µ) = 0 on R≥0 × Sd−1 ,

                                                                                               (2)
                               µ|t=0 = µ(0)               on Sd−1 .
In the above formula, χ[µ] : Sd−1 → T Sd−1 is given by either χSA or χUSA , respectively defined as
                                                     Z
                                               1          β⟨x,y⟩
                         χSA [µ](x) = Px                e        y dµ(y)                  (SA-MF)
                                            Zβ,µ (x)
                                            Z
                         χUSA [µ](x) = Px          eβ⟨x,y⟩ y dµ(y) .                    (USA-MF)
                                              Sd−1
                           R β⟨x,y⟩
where we used Zβ,µ (x) = e          dµ(y).
Note that the dynamics are then interpreted as a flow map between probability measures on Sd−1 .
In addition, as shown in (Geshkovski et al., 2023), (2) admits a Wasserstein gradient flow structure.
Noting that (2) evolves both empirical and absolutely continuous measures, it is reasonable to guess
that the continuous dynamics (2) approximate the particle dynamics (USA) in the limit of an infinite
number of particles, at least in a certain timescale. In the following section, we show a propagation
of chaos result, which puts this consideration on a rigorous footing and is a prelude to our results on
dynamical metastability.
    1
     Which has the advantage of having a gradient flow structure.
    2
     For these specific (non-absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue) measures µ, this equation needs
to be interpreted with the weak formulation. Further, note that div here and throughout indicates the divergence
intrinsic to Sd−1 , i.e. the covariant divergence induced by the standard metric on Sd−1 .


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3       P ROPAGATION OF CHAOS RESULTS AND MEAN FIELD LIMIT
In this section, we establish the rigorous statements for the mean field limit of models (USA)
and (SA). In what follows, we denote by W1 (·, ·) the 1-Wasserstein distance3 on P(Sd−1 ) (the
space of probability measures on Sd−1 ).
                                                                              N
                                                     (N )      (N )
Consider a cloud of N points on Sd−1 , Ξ(N ) := x1 , . . . , xN       ∈ Sd−1     which we think
                                                                                    (N )
  as initial conditions  for either (SA) of (USA). Let the associated evolution be Ξ (t) :=
of
   (N )           (N )
 x1 (t), . . . , xN (t) , and consider its empirical measure
                                                          N
                                                        1 X
                                          µΞ(N ) (t) :=      δ (N ) .
                                                        N j=1 xj (t)

The following theorem proves that the convergence of a sequence of empirical measures Ξ(N ) to a
limiting one µ0 (e.g., if {xj } are drawn iid from µ0 ) is preserved by the flow of the PDE for any
finite time t, i.e., that the N -particles measure remains close to the dynamics of the particles’ law as
described by the PDE.
Theorem 3.1 (Mean field limit). Assume that there exists µ0 ∈ P(Sd−1 ) such that
W1 (µΞ(N ) (0), µ0 ) → 0 as N → ∞. Let µ(t) be the unique weak solution of the associated mean
field dynamics (2) with initial condition µ(0) = µ0 . Then, for any fixed t ≥ 0, as N → ∞,
                                          W1 (µΞ(N ) (t), µ(t)) → 0.

Remark 3.2. Global existence of weak solutions to (2) in P(Sd−1 ) is classical, and follows from
a-priori estimates on the kernel χ[µ].
The proof of the above theorem is provided for completeness in Appendix A. Following classical
references (Sznitman, 1991), we prove the desired estimate by propagating the error estimate at time
t = 0 to any given positive time by using an exponential (in t) bound on the rate of separation of
trajectories, also called Dobrushin’s bound (Dobrushin, 1979), summarized in A.4.
To conclude this section, we highlight the fact that the estimate presented in the above theorem only
holds on finite time intervals. This is a result of the exponential degeneration in time of Dobrushin’s
bound, which is expected to hold in general (as it is a form of Cauchy stability). This degeneration is
indeed inevitable for the system at hand (i.e., this system does not obey uniform in time propagation
of chaos) as proven in a counterexample in Appendix B.
As we shall see in the upcoming section, despite the above exponential degeneration, estimates on
longer time intervals may still be established, providing insight on the qualitative behavior of the
system beyond the finite-time horizon. This is a necessary step to characterize the emergence of
meta-stable phases, i.e., states existing for long – in N – time intervals.

4       DYNAMIC META - STABILITY RESULTS
In (Geshkovski et al., 2023), it is observed that the tokens xi (t) in models (SA) and (USA) ex-
hibit exponential convergence to a single clustered configuration in certain regimes, as time goes
to infinity. In an intermediate time range, however, the authors observe the existence of long-time
meta-stable states. Their simulations reveal a two-phase dynamic: an initial phase characterized
by the formation of multiple clusters, followed by a pairwise merging of these clusters, ultimately
leading to a single point mass distribution. In this section, we rigorously describe both the onset and
the development of such dynamical metastability phenomenon.

4.1       M ETA - STABILITY: SETUP AND DISCUSSION

We restrict our attention to a class of models which arise as a generalization of (USA):
                      ∂t µt + div(µt ∇(W ∗ µt )) = 0 for (t, x) ∈ R≥0 × Sd−1 ,

                                                                                                     (3)
                      µ|t=0 = µ0                        for x ∈ Sd−1 .
    3
        See Appendix A.1 the precise definition.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, the convolution operator ∗ is defined canonically as follows4 :
                                          Z
                           (f ∗ g)(x) =        f (⟨x, y⟩)g(y)dσSd−1 (y),                                       (4)
                                                 Sd−1

where f : [−1, 1] → R, g : Sd−1 → R and dσSd−1 is the standard Lebesgue measure on Sd−1 . In
addition div and ∇ are the intrinsic divergence and gradient in Sd−1 , induced by the standard metric
on Sd−1 .
Note that, setting W (q) := β −1 exp(βq) we recover the case of the (mean-field) dynamics (USA-
MF). However, in the spirit of keeping our discussion general, we analyze the above equation for
more general kernels W , making the following assumptions about its properties.
Assumption 1. W is a smooth (C ∞ ) function on [−1, 1].
Assumption 2. Let Ŵk be the k−th Gegenbauer coefficient of W (see (C.1.2) for the definition),
and γk := k(k + d − 2)Ŵk . The sequence {γk }k≥0 has a finite maximum γmax > 0. Moreover, this
maximum is attained only at a single value kmax > 0.
Remark 4.1. Note that Assumption 1 is trivially satisfied in the transformers model. Furthermore,
for d = 2 the coefficients Ŵk are simply given by β −1 Ik (β), where Ik is the k-th order modified
Bessel funcion of the first kind. Classical asymptotic estimates on Bessel functions (Abramowitz &
Stegun, 1948, p. 360, 9.1.10) show that the maximum γmax is finite for√all β and it is non-unique
only on a set of Lebesgue measure 0. Furthermore, as β → ∞, kmax ≈ β.

Assumption 2 is related to the concept of H-stability introduced by (Ruelle, 1999) and, as discussed
in (Carrillo et al., 2020) for the torus, determines the instability of the uniform measure and the
properties of phase transitions in the presence of noise. We will in particular show that Ŵkmax also
controls the time scale and the type of emerging symmetries.
In what follows, motivated by the absence of a preferential direction in embedding space, we con-
sider as the initial condition the empirical measure associated with N tokens sampled independently
and uniformly on Sd−1 . Although there is an extensive body of work on fluctuations of the mean-
field limit ((Fernandez & Méléard, 1997; Lancellotti, 2009)), these studies generally focus on a finite
time interval [0, T ], which is insufficient for observing the meta-stable phase. Indeed, in our setting,
the size of the perturbation scales as O(N −1/2 ), vanishing at any finite time T in the N → ∞ limit.
To observe the effect of fluctuations at initialization at macroscopic scales, a much more refined
analysis is required. To carry out such analysis, we decompose the meta-stable phase in three parts:
the linear phase, the quasi-linear phase, and the clustering phase, as depicted in Figure 1:

       • Linear phase. Starting from a very small neighborhood of the uniform measure, the pertur-
         bation coalesces towards the dominant mode determined by kmax until it reaches roughly
         size ϵ ∼ O(N −1/4 ). We describe the dynamics in this phase in a precise fashion, providing
         quantitative estimates for the distance between the solution to the nonlinear PDE in (3) and
         its linearization around the uniform measure.
       • Quasi-linear phase. After exiting the ball of radius ϵ ∼ O(N −1/4 ), the perturbation
         remains close to the nonlinear evolution of the dominant mode sufficiently long so that its
         size exceeds a small threshold δ > 0 independent of the number of particles. Moreover,
         when exiting the quasi-linear phase, the solution is arbitrarily close (as N → ∞) to the
         invariant manifold selected by kmax . This manifold is characterized by measures invariant
                 2π
         under kmax   rotations for d = 2. For d ≥ 3, the description of the above manifold is
         provided in Section 4.4.
       • Nonlinear and collapsing phase. This phase consists of any finite-time interval after the
         quasi-linear phase. In this phase, the solution preserves the structure (e.g., periodicity)
         that emerged during the preceding phases. The exact evolution in this phase depends on
         the specific form of the interaction potential W . In the case of Transformers, for W (q) =
         β −1 eβq , numerical simulations show that, after exiting the quasi-linear phase, the dominant
         mode collapses into kmax clusters.
   4
     We recall the definition for integrable functions, however it is standard to extend this to the convolution of
a smooth W with a measure µ.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                             δx∗
             Linear Phase
                                                                    µ
             Quasi-linear Phase
                                        δ                               fα
             Collapsing Phase
                                                  µ0         µ           f α,K          µ
                                             ϵ2               µL
                                                    µ∞ ϵ      f0α                  1
                                                                                        Pkmax
                                                                                 kmax       i=0    δ xi


Figure 1: Schematic representation of our decomposition of the dynamics. Here, µ represents the
“true” evolution of the system, while µL represents the linearized evolution around the uniform
measure µ∞ ; f α denotes the evolution of the mean-field PDE with initial conditions f0α on the
invariant manifold selected by kmax , and f α,K is the approximation by Grenier’s iterative scheme.


After the three phases described above, a final phase occurs, which we refer to as the late-time phase.
During this phase, as shown in (Markdahl et al., 2017) and (Criscitiello et al., 2024), the multiple
clusters eventually converge to a single point, possibly going through several meta-stable phases
with an intermediate number of clusters.

4.2   M ETA - STABILITY: PRECISE STATEMENTS

To avoid technical complications and to improve clarity of exposition, we focus on the system (3)
in dimension d = 2, identifying S1 with [0, 2π). The analysis conducted here for the linear and
quasi-linear phase can be immediately generalized to the case d > 2 as we outline in Section 4.4.
We start by recalling our setup. We draw N tokens xi (0) at initialization, independently and uni-
formly at random on Sd−1 , and consider the resulting (random) evolution under (USA). Let µt be the
empirical measure associated to the tokens {xi (t)}i=1,...,N , and let µ0 be µ at time t = 0. We define
the perturbation ρt := µt − µ∞ , omitting its dependence on N for clarity, and the corresponding
characteristic time for the linear phase by:
                                              1        N −1/4
                                     T1 :=        ln              .
                                             γmax     ∥ρ0 ∥H −1
where here and throughout ∥·∥H −1 denotes the Sobolev norm with p = 2 and negative exponent k =
−1 defined in (14). Moreover, T1 is well-defined and grows logarithmically in N , as a consequence
of the the Central Limit Theorem (see also Lemma E.3).
Theorem 4.2 (Linear phase). The measure µ(T1 ) can be decomposed as:
                                                    (ρ̂0 )kmax
                             µ(T1 ) = µ∞ + N −1/4              cos(kmax θ) + R,                           (5)
                                                    ∥ρ0 ∥H −1
where R is a remainder which satisfies ∥R∥H −1 = o(N −1/4 ) in probability, and (ρ̂0 )kmax denotes
the Fourier coefficient of ρ0 with index kmax . Thus, as N → ∞, the evolution at time T1 is kmax
periodic and has typical size N −1/4 away from the uniform measure.
From T1 onwards, the dynamics are well-approximated by the mean-field PDE with initial data at
T1 :                          α
                              ∂t f = −∂θ (f α ∇W ∗ f α )
                                                                                           (6)
                              f0α (0) = µ∞ + α cos(kmax θ),
                     (ρ̂ )
where α = N −1/4 ∥ρ00 ∥kmax     . Importantly, since the first equation in display (6) is invariant un-
                           H −1
der rotation (i.e., translation in θ), it will preserve the periodicity (if any) of its initial condition.
Consequently, we note that the function f α will be kmax -periodic for all times.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let δ > 0 be a fixed small parameter, independent of N . As the following theorem shows, the
characteristic time to reach the end of the quasi-linear phase is given by:
                                                    1
                                           T2 :=            ln(δ/α).                                (7)
                                                   γmax
Theorem 4.3 (Quasi-linear phase). Let f α be the solution to the initial value problem (6) and δ > 0
small enough. Then, we have
                                    W1 (µ(T1 + T2 ), f α (T2 )) → 0 ,
in probability as N → ∞ and
                                      W1 (µ(T1 + T2 ), µ∞ ) > δ .
                                α
Remark 4.4. Recalling that f has periodicity kmax , Theorem 4.3 states that the evolution in the
mean field limit, when exiting the quasi-linear phase, converges to a kmax -periodic function, while
being a fixed amount δ away from the equilibrium measure. In other words, this result proves that
when exiting the quasi-linear phase, µ (approximately) displays a very specific structure.

Finally, after the quasi-linear phase, we establish the mean-field limit in the clustering phase. To do
so we require the following assumption:
Assumption 3. Let f∗ := limα→0 f α (T2 ), and consider the initial value problem (6) with initial
data f∗ imposed at time T2 . Then, as t → ∞,

                                                                             1      X−1
                                                                                   kmax
              W1 (f∗ (t), µcluster ) → 0     where            µcluster :=                 δ 2πj .   (8)
                                                                            kmax    j=0
                                                                                           kmax


Let us motivate Assumption 3. Indeed, it is relatively straightforward (using the gradient flow struc-
ture) to show that, as time goes to infinity, f∗ (t) converges (in the weak sense) to a sum of a number
of delta masses located at several points (see Lemma E.5). Moreover, again by translation invariance
in θ, the limit will be kmax periodic. Thus, Assumption 3 is true if we only require the limit to be a
kmax periodic superposition of a number of delta masses.
To motivate why µcluster should have the specific form (8), let us focus our attention on the
dynamics of equation (6) on each interval of periodicity (for simplicity, consider the interval
I := [−π/kmax , π/kmax ]). Following an analogous reasoning as in (Markdahl et al., 2017) it can
be shown that the evolution under the dynamics of (6) (restricted to I via periodicity) of almost
every empirical measure will tend, as time goes to infinity, to a single delta function. Thus, Assump-
tion 3 holds for almost every empirical measure, which leads us to believe that it should hold for the
particular f∗ under consideration.
Under Assumption 3, we obtain the following statement.
Theorem 4.5 (Clustering phase). Let T3 > 0 be a finite time. As N tends to infinity, µ(T1 +T2 +T3 ) is
approximated by f α (T2 +T3 ) in Wasserstein 1-distance, with an error vanishing in probability as N
tends to infinity. In particular, provided that Assumption 3 holds, and picking the time T3 sufficiently
large, as N goes to infinity, µ(T1 +T2 +T3 ) is arbitrarily close (in the Wasserstein 1-distance and in
probability) to the measure µcluster defined in display (8).
Remark 4.6. Note that, without requiring assumption 3, an analogous rigorous statement can be
obtained in which the limiting measure is a kmax periodic superposition of delta masses. However,
in this case a number k ≥ kmax of clusters, possibly of different intensity, may emerge.

4.3   D ESCRIPTION OF THE PROOF

The technical machinery which enables us to achieve the proof of the above Theorems is contained
in Appendix C. First, we introduce key technical definitions and statements in Section C.1, and the
linearization of our problem in Section C.2.
Linear phase. Section C.3 is devoted to the proof of Proposition C.10, the quantitative statement of
Theorem 4.2. First, we improve, via Lemma C.7, the Lyapunov exponent on times smaller than T1 ,
by studying explicitly the linearized operator around µ∞ . This Lemma employs a duality argument


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to avoid derivative loss, and allows us to show a quantitative improvement of Dobrushin’s estimate,
which in turn is enough to show propagation of chaos for times comparable to T1 . These ingredients
are enough to conclude the proof of Proposition C.10.
Quasi-linear phase. In Section C.4, we construct a genuinely nonlinear solution which arises from
the unstable mode cos(kmax θ) after time T1 . The main technical issue in this regard is that we only
have a poor estimate of the nonlinear growth rate C > 0 of solutions to the mean-field equation
(appearing in Dobrushin’s estimate). In particular, a direct approach would work if 2γmax > C
(i.e., the nonlinear growth rate is slower than twice the growth rate of the unstable mode) for the
relevant times t < T1 + T2 , but this estimate does not seem to be available. By employing Grenier’s
scheme (Grenier, 2000), we consider a higher-order approximation to the dynamics, which allows
us to relax the above condition to nkmax > C, where n > 1 is the order of our approximation. This
reasoning allows us to prove Proposition C.15 on the quasi-linear phase.
Collapse phase. At time T2 , as N → ∞, the evolution concentrates around the kmax periodic func-
tion f∗ considered in assumption 3. We then use Dobrushin’s estimates, together with the specific
form of the infinite time limit provided by assumption 3 to conclude the statement of Theorem C.23.
Note in particular that, after time T2 , the time required for clustering to occur does not depend on
N . Consequently, Dobrushin’s estimates apply directly here.

4.4   M ETA - STABLE P HASE IN H IGHER D IMENSIONS

In higher dimensions, a similar analysis of the meta-stable phase can be carried out as in the lower-
dimensional case (see D for details). The definitions and arguments from the previous sections
naturally extend to the case d ≥ 2 due to the properties of spherical harmonics and Gegenbauer
coefficients. The uniform measure remains an unstable equilibrium. The key difference is that
the dominant mode f α , which emerges in the linear phase as described in Theorem 4.2, is now a
superposition of spherical harmonics of degree kmax , solving:
                             (
                              ∂t f α = −∂θ (f α ∇W ∗ f α )
                                                PZkdmax                                           (9)
                              f0α (T1 ) = µ∞ + j=0        αj Ykmax ,j ,

where Zkdmax is the multiplicity of spherical harmonics of degree kmax in dimension d.
This function belongs to the subspace Hkmax , invariant for the continuity equation (3), defined as:

                   Hk := {µ ∈ P(Sd−1 ) : ⟨µ, Yl,j ⟩ = 0 ∀l not divisible by k},
                                       2π
that generalizes the invariance under kmax -rotations. Hence, Theorem 4.3 can be reformulated in
this higher-dimensional context as:
Theorem 4.7 (Quasi-linear phase). Let f α be the solution to the initial value problem (9) and δ > 0
small enough. Then, we have

                                  W1 (µ(T1 + T2 ), f α (T2 )) → 0 ,

in probability as N → ∞ and

                                     W1 (µ(T1 + T2 ), µ∞ ) > δ .

Again, Theorem 4.7 states that the evolution in the mean field limit, when exiting the quasi-linear
phase, converges to a function in Hkmax , while being a fixed amount δ away from the equilibrium
measure. This proves that the measure displays a very specific structure at the end of the quasi-linear
phase. A natural extension of the analysis is to characterize the stable equilibria of the dynamics
when restricted to the subspace Hkmax , excluding the uniform measure. These equilibria must
be finite unions of submanifolds of dimension at most d − 2 (see Lemma E.5). Furthermore, if
the measure is the empirical measure representing a set of points, being in Hkmax (Bannai et al.
(2015)) implies that these points form a spherical kmax − 1-design. This condition indicates specific
properties regarding the minimum number of clusters, their geometric structure, and the distribution
of tokens, which have been extensively explored in the literature and are an active area of research.

                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: On the left, the plots of γk as a function of k for β = 5 (top) and β = 7 (bottom) are shown.
The dashed blue line represents the value of γk generalized to real k. From these graphs, we observe
that the corresponding values of kmax are 3 and 4, respectively, representing the predicted number
of clusters in the large-N limit. In the center, numerical simulations depict particle trajectories for
β = 5 (top) and β = 7 (bottom), with 104 particles whose initial conditions are sampled uniformly
at random. On the right, the histograms of particle distributions at the end of the simulations are
displayed, showcasing the formation of 3 and 4 clusters respectively.


5   N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS

The first experiment aims to illustrate the relationship between the parameter β and the number of
clusters formed: an immediate manifestation of the symmetry described in Theorem 4.3 and the
clustering tendency of the dynamics. Specifically, the left column of Figure 2 illustrates the values
of the coefficients γk for the Transformer model USA with β set to 5 and 7. Assumption 2 is satis-
fied with kmax values of 3 and 4, respectively. By Theorem 4.2 and Proposition C.20, these values
correspond to the expected number of clusters observed during the meta-stable phase. To confirm
this, we simulate in Figure 2 the trajectories of 104 particles on S1 , whose initial conditions are sam-
pled uniformly at random. The angular ODEs system (10), equivalent to Eq. (USA), is numerically
solved using the Euler method with a time step dt = 5 × 10−4 . Notice the different timescales of
the two simulations, the meta-stable phase and the emergence of the predicted 3 and 4 clusters. The
computation is performed using PyTorch in double precision on a Nvidia Tesla T4 GPU.
With the second experiment we demonstrate the decomposi-
tion of Eq. (5) and the emergence of periodicity in the token
distribution. To further investigate the asymptotic limit on the
number of tokens, and given the computational constraints on
simulating a large number of particles, we chose to examine
the limiting case of an absolutely continuous initial condition.
Given that the results in Theorem 4.2 apply to general pertur-
bations of uniform measures, we consider as initial condition,
µ0 , the uniform measure slightly perturbed by white noise.
Figure 4 illustrates the evolution of µt starting from µ0 . The
continuity equation (3), more precisely its angular counter-
part Eq.(11), is numerically solved using the Lax–Friedrichs
method by discretizing the spatial domain into 104 grid points     Figure 3: Plot of the average time
over the interval [0, 2π], with a spatial step dx = 2π × 10−4      required for the empirical measure
and a time step dt = 0.05dx. The resulting dynamics consis-        to exceed a fixed threshold. Note
tently confirm our theoretical expectations.                       the logarithmic scale on the x-axis.
In the third experiment, we demonstrate that the duration of the meta-stable phase is O(ln(N )),
as predicted by Theorem 4.2 and Theorem 4.3. We fix β = 2 and run multiple simulations with
the same setup of the first experiment, with the number of particles ranging from N = 1000 to
N = 16000. The simulations are terminated when the approximate total variation distance between


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Evolution of the initial condition given by the uniform measure perturbed by white noise
(σ = 0.01) with β = 5 . Note that the emerging solution is 3-periodic as predicted by Theorem 4.3.

the uniform distribution and the token distribution (computed using 100 bins for the histogram)
exceeds a fixed threshold. Figure 3 shows the average results from 20 simulations per particle
number. We observe a clear logarithmic dependence in N of the exit time from the quasi-linear
regime, aligning with the theoretical expectations. Code is available at this GitHub-Repository.

6   C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper we rigorously investigate the dynamics of N tokens, interpreted as exchangeable par-
ticles, through the depth of a simple transformer model in the limit of a large N . In this limit, the
dynamic meta-stability of the system can be captured by studying the emergence of symmetry at
initialization through a careful analysis of the evolving fluctuations in the systems. In particular, we
show that, after a time that depends logarithmically on N , the system exits from a ball containing
the uniform measure displaying, approximately, a specific structure (a certain periodicity in the case
d = 2) that depends explicitly on the inverse temperature parameter β and on the dimension d. Since
the equation describing the dynamics of this model preserves such structure, this observation allows
to capture the emergence of dynamically meta-stable solutions and to characterize them explicitly.
In practice, this translates in a detailed understanding of the representations produced by the network
at finite but large depths, and how these representations vary with the depth as a function of N .
While 104 tokens might seem a large number, many modern models can handle significantly larger
context lengths. For instance, ChatGPT can process up to 128k tokens, and Gemini 1.5 Pro supports
up to 2 million tokens. As the context lengths and the depth of large language models continue
to expand, the large-N limit and the meta-stable effects discussed here will become increasingly
relevant. Indeed, we demonstrated the existence of a strong interconnection among the main hyper-
parameters of a Transformer model: number of tokens, temperature, embedding dimension, and
model depth. These hyper-parameters cannot be adjusted independently of one another.
Admittedly, our work makes strong assumptions on the structure of the model, e.g., absence of MLP
layer and Q = K = V = Id. The latter assumption can be immediately relaxed to QT K = λId,
and quite possibly to QT K = V , as the gradient flow structure is preserved in that case. While these
assumptions are still far from realistic, numerical experiments in (Geshkovski et al., 2023) show that
BERT displays qualitatively similar token clustering behavior to the one of our model. On the other
hand, the choice of MLP layer will have a dramatic impact on the dynamical landscape (Cowsik
et al., 2024). The qualitative effect of this extra term on the dynamics depends heavily on the
specific choice of MLP weights, but a linearized analysis similar to ours is expected to go through in
a neighborhood of the (new) unstable equilibria of the model. Despite these limitations, we believe
isolating properties of the full model in simplified settings such as the one considered here is a
crucial step toward building a comprehensive understanding of real-world transformers. Combining
this result with complementary ones on MLP and nontrivial Q, K, V is left for future research.
This work hints at a number of further interesting questions. First, an interesting avenue of future
research consists of proving that Assumption 3 holds, i.e., that the solution to the PDE (2) as it exits
the quasi-linear phase indeed converges to a certain number of delta measures. This result goes well
beyond the ones presented in (Cohn & Kumar, 2007), as it requires characterising the solution of the
PDE with a specific initial condition that may fall in the set of measure 0 in the previously established
result. It would also be interesting to investigate the effect of adding noise - motivated by considering
randomly initialized linear layers between attention layers before training - to the ODEs (SA) and
(USA) and, as a consequence, on the emergence of symmetry and clustering in the resulting system.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Philippe Rigollet for discussions that motivated this work. AA and GB thank the Mathe-
matics Department at the University of Pisa, where part of this work was carried out. AA acknowl-
edges partial support of Dipartimento di Eccellenza, UNIPI, the Future of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search (FAIR) foundation (WP2), PRIN 2022 project ConStRAINeD (2022XRWY7W), and PRA
Project APRISE.

R EFERENCES
Milton Abramowitz and Irene A Stegun. Handbook of mathematical functions with formulas,
 graphs, and mathematical tables, volume 55. US Government printing office, 1948.
Andrea Agazzi and Jianfeng Lu. Global optimality of softmax policy gradient with single hidden
  layer neural networks in the mean-field regime. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR 2021), 2021.
Luigi Ambrosio, Nicola Gigli, and Giuseppe Savaré. Gradient flows: in metric spaces and in the
  space of probability measures. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008.
Dzmitry Bahdanau. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
Eiichi Bannai, Takayuki Okuda, and Makoto Tagami. Spherical designs of harmonic index t. Journal
  of Approximation Theory, 195:1–18, 2015.
Jose Antonio Carrillo, Rishabh S Gvalani, Grigorios A Pavliotis, and Andre Schlichting. Long-time
  behaviour and phase transitions for the mckean–vlasov equation on the torus. Archive for Rational
  Mechanics and Analysis, 235(1):635–690, 2020.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-
  parameterized models using optimal transport. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 31, 2018.
Henry Cohn and Abhinav Kumar. Universally optimal distribution of points on spheres. Journal of
  the American Mathematical Society, 20(1):99–148, 2007.
Aditya Cowsik, Tamra Nebabu, Xiao-Liang Qi, and Surya Ganguli. Geometric dynamics of signal
  propagation predict trainability of transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02579, 2024.
Christopher Criscitiello, Quentin Rebjock, Andrew D McRae, and Nicolas Boumal. Synchronization
  on circles and spheres with nonlinear interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18273, 2024.
Valentin De Bortoli, Alain Durmus, Xavier Fontaine, and Umut Simsekli. Quantitative propagation
  of chaos for sgd in wide neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:278–288, 2020.
Roland L’vovich Dobrushin. Vlasov equations. Functional Analysis and Its Applications, 13(2):
  115–123, 1979.
Weinan E. A proposal on machine learning via dynamical systems. Communications in Mathematics
 and Statistics, 1(5):1–11, 2017.
Begona Fernandez and Sylvie Méléard. A hilbertian approach for fluctuations on the mckean-vlasov
  model. Stochastic processes and their applications, 71(1):33–53, 1997.
Borjan Geshkovski, Cyril Letrouit, Yury Polyanskiy, and Philippe Rigollet. A mathematical per-
  spective on transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10794, 2023.
Borjan Geshkovski, Hugo Koubbi, Yury Polyanskiy, and Philippe Rigollet. Dynamic metastability
  in the self-attention model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06833, 2024a.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Borjan Geshkovski, Cyril Letrouit, Yury Polyanskiy, and Philippe Rigollet. The emergence of clus-
  ters in self-attention dynamics. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
GitHub-Repository.                                       https://github.com/gbruno16/
  transformers-metastability.
Emmanuel Grenier. On the nonlinear instability of euler and prandtl equations. Communications
  on Pure and Applied Mathematics: A Journal Issued by the Courant Institute of Mathematical
  Sciences, 53(9):1067–1091, 2000.
Weimin Han, Kendall Atkinson, and Hao Zheng. Some integral identities for spherical harmonics
 in an arbitrary dimension. Journal of Mathematical Chemistry, 50:1126–1135, 2012.
Daniel Han-Kwan and Toan T. Nguyen. Instabilities in the mean field limit. Journal of Statistical
  Physics, 162(6):1639–1653, February 2016. ISSN 1572-9613. doi: 10.1007/s10955-016-1455-6.
  URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10955-016-1455-6.
Emmanuel Hebey. Sobolev spaces on Riemannian manifolds, volume 1635. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 1996.
SG Krantz. A Primer of Real Analytic Functions.             Birkhäuser Advanced Texts: Basler
  Lehrbücher/Birkhäuser Boston, Inc, 2002.
Carlo Lancellotti. On the fluctuations about the vlasov limit for n-particle systems with mean-field
  interactions. Journal of Statistical Physics, 136(4):643–665, 2009.
Johan Markdahl, Johan Thunberg, and Jorge Gonçalves. Almost global consensus on the n-sphere.
  IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 63(6):1664–1675, 2017.
Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-
  layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):E7665–E7671,
  2018.
Victor M Panaretos and Yoav Zemel. An invitation to statistics in Wasserstein space. Springer
  Nature, 2020.
Grant Rotskoff and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Trainability and accuracy of artificial neural networks:
  An interacting particle system approach. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 75
  (9):1889–1935, 2022.
David Ruelle. Smooth dynamics and new theoretical ideas in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics.
  Journal of Statistical Physics, 95:393–468, 1999.
Michael E Sander, Pierre Ablin, Mathieu Blondel, and Gabriel Peyré. Sinkformers: Transform-
 ers with doubly stochastic attention. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 3515–3530. PMLR, 2022.
Robert T Seeley. Spherical harmonics. The American Mathematical Monthly, 73(4P2):115–121,
  1966.
Alain-Sol Sznitman. Topics in propagation of chaos. Ecole d’été de probabilités de Saint-Flour
  XIX—1989, 1464:165–251, 1991.
A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
A     P ROPAGATION OF CHAOS

A.1   P RELIMINARIES : WASSERSTEIN DISTANCE

Let (X, d) be a compact metric space and let P(X) be the set of probability measures on X. The
p−Wasserstein distance is defined as:
                                               Z                   1/p
                                                        p
                       Wp (µ, ν) :=     min      d(x, y) dγ(x, y)      .
                                          γ∈Π(µ,ν)


It is a well defined distance and in compact spaces satisfies for all p ≥ 1:
                                                              p−1              1
                         W1 (µ, ν) ≤ Wp (µ, ν) ≤ diam(X) p W1 (µ, ν) p .

Moreover, under the compactness assumption, for p ∈ [1, +∞[, we have µn ⇀ µ if and only if
Wp (µn , µ) → 0.
Another common characterization of the distance W1 is a consequence of the duality theorem of
Kantorovich and Rubinstein: when µ and ν have bounded support,
                          Z
         W1 (µ, ν) = sup      f (x)d(µ − ν)(x) f : X → R continuous , Lip(f ) ≤ 1 .
                               X


For other properties and results related to the Wasserstein distance, the reader can refer to (Ambrosio
et al., 2008; Panaretos & Zemel, 2020).

A.2   A NGULAR EQUATION AND MEAN - FIELD PDE CONVERGENCE

In this section we provide a proof of the Dobrushin’s estimate for the Transformers model. For
clarity we restrict our attention to the case where d = 2 for the model USA. Nevertheless, the same
arguments can be extended to prove the estimate for d ≥ 3 and for the model SA.
An interacting particle system on S1 can be equivalently described by associating the particles
xi (t) ∈ S1 with the corresponding angles θi (t) ∈ T. The angular representation of the system
of ODEs for the model USA can be expressed as follow:

                                           N
                                        1 X β cos(θi −θj )
                              θ̇i = −         e            sin(θi − θj ).                         (10)
                                        N j=1
                                                      PN
Then the empirical measure of the angles, ν(t) = N1 j=1 δθj (t) , is a solution of the continuity
equation:
                                ∂t ν(t) + ∂θ (χ[ν(t)]ν(t)) = 0,                              (11)
where:                                         Z
                                   χ[ν](θ) =       h′β (θ − ω) dν(ω)

and hβ (θ) = β1 eβ cos(θ) . With this notation and these definitions, Dobrushin’s estimate can be
formulated as follows:
Theorem A.1. Let µt , νt be two solutions of Eq. (11), with initial conditions respectively µ0 , ν0 ∈
P(S1 ). Then ∀t ≥ 0:
                                W1 (µt , νt ) ≤ e2Ct W1 (µ0 , ν0 ),
with C = ∥h′′β ∥L∞ .


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We denote Tt [µ](x) the flow of our system with initial condition x ∈ S1 and vector field χ[µt ].
Furthermore, given a generic measurable map f , we denote the push-forward of the measure µ
under the map f as f #µ. In particular Eq. (11) is equivalent to νt = Tt [ν]#ν0 .
The proof of Theorem A.1 is a consequence of the Lipschtzianity of the vector field χ[µt ] and of the
flow Tt [µ], which are shown in the next two lemmas:
Lemma A.2. Let µ, ν ∈ P(S1 ), then:
                                 ∥χ[µ] − χ[ν]∥L∞ ≤ ∥h′′β ∥L∞ W1 (µ, ν).

Proof. By definition of χ:
                                                Z
                  ∥χ[µ] − χ[ν]∥L∞ = sup               h′β (θ − ω)[dµ(ω) − dν(ω)] ≤
                                         θ∈S1

                                                                   h′β (θ − ω)
                                                              Z
                                     ≤ ∥h′′β ∥L∞ sup                           [dµ(ω) − dν(ω)] .
                                                 θ∈S1               ∥h′′β ∥L∞
       h′ (θ−ω)
Since ∥hβ ′′ ∥L∞ is 1-Lipschitz we can conclude by definition of W1 .
         β


Lemma A.3. Let µ ∈ P(S1 ), then:
                                  ∥χ[µ]∥Lip ≤ C,           ∥Tt [µ]∥Lip ≤ eCt .
where C = ∥h′′β ∥L∞ .

Proof. For the first part:
                                     Z
       ∥χ[µ](θ1 ) − χ[µ](θ2 )∥ ≤         |h′β (θ1 − ω) − h′β (θ2 − ω)|dµ(ω) ≤ ∥h′′β ∥L∞ (θ1 − θ2 ).

For the second part:
       d                                  d                d
          |Tt [µ](θ1 ) − Tt [µ](θ2 )| ≤     Tt [µ](θ1 ) − Tt [µ](θ2 ) =
       dt                                dt                dt
                                      = |χ[µt ](Tt (θ1 )) − χ[µt ](Tt (θ2 ))| ≤ C |Tt (θ1 ) − Tt (θ2 )| .
The conclusion follows as a consequence of Gronwall’s lemma.

Now we can return to the theorem:

Proof of Theorem A.1.
                  W1 (µt , νt ) = W1 (Tt [µ]#µ0 , Tt [ν]#ν0 ) ≤
                                                                                                                (12)
                                ≤ W1 (Tt [µ]#µ0 , Tt [µ]#ν0 ) + W1 (Tt [µ]#ν0 , Tt [ν]#ν0 )
For the first term:
                                                          Z
             W1 (Tt [µ]#µ0 , Tt [µ]#ν0 ) =       sup              ϕ d[Tt [µ]#µ0 − Tt [µ]#ν0 ] =
                                              ∥ϕ∥Lip ≤1      S1
                                                          Z
                                          =      sup              (ϕ ◦ Tt [µ]) d[µ0 − ν0 ] =
                                              ∥ϕ∥Lip ≤1      S1
                                                                  Z
                                          =e    Ct
                                                       sup                 (e−Ct ϕ ◦ Tt [µ]) d[µ0 − ν0 ] ≤
                                                     ∥ϕ∥Lip ≤1      S1
                                                                  Z
                                          ≤ eCt        sup                 ψ d[µ0 − ν0 ] = eCt W1 (µ0 , ν0 ),
                                                     ∥ψ∥Lip ≤1        S1

where the last row follow from Lemma (A.3).


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the second term:
                                                                Z
             W1 (Tt [µ]#ν0 , Tt [ν]#ν0 ) =           sup              (ϕ ◦ Tt [µ] − ϕ ◦ Tt [ν]) dν0 ≤
                                                ∥ϕ∥Lip ≤1        S1
                                                Z
                                            ≤            |Tt [µ] − Tt [ν]| dν0 := λ(t).
                                                    S1
Now,
                 Z
       dλ(t)          d          d
             ≤           Tt [µ] − Tt [ν] dν0 =
        dt            dt         dt
                 Z
            =        |χ[µt ] ◦ Tt [µ] − χ[νt ] ◦ Tt [ν]| dν0 ≤
                 Z                                                    Z
            ≤        |χ[µt ] ◦ Tt [µ] − χ[µt ] ◦ Tt [ν]| dν0 +             |χ[µt ] ◦ Tt [ν] − χ[νt ] ◦ Tt [ν]| dν0 .

By Lemma (A.3) for the first term, and by the properties of Tt for the second term (in particular
µt = Tt [µ]#µ0 ), we get:
                            Z                       Z
                  dλ(t)
                        ≤ C |Tt [µ] − Tt [ν]| dν0 + |χ[µt ] − χ[νt ]| dνt ≤
                   dt
                        ≤ Cλ(t) + ∥χ[µt ] − χ[νt ]∥L∞ ≤ C[λ(t) + W1 (µt , νt )].
where the last step follows by Lemma (A.2). As a consequence of Gronwall’s inequality it holds:
                                         Z t
                                λ(t) ≤ C     eC(t−τ ) W1 (µτ , ντ )dτ.
                                                0
Going back to Equation (12) we get:
                                                                    Z t
                                      Ct
                     W1 (µt , νt ) ≤ e W1 (µ0 , ν0 ) + C                  eC(t−τ ) W1 (µτ , ντ )dτ.
                                                                      0
And to conclude we just need to apply another time Gronwall’s lemma:
                                      W1 (µt , νt ) ≤ e2Ct W1 (µ0 , ν0 ).


An analogous reasoning in the higher dimensional case, for the dynamics (SA-MF) and (USA-MF)
yields the following more general result.
Theorem A.4 (Dobrushin’s estimate in d dimensions). There exists a constant C > 0 depend-
ing on β such that the following holds. Suppose that µt , νt are two solutions
                                                                                of (2) in the class
C(R≥0 , P(Sd−1 )), with initial conditions respectively µ0 , ν0 ∈ P Sd−1 . Then ∀t ≥ 0 :
                                     W1 (µt , νt ) ≤ e2Ct W1 (µ0 , ν0 ) .
Moreover, C can be computed explicitly. In the case of (SA-MF),
         C = ∥∇x Kβ (x, y)∥L∞ (Sd−1 ×Sd−1 ) ,                   where          Kβ (x, y) := eβ⟨x,y⟩ Px (y).

Finally, Theorem 3.1 is a direct consequence of Theorem A.4 and we omit the proof here.

B    O N THE EXPONENTIAL IN TIME DEPENDENCE
In this section, we demonstrate through a straightforward counterexample that the exponential time-
dependence in Dobrushin’s estimate for the Transformers model cannot generally be improved. The
time control is not only non-uniform but must also exhibit exponential growth.
Let’s consider for simplicity the case β = 1 and N = 2. The ordinary differential equations system
obtained from Eq. (SA) is:
                          
                          ẋ1 = Px1        1      ⟨x1 ,x1 ⟩         ⟨x1 ,x2 ⟩
                                                (e           x 1 + e           x 2 )
                                           Zβ,1
                                                   ⟨x2 ,x1 ⟩
                          ẋ2 = Px2        1
                                           Zβ,2 (e           x1 + e⟨x2 ,x2 ⟩ x2 ) .


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


It’s easier to examine the angle version of the previous ODE system:
                              (
                                θ̇1 = − Zβ,11
                                               ecos(θ1 −θ2 ) sin(θ1 − θ2 )
                                θ̇2 = − Zβ,2 ecos(θ2 −θ1 ) sin(θ2 − θ1 ).
                                            1


Using that Zβ,1 = Zβ,2 =: Z, then ω := θ2 − θ1 satisfies:

                                                        ecos(ω)
                                              ω̇ = −2           sin(ω).
                                                          Z
Since ω(t) = 0 and ω(t) = π are constant solutions, then for every ω0 ∈ [0, π] the corresponding
                                                                                               cos(ω)
trajectory ω(t) is confined in [0, π] ∀t ≥ 0, and this implies sin(ω(t)) ≥ 0. Moreover, e12 ≤ e Z ,
hence:
                                                   2
                                           ω̇ ≤ − 2 sin(ω),
                                                   e
which implies, by an ODE comparison theorem:
                                                                      2
                                             ω(t) ≤ 2 cot−1 (ec+2t/e )                            (13)
where the right-hand side is the solution of γ̇ = − e22 sin(γ) and c depends on the initial condition.
Now consider the initial conditions θ1ϵ := ϵ and θ2ϵ := π − ϵ. The corresponding empirical measure
is:
                                                 1
                                       µϵ (0) := (δϵ + δπ−ϵ )
                                                 2
We want a bound of this kind:
                              W 1 (µϵ (t), µ0 (t))
                                                   ≤ f (t) ∀ϵ > 0         ∀t ≥ 0.
                              W 1 (µϵ (0), µ0 (0))
for some function f .
Notice that µ0 (0) is a constant solution of our system. The Wasserstein distance w.r.t. the geodesic
distance on S1 is given by:
                                                    1                        π ω(t)
                        W 1 (µϵ (t), µ0 (t)) =        (θ1 (t) + π − θ2 (t)) = −     ,
                                                    2                        2  2
hence the function f must satisfy:
                                   π  ω(t)
                                   2 − 2
                                                 ≤ f (t) ∀ϵ > 0       ∀t ≥ 0,
                                         ϵ
with initial condition ω(0) = π − 2ϵ. Using the bounds in Eq. (13):
                                 π  ω(t)
                                 2 − 2              1  π                 2

                                                ≥        − cot−1 (ec+2t/e )
                                     ϵ              ϵ 2
with c s.t. 2 cot−1 (ec ) = π − 2ϵ, i.e. ec = tan(ϵ). Hence it must hold:
                                   1  π                        2

                           f (t) ≥         − cot−1 (tan(ϵ)e2t/e )    ∀ϵ > 0.
                                   ϵ 2
Passing to the limit as ϵ → 0, using a first order Taylor expansion in 0 for cot−1 (x) ≈ π2 − x, we
get:
                                       1  π                        2

                           f (t) ≥ lim         − cot−1 (tan(ϵ)e2t/e ) =
                                   ϵ→0 ϵ     2
                                       tan(ϵ) 2t/e2          2
                                 = lim         e      = e2t/e .
                                   ϵ→0     ϵ
This implies that we cannot improve the exponential time dependence for the stability.


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A PPENDIX : METASTABILITY

C.1     P RELIMINARY DEFINITIONS

C.1.1    S OBOLEV SPACES OF NEGATIVE ORDER
Given a domain Ω ⊂ Rd , we define for every s ∈ N and p ∈ [1, +∞[ the corresponding Sobolev
space of negative order as the dual:
                                              ′
                                     W −s,p (Ω) := W0s,p (Ω)′ ,
where p′ = p/(p − 1) and W0s (Ω) denotes the closure of Cc∞ (Ω) in the usual Sobolev space
                                                  ′
W s,p (Ω). The corresponding dual norm for W −s,p (Ω) is given by:
                 ∥u∥W −s,p′ (Ω) := sup ⟨u, v⟩ : v ∈ W0s,p (Ω), ∥v∥W s,p (Ω) = 1 .

                                                                                      (14)

                                                      ′
For any s ∈ N and p ∈ [1, +∞[ the space W −s,p (Ω) is a Banach space. Moreover, if 1 < p < +∞,
      ′
W −s,p (Ω) is separable and reflexive.
These definitions can be naturally extended to compact Riemannian manifolds, while the non-
compact case is more subtle (the reader can find a reference in (Hebey, 1996)).
Most of our discussion is set within the space W −s,2 (Ω), also referred to as H −s (Ω). These spaces
can be conveniently characterized using Fourier series:

                          H s (Td ) = u ∈ C ∞ (Tn ) : ∥u∥H s (Td ) < ∞ ,


where the norm on H s (Td ) is defined as:
                                                  X
                                 ∥u∥2H sd =               |ûk |2 (1 + |k|2 )s .
                                       T
                                                  k∈Zd

Additionally, note that the Dirac delta δ is an element of H s (Rd ) for every s < −d/2.

C.1.2    S PHERICAL HARMONICS AND G EGENBAUER POLYNOMIALS
The classical spherical harmonics can be generalized to higher-dimensional spheres Sd−1 in the
following way. Consider Pl the space of homogeneous polynomials p(x) : Rd → C of degree l in d
variables, and let Al denote the subspace Pl of harmonic polynomials. Then the spherical harmonics
of degree l are an orthogonal basis for:

         Hl := Yl : Sd−1 → C| exists p ∈ Al such that Yl (x) = p(x) for all x ∈ Sd−1 .


While explicit formulas can be given by induction, we will just need the following:
Theorem C.1. If ∆ is the Laplace-Beltrami operator on Sd−1 , then for all Yl ∈ Hl , one has:
                                      ∆Yl = −l(l + d − 2)Yl .

Furthermore, spherical harmonics have a strict relationship with the convolution defined in Eq. (4),
through the so called Gegenbauer polynomials Pkα .
These polynomials, also known as ultraspherical, are orthogonal on [−1, 1] with respect to the prob-
                              Γ(α+1)           2 α− 21
ability measure with density √πΓ(α+  1 (1 − t )        . An useful definition is through Rodrigues
                                     2)
formula:
                           (−1)k Γ(α + 12 )        2 −α+ 12 d
                                                             k h
                                                                      2 k+α− 21
                                                                                i
                 Pkα (t) = k                (1 − t  )           (1 − t )          .
                          2 Γ(k + α + 21 )                  dtk

They generalize Legendre polynomials and Chebyshev polynomials, and satisfy the so called Funk-
Hecke formula:


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       d−3
Theorem C.2. Let f : [−1, 1] → R such that t → (1 − t2 ) 2 f (t) is integrable. Then the Funk-
Hecke formula holds:       Z
                                           f (⟨x, y⟩)Yl (y)dσ(y) = λl Yl (x),
                                  Sd−1
with the constant λl given by:
                                  Z 1                           d−1
                                                d−2           2π 2          d−3
                           λl =            Pl    2
                                                      (t)f (t) d−1 (1 − t2 ) 2 dt,
                                      −1                      Γ( 2 )
where Γ(·) is the gamma function and Yl is any spherical harmonics on Sd−1 of degree l.
Other properties are discussed in (Han et al., 2012; Seeley, 1966). Although the nomenclature may
not be standardized in the literature, we refer to λl as Gegenbauer coefficent of f of degree l.

C.2   T HE EMERGENCE OF SYMMETRY

For clarity, the following discussion is restricted to S1 (refer to Section 4.4 for adaptations to higher
dimensions). Specifically, notice that identifying each pair of points x, y ∈ S1 with the corre-
sponding angle θ, γ ∈ [0, 2π] and using the relation W (⟨x, y⟩) = W (cos(θ − γ)), the definition of
convolution provided in Eq. (4) aligns with the classical notion of convolution on S1 . Furthermore,
thanks to this change of variable, the Gengenbauer coefficients Ŵk correspond to the Fourier cosine
expansion of W ◦ cos. Thus, for simplicity of notation we will continue using the notation W to
represent the composition W ◦ cos.
Remark C.3. In the case  P∞ of Transformers, both Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 are satisfied since
W (θ) := β1 eβ cos(θ) = k=0 β2 Ik (β) cos(kθ), where Ik (β) are the modified Bessel functions of the
first kind.
Consider µ∞ as the uniform measure on S1 , and let the intial perturbation be µ0 := µ∞ + ρ0 in
P(S1 ). If µt evolves according to the following PDE (consequence of Eq. (3)):

                                       ∂t µt = −∂θ (µt ∇W ∗ µt ),
                                                                                          (15)
                                       µ(0) = µ0 ,
then the perturbation ρt satisfies:

                                 ∂t ρt = Lµ∞ (ρt ) − ∂θ (ρt ∇W ∗ ρt ),
                                                                                          (16)
                                 ρ(0) = ρ0 ,
where Lµ∞ (ρ) := −µ∞ ∆W ∗ ρ denotes the PDE’s linearized operator around µ∞ .
Remark C.4. Since ∇W ∗ µ∞ = 0, the uniform measure is an equilibrium of the system.
The objective of this section is to demonstrate that the dynamics of the system near µ∞ are governed
by the maximal eigenvalue of Lµ∞ .
The core estimate is provided by the following lemma:
Lemma C.5. Let n ≥ 0. For any g ∈ H n (S1 ) and f ∈ W n,∞ (S1 ), the following inequality holds:
                               ⟨f ∂θ g, g⟩H n ≤ Cn ∥f ∥W n,∞ ∥g∥2H n .

Proof. For every k ≤ n:
                                k
          k          k
                                X  k
        ⟨∂ (f ∂g), ∂ g⟩L2 =                  ⟨∂ k−j f ∂ j+1 g, ∂ k g⟩ =
                                j=0
                                       j
                                k−1
                                X
                                       k
                            =              ⟨∂ k−j f ∂ j+1 g, ∂ k g⟩ + ⟨f ∂ k+1 g, ∂ k g⟩ ≤
                                j=0
                                       j
                                k−1
                                X
                                       k                                           1
                            ≤              ∥∂ k−j f ∥L∞ ∥∂ j+1 g∥L2 ∥∂ k g∥L2 + ⟨f, ∂(∂ k g)2 ⟩ ≤
                                j=0
                                       j                                           2
                            ≤ Ck ∥f ∥W k,∞ ∥g∥2H k .



                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For sufficiently small time intervals, the evolution of µt can be approximated by the solution of the
linearized operator. The deviation from this approximation will be estimated in the next paragraph.

C.3    T HE LINEAR PHASE

Dobrushin’s estimate applies globally on S1 and may be suboptimal in the vicinity of the equilibrium
µ∞ . While in general is not possible to have a uniform or polynomial dependence with respect to
time (see Appendix B), this estimate can be locally refined by considering the singular values of the
linear operator Lµ∞ : H k (S1 ) → H k (S1 ). Specifically, under Assumption (1) and Assumption (2),
for every f ∈ H k (S1 ) with k ∈ Z (refer to Lemma E.2):
                                                          1
                                    ∥Lµ∞ f ∥H k ≤           γmax ∥f ∥H k .
                                                         2π
                        1
Remark C.6. Hereafter, 2π γk will be denoted simply as γk .

Utilizing the Lagrangian flow, it’s possible to bound the growth of the perturbation ρt in a small
neighborhood of µ∞ using γmax . In particular, the following lemma can be proved:
Lemma C.7. Let k ≥ 0. There exists ϵ > 0 such that, if ∥ρ0 ∥H −k < ϵ, then

                                                1           ϵ
                               T1 (ϵ, ρ0 ) :=      ln
                                              γmax      ∥ρ0 ∥H −k
is well-defined, and for every t ∈ [0, T1 (ϵ, ρ0 )], the following inequality holds:
                                     ∥ρt ∥H −k ≤ 3∥ρ0 ∥H −k eγmax t .
Remark C.8. The constant ϵ is independent of ρ0 . Furthermore, this lemma implies that, within the
time interval [0, T1 ] the evolution of the measure µt remains within BH −k (µ∞ , 3ϵ).

Proof. Given a test function ψ̄ ∈ H k (S1 ), let ψs be the solution of:

                         ∂s ψs = −Lµ∞ (ψs ) − (∇W ∗ ρs )∂θ ψs s ∈ [0, t],
                                                                                                    (17)
                         ψt = ψ̄.

Hence, by construction:
      ∂s ⟨ρs , ψs ⟩ = ⟨∂s ρ, ψ⟩ + ⟨ρ, ∂s ψ⟩ =
                    = ⟨Lµ∞ (ρs ) − ∂θ (ρs ∇W ∗ ρs ), ψs ⟩ − ⟨ρs , Lµ∞ (ψs ) + (∇W ∗ ρs )∂θ ψs ⟩ =
                    = 0.

This implies:
                          ∥ρt ∥H −k =     sup ⟨ρt , ψ̄⟩ =             sup    ⟨ρt , ψt ⟩ =
                                        ∥ψ̄∥H k =1              ∥ψt ∥H k =1

                                    =      sup        ⟨ρ0 , ψ0 ⟩ ≤                                  (18)
                                        ∥ψt ∥H k =1

                                    ≤ ∥ρ0 ∥H −k          sup        ∥ψ0 ∥H k .
                                                      ∥ψt ∥H k =1


Next, we need an estimate for ∥ψ0 ∥H k . The energy of the time-reversed Eq. (17) satisfies:
            1 d
                 ∥ψt−s ∥2H k = ⟨Lµ∞ ψt−s , ψt−s ⟩H k + ⟨∇W ∗ ρt−s ∂θ ψt−s , ψt−s ⟩H k ≤
            2 ds
                             ≤ γmax ∥ψt−s ∥2H k + C∥ψt−s ∥2H k ∥∇W ∗ ρt−s ∥W k,∞ ≤
                             ≤ γmax ∥ψt−s ∥2H k + C∥ψt−s ∥2H k ∥∇W ∥H 2k ∥ρt−s ∥H −k ≤
                             ≤ (γmax + C∥ρt−s ∥H −k )∥ψt−s ∥2H k ,
where the second row is an application of Lemma C.5. Hence, by Gronwall’s lemma:
                                                                     Rt
                              ∥ψ0 ∥H k ≤ ∥ψt ∥H k eγmax t+C 0 ∥ρs ∥H −k ds .


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Substituting this bound into Eq. (18), we obtain for all t ≥ 0:
                                                                   Rt
                            ∥ρt ∥H −k ≤ ∥ρ0 ∥H −k eγmax t+C 0 ∥ρs ∥H −k ds .                    (19)

The conclusion follows from a standard continuation argument: assume ∥ρs ∥H −k                     ≤
3∥ρ0 ∥H −k eγmax s . Then, by Eq. (19), in the interval [0, T1 (ϵ, ρ0 )], it holds:
                                                          Rt
                    ∥ρt ∥H −k ≤ ∥ρ0 ∥H −k eγmax t+C 0 ∥ρs ∥H −k ds ≤
                                                                        1   γmax t
                              ≤ ∥ρ0 ∥H −k eγmax t+3C∥ρ0 ∥H −k γmax e                 ≤
                                                                   1
                                              γmax t+3C∥ρ0 ∥H −k γmax eγmax T1 (ϵ,ρ0 )
                              ≤ ∥ρ0 ∥H −k e                                              ≤
                                                γmax t+ γ3Cϵ
                              ≤ ∥ρ(0)∥H −k e             max   .
If ϵ is such that γ3Cϵ
                   max
                      ≤ 1, then ∥ρt ∥H −k < 3∥ρ0 ∥H −k eγmax t in the interval [0, T1 (ϵ, ρ0 )]. This
concludes the continuation argument.

Now we want to control the distance between ρ and the solution ρL of the linearized PDE:
                                       L
                                      ∂t ρ = Lµ∞ (ρL ),
                                                                                                (20)
                                      ρL0 = ρ0 .

By considering a loss of regularity we derive the following estimate:
Lemma C.9. Let k ≥ 0. For all t ∈ [0, T1 (ϵ, ρ0 )], the following holds:
                              ∥ρt − ρL                 2
                                     t ∥H −k−1 ≤ C∥ρ0 ∥H −k e
                                                              2γmax t
                                                                      .

Proof. The difference ρ − ρL satisfies the PDE:
                         ∂t (ρ − ρL ) = Lµ∞ (ρt − ρL
                                                   t ) − ∂θ (ρt ∇W ∗ ρt ).
Thus,
           d
              ∥ρt − ρL                       L
                     t ∥H −k−1 ≤ γmax ∥ρt − ρt ∥H −k−1 + ∥ρt ∇W ∗ ρt ∥H −k ≤
           dt
                               ≤ γmax ∥ρt − ρL
                                             t ∥H −k−1 + ∥ρt ∥H −k ∥∇W ∗ ρt ∥W k,∞ ≤
                                ≤ γmax ∥ρt − ρL                 2
                                              t ∥H −k−1 + C∥ρt ∥H −k .
Applying Lemma C.7, we obtain:
               d
                  ∥ρt − ρL                                         2
                         t ∥H −k−1 ≤ γmax ∥ρt − ρL ∥H −k−1 + C∥ρ0 ∥H −k e
                                                                          2γmax t
                                                                                  .
               dt
The conclusion is a consequence of Gronwall’s lemma (Lemma E.1).

We can conclude this section with the following proposition, which describe the measure µt at the
exit point from BH −k (µ∞ , 3ϵ). In particular, we prove that after a time T1 , defined as:

                                                 1            ϵ
                                 T1 (ϵ, ρ0 ) :=      ln                                     (21)
                                                γmax      ∥ρ0 ∥H −k
the perturbation of the uniform measure consists of a dominant mode characterized by kmax , along
with a remainder made up of two components: the error from discarding the other modes and the
error resulting from linearizing the PDE.
Proposition C.10. Let k ≥ 0. There exists ϵ0 > 0 such that if ∥ρ0 ∥H −k < ϵ < ϵ0 , then:
                                         (ρ̂0 )kmax
                    µT1 (ϵ,ρ) = µ∞ + ϵ              cos(kmax θ) + R(ϵ, ∥ρ0 ∥H −k ),
                                         ∥ρ0 ∥H −k
where T1 (ϵ, ρ0 ) is defined in Eq. (21). Furthermore, let γ − := maxk̸=±kmax γk , then:
                                                                         γγ−
                                                                                  

                                                                 ϵ        max
                  R(ϵ, ∥ρ0 ∥H −k ) = OH −k−1 ∥ρ0 ∥H −k                       + ϵ2  .
                                                             ∥ρ0 ∥H −k


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Notice that the solution to Eq. (20) can be explicitly expressed in terms of the Fourier coef-
ficients of the initial condition:          X
                                      ρL
                                       t =      (ρ̂0 )k eγk t eikx .                             (22)
                                                 k∈Z

Let γ − := maxk̸=kmax γk . By substituting Eq. (22) into Lemma C.9 and using the definition of T1 ,
we get:
ρT1 =ρL                        2   2γmax T1

        T1 + OH −k−1 ∥ρ0 ∥H −k e              =
                                            X
                   γmax T1
                                                (ρ̂0 )k eγk T1 eikx + OH −k−1 ∥ρ0 ∥2H −k e2γmax T1 =

     =(ρ̂0 )kmax e         cos(kmax x) +
                                           k̸=±kmax
                                                                           γγ−
         (ρ̂0 )kmax                    X                         ϵ          max
                                                                                  eikx + OH −k−1 ϵ2 =

      =ϵ            cos(kmax x) +              (ρ̂0 )k
         ∥ρ0 ∥H −k                                           ∥ρ0 ∥H −k
                                    k̸=±kmax
                                                                                   γγ−
                                                                                            

           (ρ̂0 )kmax                                                   ϵ          max
      =ϵ              cos(kmax x) + OH −k−1 ∥ρ0 ∥H −k                                   + ϵ2  .
           ∥ρ0 ∥H −k                                                ∥ρ0 ∥H −k



We turn to our discussion of the subsequent “quasi-linear” phase.

C.4    T HE QUASI - LINEAR PHASE

When the measure µt exits the ball BH −k (µ∞ , 3ϵ), the estimates based on the linearized equation
are no longer sufficient to describe the system’s evolution. To address this, we build a nonlinear
approximation following Grenier’s iterative scheme ((Grenier, 2000; Han-Kwan & Nguyen, 2016)).
In the preceding paragraph, we isolated the dominant mode cos(kmax θ). Let α > 0 and consider
the solution of the following nonlinear PDE:
                                    α
                                    ∂t f = −∂θ (f α ∇W ∗ f α )
                                                                                         (23)
                                    f0α = µ∞ + α cos(kmax θ).

We will demonstrate the existence of δ > 0, independent of α, such that the evolution of f α within
the ball BH −k (µ∞ , δ) is still controlled by γmax . In particular, we prove in Proposition C.15 that
after a time T2 :
                                                     1
                                       T2 (δ, α) :=      ln(δ/α),                                (24)
                                                    γmax
the nonlinear evolution of the dominant mode moves outside a neighborhood of the uniform mea-
sure, with the radius of this neighborhood δ being independent of α. Moreover, in Proposition C.17,
we provide a bound on the distance between f α and any distribution close to it at time 0, valid over
the time horizon [0, T2 ].
Let’s introduce the following definitions essential for Grenier’s scheme:
                                      g1 (t, θ) := eγmax t cos(kmax θ),
                                                                K
                                                                X
                                    f α,K (t, θ) := µ∞ +              αj gj ,
                                                                j=1

where the functions gk are defined recursively by:
                        (                      Pk−1
                          (∂t − Lµ∞ )gk = − j=1 ∂θ (gj ∇W ∗ gk−j )
                                                                                                            (25)
                          gk (0) = 0 ∀k ≥ 2.

Notice that:
                                                                          X
             ∂t f α,K + ∂θ (f α,K ∇W ∗ f α,K ) = Rα,K := −                         αj+l ∂θ (gj ∇W ∗ gl ).   (26)
                                                                       1≤j,l≤K
                                                                      j+l≥K+1


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma C.11. Let K > 0 and s ≥ 0. Then ∀k ≤ K:
                                       ∥gk ∥H s ≤ CK ekγmax t .

Proof. The proof proceeds by induction, showing that ∥gk ∥H n−k ≤ Ck ekγmax t , where n := K + s.
By definition, we immediately get ∥g1 ∥H n ≤ Ceγmax t .
For the inductive step, consider k > 0 and assume the hypothesis holds up to k − 1. Then by
Eq. (25):
                                           k−1
          d                                X
             ∥gk ∥H n−k ≤ ∥Lµ∞ gk ∥H n−k +     ∥∂θ (gj ∇W ∗ gk−j )∥H n−k ≤
          dt                               j=1
                                               k−1
                                               X
                        ≤ γmax ∥gk ∥H n−k +          ∥gj ∇W ∗ gk−j ∥H n−k+1 ≤
                                               j=1
                                               k−1
                                               X
                        ≤ γmax ∥gk ∥H n−k +          ∥gj ∥H n−k+1 ∥∇W ∗ gk−j ∥W n−k+1,∞ ≤
                                               j=1
                                               k−1
                                               X
                        ≤ γmax ∥gk ∥H n−k +          ∥gj ∥H n−k+1 ∥∇W ∥L2 ∥gk−j ∥H n−k+1 ≤
                                               j=1
                                                  k−1
                                                  X
                        ≤ γmax ∥gk ∥H n−k + C            ∥gj ∥H n−j ∥gk−j ∥H n−(k−j) ≤
                                                  j=1

                        ≤ γmax ∥gk ∥H n−k + Ck ekγmax t .
Therefore, by Gronwall’s lemma (Lemma E.1):
                                       ∥gk ∥H n−k ≤ Ck ekγmax t .
To conclude, recall the definition of n as K + s.
Remark C.12. This lemma implies that if αeγmax t ≤ δ < 1, then:
                                               K
                                               X
                     ∥f α,K − µ∞ ∥H s ≤ CK       (αeγmax t )j ≤ C̃K (αeγmax t ),
                                               j=1

and similarly:
                                                          K
                                                          X
                 ∥f α,K − µ∞ ∥H s ≥ ∥αg1 ∥H s − CK          (αeγmax t )j ≥ C̄K αeγmax t .
                                                          j=2


We now need to estimate the remainder Rα,K that appears in Eq. (26):
Lemma C.13. Let K > 0, s ≥ 0 and δ < 1. If αeγmax t ≤ δ, then:
                                                          K+1
                               ∥Rα,K ∥H s ≤ C̃K αeγmax t        .

Proof. By definition of Rα,K :
                                          X
                       ∥Rα,K ∥H s ≤               αj+l ∥∂θ (gj ∇W ∗ gl )∥H s ≤
                                        1≤j,l≤K
                                       j+l≥K+1
                                          X
                                   ≤              αj+l ∥gj ∇W ∗ gl ∥H s+1 ≤
                                        1≤j,l≤K
                                       j+l≥K+1
                                              X
                                   ≤ CK                  αj+l ∥gj ∥H s+1 ∥gl ∥H s+1 .
                                            1≤j,l≤K
                                           j+l≥K+1


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, Lemma C.11 and the assumption imply:
                                  X                                        K+1
              ∥Rα,K ∥H s ≤ CK            αj+l e(j+l)γmax t ≤ C̃K αeγmax t      .
                                   1≤j,l≤K
                                  j+l≥K+1


Now, we can compare the evolution of the dominant mode f α defined in Eq. (23) and Grenier’s
approximation f α,K . Let rα,K := f α − f α,K .
Lemma C.14. Given s ≥ 0, there exist constants K0 and δ > 0 (independent of α) such that, for
every K ≥ K0 and for every t such that αeγmax t < δ, the following bound holds:
                                   ∥rtα,K ∥H s ≤ C(αeγmax t )K ,
where the constant C depends only on s, K and W .

Proof. Combining Eq. (23) and Eq. (26), rα,K solves:
  ∂t rα,K + ∂θ f α,K ∇W ∗ rα,K + ∂θ rα,K ∇W ∗ f α,K + ∂θ rα,K ∇W ∗ rα,K = Rα,K .


To study its energy:
                       1 d α,K 2
                               ∥H s = − ⟨∂θ f α,K ∇W ∗ rα,K , rα,K ⟩H s +

                            ∥r
                       2 dt
                                      − ⟨∂θ rα,K ∇W ∗ f α,K , rα,K ⟩H s +

                                                                                              (27)
                                      − ⟨∂θ rα,K ∇W ∗ rα,K , rα,K ⟩H s +


                                       + ⟨Rα,K , rα,K ⟩H s .

The three terms can be estimated separately:

      • first term:
                −⟨∂θ f α,K ∇W ∗ rα,K , rα,K ⟩H s = − ⟨ ∂θ f α,K ∇W ∗ rα,K , rα,K ⟩H s +


                                                       − ⟨f α,K ∆W ∗ rα,K , rα,K ⟩H s ≤
                                                     ≤C∥f α,K ∥H s+1 ∥rα,K ∥2H s .

      • second term (using Lemma C.5):
                       −⟨∂θ rα,K ∇W ∗ f α,K , rα,K ⟩H s ≤ C∥f α,K ∥H s ∥rα,K ∥2H s .



      • third term (again by Lemma C.5):
                            −⟨∂θ rα,K ∇W ∗ rα,K , rα,K ⟩H s ≤ C∥rα,K ∥3H s .



Combining these estimates, and utilizing Lemma C.12 and Lemma C.13:
             d α,K
                ∥r   ∥H s ≤C(∥f α,K ∥H s+1 + ∥rα,K ∥H s )∥rα,K ∥H s + ∥Rα,K ∥H s
             dt
                           ≤C(∥µ∞ ∥H s + CK αeγmax t + ∥rα,K ∥H s )∥rα,K ∥H s +
                            +CK (αeγmax t )K+1 .

The conclusion follows via the standard continuation argument.
                                               h             i
                                    K               1
Assume ∥rα,K ∥H s ≤ C (αeγmax t ) and t ∈ 0, γmax      ln αδ . If δ is sufficiently small such that
CK δ < 1, and K is sufficiently large such that 3C < Kγmax , then:
           d α,K                                                       K
              ∥r    ∥H s ≤ C(∥µ∞ ∥H s + CK αeγmax t + CK αeγmax t )∥rα,K ∥H s +
           dt
                         + CK (αeγmax t )K+1 ≤
                          ≤ 3C∥rα,K ∥H s + CK (αeγmax t )K+1 .

                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By applying Lemma E.1, which requires the assumption 3C < Kγmax , we obtain:
                                        CK αK+1 (K+1)γmax t
                         ∥rα,K ∥H s ≤          e            ≤ δCK eKγmax t .
                                         γmax
Since δ < 1, the solution remains within the desired bound and can be continued.

The results presented in this section lead to the following proposition, which provides a lower bound
on the growth rate of the dominant mode.
Proposition C.15. Let f α be the solution of Eq. (23). Given s ≥ 0, there exists δ > 0 (independent
of α) such that for T2 (δ, α) defined as in Eq. (24), the following holds:
                                         ∥fTαα2 − µ∞ ∥H s ≥ Cδ.                                 (28)

Proof. By Lemma C.12 and Lemma C.14, we have:
                      ∥f α − µ∞ ∥H s ≥ ∥f α,K − µ∞ ∥H s − ∥f α − f α,K ∥H s ≥
                                        ≥ CK αeγmax t − CK (αeγmax t )K ≥
                                        ≥ CK αeγmax t .
To conclude, observe that the maximum t for which the assumption in Lemma C.14 holds is pre-
cisely T2 (δ, α).

Remark C.16. Note that the same estimate holds for s < 0. Indeed, the only lower bound is needed
for g1 , which grows as eγmax t in every H s space.

To conclude this section, we need to establish an estimate on the distance between a given solution
µt and the evolution of the dominant mode ftα .
Proposition C.17. Consider a solution µ of Eq. (15) with initial condition µ0 , and define ht :=
µt − ftα . If ∥h0 ∥H −k = ∥µ0 − f0α ∥H −k ≤ Cα, then there exists δ > 0 (independent of α), such
that:
                                  ∥ht ∥H −k ≤ 3∥h0 ∥H −k eγmax t ,
for every t ∈ [0, T2 (δ, α)].
Remark C.18. We will apply this proposition to µ0 = µ∞ + ρ(T1 ).

Proof. Using Eq. (15) and Eq. (23), the distribution h satisfies:
                    ∂t h = − ∂θ (µ∇W ∗ µ) + ∂θ (f α ∇W ∗ f α )
                         = − ∂θ (h∇W ∗ f α ) − ∂θ (f α ∇W ∗ h) − ∂θ (h∇W ∗ h)
                         = − µ∞ ∆W ∗ h
                           − ∂θ (h∇W ∗ (f α − µ∞ ))
                           − ∂θ ((f α − µ∞ )∇W ∗ h)
                           − ∂θ (h∇W ∗ h).

We can adapt the Lagrangian flow argument used in Lemma C.7 to bound ∥h∥H −k . Let ψ̄ ∈ H k (S1 ),
and define ψt as the solution of:
                              
                              
                                ∂s ψs = µ∞ ∆W ∗ ψs
                                          −[∇W ∗ (fsα − µ∞ )]∂θ ψs
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                          −∇W ∗ [(fsα − µ∞ )∂θ ψs ]
                                          −[∇W ∗ hs ]∂θ ψs
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 ψt = ψ̄.
                              


To estimate the energy of ψt , we proceed as follows:


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    1
                      ∂s ∥ψt−s ∥2H k = − µ∞ ⟨∆W ∗ ψt−s , ψt−s ⟩H k +
                    2
                                       + ⟨[∇W ∗ (f α − µ∞ )]∂θ ψt−s , ψt−s ⟩H k +
                                       + ⟨∇W ∗ [(f α − µ∞ )∂θ ψt−s ], ψt−s ⟩H k +
                                       + ⟨[∇W ∗ h]∂θ ψt−s , ψt−s ⟩H k

We estimate each term separately:

       • first term (Lemma E.2):
                               −µ∞ ⟨∆W ∗ ψt−s , ψt−s ⟩H k ≤ γmax ∥ψt−s ∥2H k .

       • second term (Lemma C.5):
            ⟨[∇W ∗ (f α − µ∞ )]∂θ ψt−s , ψt−s ⟩H k ≤C∥ψt−s ∥2H k ∥∇W ∗ (ft−s
                                                                         α
                                                                             − µ∞ )∥W k,∞ ≤
                                                             ≤C∥ψt−s ∥2H k ∥ft−s
                                                                             α
                                                                                 − µ∞ ∥L2 .

       • third term:
         ⟨∇W ∗ [(f α − µ∞ )∂θ ψt−s ], ψt−s ⟩H k =⟨(f α − µ∞ )∂θ ψt−s , ∇W ∗ ψt−s ⟩L2 +
                                                       +⟨(f α − µ∞ )∂θ ψt−s , ∇3 W ∗ ψt−s ⟩L2 +
                                                       +⟨(f α − µ∞ )∂θ ψt−s , ∇5 W ∗ ψt−s ⟩L2 + ...
                                                       ≤∥f α − µ∞ ∥L2 ∥ψt−s ∥H 1 ∥∇W ∗ ψt−s ∥L∞ + ...
                                                       ≤C∥f α − µ∞ ∥L2 ∥ψt−s ∥2H 1 .

       • fourth term (Lemma C.5):
                             ⟨[∇W ∗ h]∂θ ψt−s , ψt−s ⟩H k ≤ C∥ψt−s ∥2H k ∥h∥H −k .

Summarizing, we obtain the following differential inequality:
                                         α
              ∂s ∥ψt−s ∥H k ≤ (γmax + C∥ft−s − µ∞ ∥L2 + ∥ht−s ∥H −k )∥ψt−s ∥H k ,
and by Gronwall’s lemma:
                                                        Rt        α
                       ∥ψ0 ∥H k ≤ ∥ψt ∥H k eγmax t+ 0 C∥fs −µ∞ ∥L2 +∥hs ∥H −k ds .                           (29)

Since by construction ∂t ⟨ht , ψt ⟩ = 0, that implies together with Eq. (29):
                   ∥ht ∥H −k :=      sup ⟨ht , ψ̄⟩ =            sup    ⟨ht , ψt ⟩ =
                                  ∥ψ̄∥H k =1                 ∥ψt ∥H k =1

                              =      sup       ⟨h0 , ψ0 ⟩ ≤ ∥h0 ∥H −k          sup         ∥ψ0 ∥H k
                                  ∥ψt ∥H k =1                              ∥ψt ∥H k =1
                                                        Rt       α
                              ≤ ∥h0 ∥H −k eγmax t+ 0 C∥fs −µ∞ ∥L2 +∥hs ∥H −k ds .

The conclusion follows by a continuation argument. Suppose ∥ht ∥H −k ≤ 3∥h0 ∥H −k eγmax t and
t ∈ [0, T2 ]. Then:

                                                       Rt        γmax s                    γmax s
                                                                               0 ∥H −k e
                 ∥ht ∥H −k ≤∥h(0)∥H −k eγmax t+ 0 Cαe                   +3∥h                        ds
                                                                                                         ≤
                                                         Cα
                                                γmax t+ γmax eγmax t
                            ≤∥h(0)∥H −k e
                                                         Cδ
                            ≤∥h(0)∥H −k eγmax t+ γmax
where the hypothesis ∥h0 ∥H −k ≤ Cα was used in the second line. By choosing δ small enough,
           Cδ
such that γmax ≤ 1, we get the desired estimate.


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.5     C OMBINING THE TWO PHASES

In Section C.3, we analyzed the initial evolution of a perturbation µ = µ∞ + ρ of the uniform mea-
sure by comparing it with the solution of the linearized PDE. After a time T1 , the dominant mode
emerges. As the perturbation exits the neighborhood BH −k (µ∞ , 3ϵ), a higher order approximation
using Grenier’s scheme is required to track the nonlinear evolution of this dominant mode, as de-
scribed in Section C.4. We now consolidate these findings into the following proposition, which we
specify to the case of empirical measures.
Let {µN                                                      1         N
        0 }N ∈N denote a sequence of random measures in P(S ), where µ0 is the empirical measure
associated with N i.i.d. particles sampled from the uniform measure on S1 . Define the radius of the
ball in which the linear phase occurs as follows:
                                                       (µN \
                                                          0 − µ∞ )kmax
                                         αN :=                            ,
                                                     N 1/4 ∥µN
                                                             0 − µ∞ ∥H −1
and consider the corresponding solutions µN      N                                      N
                                          t and ft of Eq. (15) with initial conditions µ0 and
µ∞ + αN cos(kmax θ), respectively.
Remark C.19. Since (µN\   −µ )
                            0         = O(∥µN − µ ∥ −1 ), α → 0 as N → ∞.
                                       ∞ kmax             0       ∞ H         N
Proposition C.20. There exist a constant δ > 0 and two sequences of times T1N and T2N (depending
on µN
    0 ) such that:
                                    ∥fTNN − µ∞ ∥H −2 (S1 ) > δ
                                                 2

uniformly in N , and
                                        ∥µN           N
                                          T N +T N − fT N ∥H −2 (S1 ) → 0,
                                             1       2        2

as N → ∞ in probability.
Remark C.21. By Proposition C.15 and Remark C.12 we have both a lower and an upper bound
for ∥fTNN − µ∞ ∥H −2 (S1 ) , uniform in N .
        2


                                                                                −1/4
Proof. For clarity, denote ρN     N
                            t := µt − µ∞ . Applying Proposition C.10 with ϵ = N      and noting
      1/4   N
that N ∥ρ0 ∥H −1 → 0 in probability (Lemma E.3), we obtain:
                             µN            N
                               T1N = µ∞ + α cos(kmax θ) + R ,
                                                               N


               1
where T1N := γmax ln N 1/4 ∥ρ1N ∥ −1 and:
                              0 H

                                                           γγ−
                                                                     

                                                   ϵ        max
                     RN = OH −2 ∥ρ0 ∥H −1                       + ϵ2  .
                                               ∥ρ0 ∥H −1

Note that, by Lemma E.3, we have:
                                           1
                                               ∥RN ∥H −2 → 0                                       (30)
                                          αN
in probability. This implies that the hypothesis of Proposition C.17 are asymptotically satisfied for
the initial condition µN
                       T1N
                           . Therefore, there exists a constant δ > 0 such that ftN , defined as above,
satisfies:
                              ∥µN          N               N
                                 T1N +t − ft ∥H −2 ≤ 3∥R ∥H −2 e
                                                                   γmax t
                                                                          ,
                                      1       δ
                 N
                             N

for all t ∈ 0, T2 , with T2 := γmax ln αN .
Thus,
                                                                   δ
                                ∥µN           N
                                  T N +T N − fT N ∥H −2 ≤ 3          ∥RN ∥H −2 → 0
                                   1     2           2            αN
in probability, as recalled in Eq. (30).
Finally, observe that ∥fTNN − µ∞ ∥H −2 (S1 ) > δ is an immediate consequence of Proposition C.15.
                            2


Remark C.22. The convergence also holds in Wasserstein distance, as proved in Lemma E.4.


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.6   T HE CLUSTERING PHASE

In the previous steps, only an approximate understanding of the trajectory of the dominant mode,
f α , was necessary. Now, however, we focus on a more specific case. Numerical experiments (see
Figure 5) conducted on the Transformers model, W (θ) = β1 eβ cos(θ) , reveal that after an initial phase
where f α surpasses a fixed threshold, i.e., W1 (ftα , µ∞ ) > δ, the system converges to kmax equally
spaced clusters. The time required for the transition from such threshold to the clustered state is
independent of α. This assumption is summarized in Assumption 3 .
Although this remains an assumption, we believe it holds true, particularly in the case of Transform-
ers. This belief is strongly supported by the fact that probability measures invariant under kmax -fold
rotations form an invariant manifold for the system’s dynamics, and the limiting measure must be a
sum of Dirac deltas (see Lemma E.5).


Figure 5: Plots showing the evolution of the Wasserstein distance between µt and the uniform
                                                         P2
measure µ∞ (solid line) and between µt and δ3 :=            k=0 δ2πk/3 (dashed line). Note that the
simulations with the initial condition f α for α = 0.01 and α = 0.001 almost completely overlap,
differing only by a time shift. This observation supports the validity of Assumption 3.

Under Assumption 3 we can more precisely characterize the final result of the meta-stable phase:
Theorem C.23. Let {µN                                                          1           N
                      0 }N ∈N denote a sequence of random measures in P(S ), where µ0 is the
empirical measure associated with N i.i.d. particles sampled from the uniform measure on S1 .
Under assumptions 1,2 and 3 we can conclude:
                                    lim inf W1 (µNt ,δ
                                                       kmax
                                                            ) = 0,
                                   N →∞ t≥0
                                  1
in probability, where δ kmax := kmax
                                      P
                                        i δ k2πi modulo rotations.
                                             max



Proof. By Assumption 3, for every ϵ > 0 there exists t̄ > 0, independent of N , such that:
                                           N                 ϵ
                                    W1 (fTα2 +t̄ , δ kmax ) ≤ ,
                                                             2
where αN and T2 are defined as in Proposition C.20. Therefore, for all ϵ > 0:
          lim inf W1 (µN
                       t ,δ
                            kmax
                                 ) ≤ lim W1 (µT1 +T2 +t̄ , δ kmax ) ≤
         N →∞ t≥0                      N →∞
                                                                   N               N
                                     ≤ lim W1 (µT1 +T2 +t̄ , fTα2 +t̄ ) + W1 (fTα2 +t̄ , δ kmax ) ≤
                                       N →∞
                                                                    N      ϵ
                                        ≤ lim eLt̄ W1 (µT1 +T2 , fTα2 ) + ,
                                           N →∞                           2
where the classical Dobrushin’s estimate (Theorem A.4) is used in the last line, with a finite con-
stant L depending on the properties of W . By Proposition C.20 and Remark C.22, it follows that
                      N
eLt̄ W1 (µT1 +T2 , fTα2 ) ≤ 2ϵ definitely in N . Hence, the conclusion follows by arbitrariness of ϵ.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    E XTENSION TO HIGHER DIMENSIONS
In this section we discuss what happens if the system is defined on Sd−1 by:

                                    ∂t µ = − div(µ∇(W ∗ µ)),
                                                                                                (31)
                                    µ(0) = µ0 ,
where W : Sd−1 → R and W ∗ µ is the convolution defined in Eq. (4).
Remark D.1. The differential operators should be interpreted with respect to the underlying Rie-
mannian manifold structure.
The uniform measure µ∞ remains an unstable equilibrium of the dynamics. Furthermore, the lin-
earized PDE for an initial perturbation µ∞ + ρ0 is again:
                                     L
                                     ∂t ρ  = −µ∞ ∆(W ∗ ρL ),
                                      L
                                     ρ0    = ρ0 ,
with ∆ the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the sphere Sd−1 .
As in the d = 2 case, we can study the linear operator Lµ∞ (f ) := −µ∞ ∆(W ∗ f ). Letting fn,j
represent the spherical harmonics coefficients, we obtain:
                              (Lµ∞ (f ))n,j = µ∞ n(n + d − 2)Ŵn fn,j .
where Ŵn are the Gegenbauer coefficients. This result follows from the fact that spherical harmonics
are eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator, combined with the Funk-Hecke theorem for
convolutions on spheres (see Section C.1.2). This provides the usual spectral bounds with a similar
γmax for the linear operator, and an explicit solution ρL :
                                                        d
                                                   Zn
                                                 ∞ X
                                                 X
                                         ρL
                                          t =         (ρ0 )n,j eγn t Yn,j ,
                                                 n=0 j=0

where Znd denotes the number of spherical harmonics Yn,j on Sd−1 of degree n.
It is important to note that we now have a superposition of functions of the same degree nmax , all
growing at the same rate. In particular, the steps outlined in the previous sections can be repeated,
but with initial condition for f N given by:
                                                          d
                                                         Zn max
                                                            X
                                         f0N = µ∞ +                   αjN Ynmax ,j .
                                                            j=0
Additionally, the calculations have to be performed in the space H s with s < −d/2, rather than in
H −1 , the proofs remain analogous.
In d = 2, the emerging symmetry was characterized by invariance under rotations by angles of
  2π
kmax , which was relatively straightforward to describe. However, as we move to higher dimensions,
the nature of the symmetry becomes more complex and challenging to express.
Consider the subspace:
                       Hk := {µ ∈ H s : ⟨µ, Yl,j ⟩ = 0 ∀l not divisible by k}.
This set is invariant for the dynamics of Eq. (31), indeed, since Hk is a vector subspace of H s , it
suffices to show that ∂t µ ∈ Hk for every µ ∈ Hk :
               ⟨∂t µ, Yl,m ⟩ = −⟨div(µ∇(W ∗ µ)), Yl,m ⟩ =
                             = ⟨µ∇(W ∗ µ), ∇Yl,m ⟩ =
                                                                          
                                  X                X
                             = ⟨    µn,j Yn,j      Wn′ µn′ ,j ′ ∇Yn′ ,j ′  , ∇Yl,m ⟩ =
                                   n,j                      n′ ,j ′
                                 X
                          =                  Wn′ µn′ ,j ′ µn,j ⟨Yn,j ∇Yn′ ,j ′ , ∇Yl,m ⟩ =
                              n′ ,n,j ′ ,j
                               X
                          =              Wl−n µl−n,j ′ µn,j ⟨Yn,j ∇Yl−n,j ′ , ∇Yl,m ⟩,
                              n,j ′ ,j


                                                            28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Figure 6: Example of a curve in H3 .


where we used Funk-Hecke theorem and a triple product integral identity for vector spherical har-
monics. If this derivative is non-zero, then at least one of the terms in the sum must be non-zero.
This implies l − n = 0 mod k and n = 0 mod k. Thus, l must be a multiple of k.
In conclusion:
                            lim inf W1 (µN    δ
                                         t , Hnmax ∩ P(S
                                                        d−1
                                                            )) → 0.
                           N →∞ t≥0
in probability.

E    AUXILIARY RESULTS
Lemma E.1. Let f : [0, ∞) → R satisfy f ′ (t) ≤ af (t) + cebt for all t ∈ [0, ∞), where 0 < a < b
and c > 0. Then:
                                                       c bt
                               f (t) ≤ f (0)eat +         e .
                                                     b−a

Proof. This result follows directly by Gronwall’s inequality. Specifically:
                                     Z t
                              c bt                  c
             f (t) ≤ f (0) + e +           f (0) + ebs aea(t−s) ds =
                              b        0            b
                                                Z t
                                                              c at t (b−a)s
                                                                    Z
                              c bt           at       −as
                   = f (0) + e + f (0)ae            e ds + ae           e   ds =
                              b                  0            b      0
                              c                            c a at (b−a)t
                   = f (0) + ebt + f (0)eat (1 − e−at ) +          e (e     − 1) ≤
                              b                            bb−a
                                    c bt
                   ≤ f (0)eat +        e .
                                 b−a

Lemma E.2. Let k ∈ Z. Under Assumptions 1 and 2 the linear operator Lµ∞ : H k (S1 ) → H k (S1 )
defined as Lµ∞ (f ) := −µ∞ ∆W ∗ f satisfies:
                                              1
                              ∥Lµ∞ f ∥H k ≤     γmax ∥f ∥H k .
                                             2π

Proof. Using the Fourier definition of the spaces H k (S1 ):
                                   X
                  ∥Lµ f ∥2 k =
                       ∞    H           n2k |(−µ∞\∆W ∗ f ) |2 =
                                                              n
                                    n∈Z
                                    X                        2
                                =         n2k µ∞ γn |(fˆ)n | ≤ µ2∞ γmax
                                                                    2
                                                                        ∥f ∥2H k .
                                    n∈Z



                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.3. Let {µN } be a sequence of random probabilities on S1 given by the empirical mea-
sures of N i.i.d. samples from the uniform measure. Then ρN := µN − µ∞ satisfies:

       • N 1/4 ∥ρN
                 0 ∥H −1 → 0,

                                                                     γγ−
                                                                                              !
           N 1/4 ∥ρN

                   0 ∥H −1                             1             max            −1/4 2
       •     (ρ̂N
                              ∥ρN
                                0 ∥H −1        N 1/4 ∥ρN
                                                                            + (N          )       → 0,
                0 )kmax                                 0 ∥H −1



with both of the limits in probability.

Proof. First of all notice that, fixing an orthonormal basis {ek }k of L2 (S1 ), ∀β > 0 and s > 21 :
                                                  "                      #
                    1
                                                    X
                      −β   N         2      −2β           −2s   N      2
             E[(N 2 ∥ρ0 ∥H −s ) ] =N            E     N k ⟨ρ0 , ek ⟩ ≤
                                                               k
                                                                                
                                                                                          N
                                                                                                         !2 
                                                             X                  1 X
                                                ≤ N −2β             N k −2s E        ek (xi )             ≤
                                                                                N i=1
                                                               k
                                                             X
                                                       −2β
                                                ≤N                  k −2s → 0,
                                                               k

where we used Beppo Levi and the indipendence of samples. In particular by Chebychev’s lemma
               1
this implies N 2 −β ∥ρN
                      0 ∥H −s → 0 in probability. Taking β = 1/4 and s = 1 we get the first limit.

Before proving the second limit, observe that
                                                                          
                                                           N
                √                  √                   1
                                                                       Z
                    N (ρˆN )k =
                                                          X
                                       N ⟨ρN , ek ⟩ = √     ek (Xj ) − ek  → N (0, 1)
                                                       N j=1

in distribution by the central limit theorem.
Now:
                                                 γ−
                                                     −1
                                   N −1/4
                                                γmax
                 ∥ρ0 ∥H −1                                                 ∥ρ0 ∥H −1
                                                          + N −1/4                    =
                 (ρ̂0 )kmax       ∥ρ0 ∥H −1                                (ρˆ0 )kmax
                                                           −
                      1                                     γ−     N 1/4 ∥ρ0 ∥H −1

                                            2− γ     1
                                                        1− γmax
                 =√            N 1/2 ∥ρ0 ∥H −1γmax N 4           + √               =
                  N (ρ̂0 )kmax                                       N (ρˆ0 )kmax
                                               γ−            γ−

                      1

                                    1   1                2− γmax
                                    2 + 4 1− γmax                   1/4
              = √                N                  ∥ρ0 ∥H −1    + N ∥ρ0 ∥H    −1   .
                  N (ρ̂0 )kmax
                                                                                         −

The terms between the parenthesis converge to zero in probability (indeed 21 + 14 1 − γγmax <

1       γ−
2 2 − γmax and we can use the argument above). The term outside the parenthesis instead con-
verges in distribution to 1/Z with Z standard normal (because of the continuous mapping theorem,
since 1/x is almost-surely continuous). Hence, by Slutsky’s lemma, we get convergence to 0 in
distribution and then in probability.
Lemma E.4. Given two sequences of probability measures µn , νn in H −k (X), with X compact
space, such that ∥µn − νn ∥H −k (X) → 0, then also W1 (µn , νn ) → 0 is true.

Proof. Notice that ∥µn − νn ∥H −k → 0 implies ⟨µn − νn , f ⟩ → 0 for every f ∈ H k (X). Since
H k (X) ∩ Cb (X) is dense in Cb (X) (it contains the smooth functions) and since µn and νn are both
probability measures, then µn − νn ⇀ 0 in weak sense.
                                   R limk W1 (µnk , νnk ) = lim supn W1 (µn , νn ). For each k,
Let us fix a subsequence that satisfies
consider ϕnk ∈ Lip1 (X) such that ϕnk (µnk − νnk ) = W1 (µnk , νnk ). Without loss of generality,


                                                             30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by adding a constant (which does not affect the integral), we can assume that the functions ϕnk
vanish at the same point, hence they are uniformly bounded and equicontinuous. By Ascoli-Arzelà
theorem we can extract a subsequence converging to some ϕ ∈ Lip1 (X). Hence, renaming the
subsequence:
                          Z                                      Z
        W1 (µnk , νnk ) = ϕnk d(µnk − νnk ) ≤ 2∥ϕnk − ϕ∥∞ + ϕd(µnk − νnk ) → 0.

This concludes the proof.
Lemma E.5. Let W : [−1, 1] → R be an analytic function and suppose that Ŵn ̸= 0 for every n.
Then the equilibria of Eq. (31) can only be the uniform measure or a finite union of submanifolds of
dimension at most d − 2.

Proof. Consider µeq to be an equilibrium of Eq. (31). Then, for every f ∈ C ∞ (Sd−1 ), it must hold
that:
                                 0 = ⟨f, div(µeq ∇(W ∗ µeq )⟩.
In particular, substituting f = ∇(W ∗ µeq ), we obtain:
                                  Z
                                       ∥∇(W ∗ µeq )∥2 dµeq = 0.
                                   Sd−1

This implies A := {x ∈ Sd−1 |∇(W ∗ µeq )(x) = 0} is such that µeq (AC ) = 0, hence supp(µeq ) =
A. Note that x → ∥∇(W ∗ µeq )(x)∥2 is still an analytic function, hence A must be either Sd−1
or a finite union of submanifolds of dimension at most d − 2 (by Lojasiewicz’s structure theorem,
(Krantz, 2002)).
To conclude the proof, we just need to study the case A = Sd−1 . The definition of A implies that
W ∗ µeq must be constant on Sd−1 . By the Funk-Hecke theorem, ∀n > 0, ∀j:
                               0 = (W ∗ µeq )n,j = Wn · (µeq )n,j ,
and thanks to the hypothesis Wn ̸= 0, we obtain (µeq )n,j = 0 ∀n ̸= 0 and ∀j. Thus, µeq is the
uniform measure.


                                                31
