Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING N EURAL N ETWORKS WITH D ISTRIBUTION
S HIFT: E FFICIENTLY C ERTIFIABLE G UARANTEES
 Gautam Chandrasekaran, Adam R. Klivans, Lin Lin Lee, Konstantinos Stavropoulos
 The University of Texas at Austin
 {gautamc,klivans,kstavrop}@cs.utexas.edu
 llee3@utexas.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         We give the first provably efficient algorithms for learning neural networks with
         respect to distribution shift. We work in the Testable Learning with Distribution
         Shift framework (TDS learning) of Klivans et al. (2024a), where the learner re-
         ceives labeled examples from a training distribution and unlabeled examples from
         a test distribution and must either output a hypothesis with low test error or reject
         if distribution shift is detected. No assumptions are made on the test distribution.
         All prior work in TDS learning focuses on classification, while here we must han-
         dle the setting of nonconvex regression. Our results apply to real-valued networks
         with arbitrary Lipschitz activations and work whenever the training distribution
         has strictly sub-exponential tails. For training distributions that are bounded and
         hypercontractive, we give a fully polynomial-time algorithm for TDS learning one
         hidden-layer networks with sigmoid activations. We achieve this by importing
         classical kernel methods into the TDS framework using data-dependent feature
         maps and a type of kernel matrix that couples samples from both train and test
         distributions.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Understanding when a model will generalize from a known training distribution to an unknown test
distribution is a critical challenge in trustworthy machine learning and domain adaptation. Tradi-
tional approaches to this problem prove generalization bounds in terms of various notions of distance
between train and test distributions (Ben-David et al., 2006; 2010; Mansour et al., 2009) but do not
provide efficient algorithms. Recent work due to Klivans et al. (2024a) departs from this paradigm
and defines the model of Testable Learning with Distribution Shift (TDS learning), where a learner
may reject altogether if significant distribution shift is detected. When the learner accepts, however,
it outputs a classifier and a proof that the classifier has nearly optimal test error.
A sequence of works has given the first set of efficient algorithms in the TDS learning model for
well-studied function classes where no assumptions are taken on the test distribution (Klivans et al.,
2024a;b; Chandrasekaran et al., 2024; Goel et al., 2024). These results, however, hold for classifica-
tion and therefore do not apply to (nonconvex) regression problems and in particular to a long line of
work giving provably efficient algorithms for learning simple classes of neural networks under nat-
ural distributional assumptions on the training marginal (Goel & Klivans, 2019; Diakonikolas et al.,
2020a;c; 2022; Chen et al., 2022b; 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Gollakota et al., 2024a; Diakonikolas &
Kane, 2024).
The main contribution of this work is the first set of efficient TDS learning algorithms for broad
classes of (nonconvex) regression problems. Our results apply to neural networks with arbitrary
Lipschitz activations of any constant depth. As one example, we obtain a fully polynomial-time
algorithm for learning one hidden-layer neural networks with sigmoid activations with respect to any
bounded and hypercontractive training distribution. For bounded training distributions, the running
times of our algorithms match the best known running times for ordinary PAC or agnostic learning
(without distribution shift). We emphasize that unlike all prior work in domain adaptation, we make
no assumptions on the test distribution.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Regression Setting. We assume access to labeled examples from the training distribution and
unlabeled examples
            p         from the marginal of the test distribution. We consider the squared loss
LD (h) =       E(x,y)∼D [(y − h(x))2 ]. The error benchmark is analogous to the benchmark for
TDS learning in classification (Klivans et al., 2024a) and depends on two quantities: the opti-
mum training error achievable by a classifier in the learnt class, opt = minf ∈F [LD (f )], and
the best joint error achievable by a single classifier on both the training and test distributions,
λ = minf ′ ∈F [LD (f ′ ) + LD′ (f ′ )]. Achieving an error of opt + λ is the standard goal in domain
adaptation (Ben-David et al., 2006; Blitzer et al., 2007; Mansour et al., 2009). We now formally
define the TDS learning framework for regression:
Definition 1.1 (Testable Regression with Distribution Shift). For ϵ, δ ∈ (0, 1) and a function class
F ⊆ {Rd → R}, the learner receives iid labeled examples from some unknown training distribution
D over Rd × R and iid unlabeled examples from the marginal Dx′ of another unknown test distribu-
tion D′ over Rd × R. The learner either rejects, or it accepts and outputs hypothesis h : Rd → R
such that the following are true.

      1. (Soundness) With probability at least 1 − δ, if the algorithm accepts, then the output h
         satisfies LD′ (h) ≤ minf ∈F [LD (f )] + minf ′ ∈F [LD (f ′ ) + LD′ (f ′ )] + ϵ.
      2. (Completeness) If Dx = Dx′ , then the algorithm accepts with probability at least 1 − δ.

1.1   T ECHNICAL S TATEMENT OF R ESULTS

                                                                                                f of
Our results hold for classes of Lipschitz neural networks. In particular, we consider functions
the following form. Let σ : R → R be an activation function. Let W = W (1) , . . . W (t) with
W (i) ∈ Rsi ×si−1 be the tuple of weight matrices. Here, s0 = d is the input  dimension and st = 1.
Define recursively the function fi : Rd → Rsi as fi (x) = W (i) ·σ fi−1 (x) with f1 (x) = W (1) ·x.
The function f : Rd → R computed by the neural network (W, σ) is defined as f (x) := ft (x).
The depth of this network is t.
We now present our main results on TDS learning for neural networks.

           Function Class                  Runtime (Bounded)                  Runtime (Subgaussian)

   One hidden-layer Sigmoid Net              poly(d, M, 1/ϵ)                      dpoly(k log(M/ϵ))

            Single ReLU                   poly(d, M ) · 2O(1/ϵ)                    dpoly(log(M )/ϵ)
                                                                  t−1
                                     poly(d, M ) · 2O((log(1/ϵ))         )                              t−1
            Sigmoid Nets                                                     dpoly(k log(M )(log(1/ϵ)         ))

                                                         √   t−1                         t−1
          1-Lipschitz Nets             poly(d, M ) · 2Õ(k k2      /ϵ)
                                                                                dpoly(k2       log(M )/ϵ)



Table 1: In the above table, k denotes the number of neurons in the first hidden layer. M denotes
a bound on the labels of the train and test distributions. One hidden-layer Sigmoid nets refers to
depth 2 neural networks with sigmoid activation. The bounded distributions considered in the above
table have support on the unit ball. We assume that all relevant parameters of the neural network
are bounded by constants. For more detailed statements and proofs, see Definition A.12 and (1)
Corollaries B.4 and B.6 and Theorems B.3 and B.5 for the bounded case, and (2) Theorems C.9
and C.10 for the Subgaussian case.

From the above table, we highlight that in the cases of bounded distributions with (1) one hidden-
layer Sigmoid Nets, and (2) Single ReLU with ϵ < 1/ log d, we obtain TDS algorithms that run in
polynomial time in all parameters. Moreover, for the last row, regarding Lipschitz Nets, each neuron
is allowed to have a different and unknown Lipschitz activation. Therefore, in particular, our results
capture the class of single-index models (see, e.g., Kakade et al. (2011); Gollakota et al. (2024a)).
In the results of Table 1, we assume bounded labels for both the training and test distributions. This
assumption can be relaxed to a bound on any moment whose degree is strictly higher than 2 (see
Corollary D.2). In fact, such an assumption is necessary, as we show in Proposition D.1.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.2   O UR T ECHNIQUES

TDS Learning via Kernel Methods. The major technical contribution of this work is devoted to
importing classical kernel methods into the TDS learning framework. A first attempt at testing dis-
tribution shift with respect to a fixed feature map would be to form two corresponding covariance
matrices of the expanded features, one from samples drawn from the training distribution and the
other from samples drawn from the test distribution, and test if these two matrices have similar eigen-
decompositions. This approach only yields efficient algorithms for linear kernels, however, as here
we are interested in spectral properties of covariance matrices in the feature space corresponding to
low-degree polynomials, whose dimension is too large.
Instead we form a new data-dependent and concise reference feature map ϕ, that depends on ex-
amples from both Dx and Dx′ . We show that this feature map approximately represents the ground
truth, i.e., some function with both low training and test error (this is due to the representer theo-
rem, see Proposition 3.7). To certify that error bounds transfer from Dx to Dx′ , we require relative
error closeness between covariance matrix Φ′ = Ex∼Dx′ [ϕ(x)ϕ(x)⊤ ] of the feature expansion ϕ
over the test marginal with the corresponding matrix Φ = Ex∼Dx [ϕ(x)ϕ(x)⊤ ] over the training
marginal. We draw fresh sets of verification examples and show how the kernel trick can be used
to efficiently achieve these approximations even though ϕ is a nonstandard feature map. For more
technical details, see Section 3.1.
By instantiating the above results using a type of polynomial kernel, we can reduce the problem
of TDS learning neural networks to the problem of obtaining an appropriate polynomial approxi-
mator. Our final training algorithm (as opposed to the testing phase) will essentially be kernelized
polynomial regression.
TDS Learning and Uniform Approximation. Prior work in TDS learning has established con-
nections between polynomial approximation theory and efficient algorithms in the TDS setting. In
particular, the existence of low-degree sandwiching approximators for a concept class is known to
imply dimension-efficient TDS learning algorithms for binary classification. The notion of sand-
wiching approximators for a function f refers to a pair of low-degree polynomials pup , pdown with
two main properties: (1) pdown ≤ f ≤ pup everywhere and (2) the expected absolute distance
between pup and pdown over some reference distribution is small. The first property is of partic-
ular importance in the TDS setting, since it holds everywhere and, therefore, it holds for any test
distribution unconditionally.
Here we make the simple observation that the incomparable notion of uniform approximation suf-
fices for TDS learning. A uniform approximator is a polynomial p that approximates a function
f pointwise, meaning that |p − f | is small in every point within a ball around the origin (there
is no known direct relationship between sandwiching and uniform approximators). In our setting,
uniform approximation is more convenient, due to the existence of powerful tools from polynomial
approximation theory regarding Lipschitz and analytic functions.
Contrary to the sandwiching property, the uniform approximation property cannot hold everywhere
if the approximated function class contains high-(or infinite-)degree functions. When the training
distribution has strictly sub-exponential tails, however, the expected error of approximation outside
the radius of approximation is negligible. Importantly, this property can be certified for the test
distribution by using a moment-matching tester. See also Section 4.

1.3   R ELATED W ORK

Learning with Distribution Shift. The field of domain adaptation has been studying the distribution
shift problem for almost two decades (Ben-David et al., 2006; Blitzer et al., 2007; Ben-David et al.,
2010; Mansour et al., 2009; David et al., 2010; Mousavi Kalan et al., 2020; Redko et al., 2020;
Kalavasis et al., 2024; Hanneke & Kpotufe, 2019; 2024; Awasthi et al., 2024), providing useful
insights regarding the information-theoretic (im)possibilities for learning with distribution shift. The
first efficient end-to-end algorithms for non-trivial concept classes with distribution shift were given
for TDS learning in Klivans et al. (2024a;b); Chandrasekaran et al. (2024) and for PQ learning,
originally defined by Goldwasser et al. (2020), in Goel et al. (2024). These works focus on binary
classification for classes like halfspaces, halfspace intersections, and geometric concepts. In the
regression setting, we need to handle unbounded loss functions, but we are also able to use Lipschitz

                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


properties of real-valued networks to obtain results even for deeper architectures. For the special
case of linear regression, efficient algorithms for learning with distribution shift are known to exist
(see, e.g., Lei et al. (2021)), but our results capture much broader classes.
Another distinction between the existing works in TDS learning and our work, is that our results
require significantly milder assumptions on the training distribution. In particular, while all prior
works on TDS learning require both concentration and anti-concentration for the training marginal
(Klivans et al., 2024a;b; Chandrasekaran et al., 2024), we only assume strictly subexponential con-
centration in every direction. This is possible because the function classes we consider are Lipschitz,
which is not the case for binary classification.
Testable Learning. More broadly, TDS learning is related to the notion of testable learning (Ru-
binfeld & Vasilyan, 2023; Gollakota et al., 2023; 2024c; Diakonikolas et al., 2023; Gollakota et al.,
2024b; Diakonikolas et al., 2024; Slot et al., 2024), originally defined by Rubinfeld & Vasilyan
(2023) for standard agnostic learning, aiming to certify optimal performance for learning algorithms
without relying directly on any distributional assumptions. The main difference between testable
agnostic learning and TDS learning is that in TDS learning, we allow for distribution shift, while
in testable agnostic learning the training and test distributions are the same. Because of this, TDS
learning remains challenging even in the absence of label noise, in which case testable learning
becomes trivial (Klivans et al., 2024a).
Efficient Learning of Neural Networks. Many works have focused on providing upper and lower
bounds on the computational complexity of learning neural networks in the standard (distribution-
shift-free) setting (Goel et al., 2017; Goel & Klivans, 2019; Goel et al., 2020a;b; Diakonikolas et al.,
2020a;b;c; 2022; Chen et al., 2022a;b; 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Gollakota et al., 2024a; Diakonikolas
& Kane, 2024; Li et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Vempala & Wilmes, 2019; Allen-
Zhu et al., 2019; Bakshi et al., 2019; Manurangsi & Reichman, 2018; Ge et al., 2019; 2018; Du
et al., 2018; Goel et al., 2018; Tian, 2017; Li & Yuan, 2017; Brutzkus & Globerson, 2017; Zhong
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016b; Janzamin et al., 2015). The majority of the upper bounds either
require noiseless labels and shallow architectures or work only under Gaussian training marginals.
Our results not only hold in the presence of distribution shift, but also capture deeper architectures,
under any strictly subexponential training marginal and allow adversarial label noise.
The upper bounds that are closest to our work are those given by Goel et al. (2017). They consider
ReLU as well as sigmoid networks, allow for adversarial label noise and assume that the training
marginal is bounded but otherwise arbitrary. Our results in Section 3 extend all of the results in
Goel et al. (2017) to the TDS setting, by assuming additionally that the training distribution is
hypercontractive (see Definition 3.9). This additional assumption is important to ensure that our
tests will pass when there is no distribution shift. For a more thorough technical comparison with
Goel et al. (2017), see Section 3.
In Section 4, we provide upper bounds for TDS learning of Lipschitz networks even when the
training marginal is an arbitrary strictly subexponential distribution. In particular, our results imply
new bounds for standard agnostic learning of single ReLU neurons, where we achieve runtime
dpoly(1/ϵ) . The only known upper bounds work under the Gaussian marginal (Diakonikolas et al.,
2020a), achieving similar runtime. In fact, in the statistical query framework (Kearns, 1998), it
is known that dpoly(1/ϵ) runtime is necessary for agnostically learning the ReLU, even under the
Gaussian distribution (Diakonikolas et al., 2020b; Goel et al., 2020b).


2   P RELIMINARIES

We use standard vector and matrix notation. We denote with R, N the sets of real and natural
numbers accordingly. We denote with D labeled distributions over Rd ×R and with Dx the marginal
of D on the features in Rd . For a set SPof points in Rd , we define the empirical probabilities (resp.
                                          x∈S 1{E(x)} (resp. Ex∼S [f (x)] = |S|
                                     1                                           1
                                                                                    P
expectations) as Prx∼S [E(x)] = |S|                                                   x∈S f (x)). We
denote with S̄ the labeled version of S and we define the clipping function clM : R → [−M, M ],
that maps a number t ∈ R either to itself if t ∈ [−M, M ], or to M · sign(t) otherwise.
Loss function. Throughout this work, we denote with LD (h) thepsquared loss of a hypothesis h :
Rd → R with respect to a labeled distribution D, i.e., LD (h) = E(x,y)∼D [(y − h(x))2 ]. More-


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                              p
over, for any function f : Rd → R, we denote with ∥f ∥D the quantity ∥f ∥D = Ex∼Dx [(f (x))2 ].
For
q aP   set of labeled examples S̄, we denote with LS̄ (h) the empirical loss on S̄, i.e., LS̄ (h) =
    1                       2
  |S̄|   (x,y)∈S̄ (y − h(x)) and similarly for ∥f ∥S .

Distributional Assumptions. In order to obtain efficient algorithms, we will either assume that the
training marginal Dx is bounded and hypercontractive (Section 3) or that it has strictly subexponen-
tial tails in every direction (Section 4). We make no assumptions on the test marginal Dx′ .
Regarding the labels, we assume some mild bound on the moments of the training and the test
labels, e.g., (a) that Ey∼Dy [y 4 ], Ey∼Dy′ [y 4 ] ≤ M or (b) that y ∈ [−M, M ] a.s. for both D and
D′ . Although, ideally, we want to avoid any assumptions on the test distribution, as we show in
Proposition D.1, a bound on some constant-degree moment of the test labels is necessary.


3    B OUNDED T RAINING M ARGINALS

We begin with the scenario where the training distribution is known to be bounded. In this case, it is
known that one-hidden-layer sigmoid networks can be agnostically learned (in the classical sense,
without distribution shift) in fully polynomial time and single ReLU neurons can be learned up to
            1
error O( log(d) ) in polynomial time (Goel et al., 2017). These results are based on a kernel-based
approach, combined with results from polynomial approximation theory. While polynomial approx-
imations can reduce the nonconvex agnostic learning problem to a convex one through polynomial
feature expansions, the kernel trick enables further pruning of the search space, which is important
for obtaining polynomial-time algorithms. Our work demonstrates another useful implication of the
kernel trick: it leads to efficient algorithms for testing distribution shift.
We will require the following standard notions:
Definition 3.1 (Kernels (Mercer, 1909)). A function K : Rd × Rd → R is a kernel. If for any set of
m points x1 , . . . , xm in Rd , the matrix (K(xi , xj ))(i,j)∈[m] is positive semidefinite, we say that the
kernel K is positive definite. The kernel K is symmetric if for all x, x′ ∈ Rd , K(x, x′ ) = K(x′ , x).

Any PSD kernel is associated with some Hilbert space H and some feature map from Rd to H.
Fact 3.2 (Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space). For any positive definite and symmetric (PDS) kernel
K, there is a Hilbert space H, equipped with the inner product ⟨·, ·⟩ : H × H → R and a function
ψ : Rd → H such that K(x, x′ ) = ⟨ψ(x), ψ(x′ )⟩ for all x, x′ ∈ Rd . We call H the reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) for K and ψ the feature map for K.

There are three main properties of the kernel method. First, although the associated feature map
ψ may correspond to a vector in an infinite-dimensional space, the kernel K(x, x′ ) may still be
efficiently evaluated, due to its analytic expression in terms of x, x′ . Second, the function class
FK = {x 7→ ⟨v, ψ(x)⟩ : v ∈ H, ⟨v, v⟩ ≤ B} has Rademacher complexity independent from the
dimension of H, as long as the maximum value of K(x, x) for x in the domain is bounded (Thm.
6.12 in Mohri et al. (2018)). Third, the time complexity of finding the function in FK that best fits a
dataset is actually polynomial to the size of the dataset, due to the representer theorem (Thm. 6.11
in Mohri et al. (2018)). Taken together, these properties constitute the basis of the kernel method,
implying learners with runtime independent from the effective dimension of the learning problem.
In order to apply the kernel method to learn some function class F, it suffices to show that the class
F can be represented sufficiently well by the class FK . We give the following definition.
Definition 3.3 (Approximate Representation). Let F be a function class over Rd , K : Rd × Rd → R
a PDS kernel, where H is the corresponding RKHS and ψ the feature map for K. We say that F can
be (ϵ, B)-approximately represented within radius R with respect to K if for any f ∈ F, there is
v ∈ H with ⟨v, v⟩ ≤ B such that |f (x) − ⟨v, ψ(x)⟩| ≤ ϵ, for all x ∈ Rd : ∥x∥2 ≤ R.

For the purposes of TDS learning, we will also require the training marginal to have be hypercon-
tractive with respect to the kernel at hand. This is important to ensure that our test will accept
whenever there is no distribution shift. More formally, we require the following.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 3.4 (Hypercontractivity). Let Dx be some distribution over Rd , let H be a Hilbert space
and let ψ : Rd → H. We say that Dx is (ψ, C, ℓ)-hypercontractive if for any t ∈ N and v ∈ H:
                        Ex∼Dx [⟨v, ψ(x)⟩2t ] ≤ (Ct)2ℓt (Ex∼Dx [⟨v, ψ(x)⟩2 ])t
If K is the PDS kernel corresponding to ψ, we also say that Dx is (K, C, ℓ)-hypercontractive.

3.1   TDS R EGRESSION VIA THE K ERNEL M ETHOD

We now give a general theorem on TDS regression for bounded distributions, under the following
assumptions. Note that, although we assume that the training and test labels are bounded, this
assumption can be relaxed in a black-box manner and bounding some constant-degree moment of
the distribution of the labels suffices, as we show in Corollary D.2.
Assumption 3.5. For a function class F ⊆ {Rd → R}, and training and test distributions D, D′
over Rd × R, we assume the following.

      1. F is (ϵ, B)-approximately represented within radius R w.r.t. a PDS kernel K : Rd × Rd →
         R, for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1) and B, R ≥ 1 and let A = supx:∥x∥2 ≤R K(x, x).

      2. The training marginal Dx (1) is bounded within {x : ∥x∥2 ≤ R} and (2) is (K, C, ℓ)-
         hypercontractive for some C, ℓ ≥ 1.
      3. The training and test labels are both bounded in [−M, M ] for some M ≥ 1.

Consider the function class F, the kernel K and the parameters ϵ, A, B, C, M, ℓ as defined in the
assumption above and let δ ∈ (0, 1). Then, we obtain the following theorem.
Theorem 3.6 (TDS Learning via the Kernel Method). Under Assumption 3.5, Algorithm 1 learns
the class F in the TDS regression setting up to excess error 5ϵ and probability of failure δ. The time
complexity is O(T ) · poly(d, 1ϵ , (log(1/δ))ℓ , A, B, C ℓ , 2ℓ , M ), where T is the evaluation time of K.

The main ideas of the proof are the following.
                                                                                                       ′
Obtaining a concise reference feature map. The algorithm first draws reference sets Sref , Sref
from both the training and the test distributions. The representer theorem, combined with the ap-
proximate representation assumption (Definition 3.3) ensure that the reference examples define a
new feature map ϕ : Rd → R2m with ϕ(x) = (K(x, z))z∈Sref ∪Sref             ′  such that the ground truth
f ∗ = arg minf ∈F [LD (f ) + LD′ (f )] can be approximately represented as a linear combination of
                                                 ′
the features in ϕ with respect to both Sref and Sref , i.e., ∥f ∗ − (a∗ )⊤ ϕ∥Sref and ∥f ∗ − (a∗ )⊤ ϕ∥Sref
                                                                                                       ′

                           ∗      2m
are both small for some a ∈ R . In particular, we have the following.
Proposition 3.7 (Representer Theorem, modification of Theorem 6.11 in Mohri et al. (2018)). Sup-
pose that a function f : Rd → R can be (ϵ, B)-approximately represented within radius R w.r.t.
                                                                                              d
some PDS kernel K (as per Definition 3.3). Then, for any     P set of examples S in {x ∈ R : ∥x∥2 ≤
                                 |S|
R}, there is a = (ax )x∈S ∈ R such that for p̃(x) = z∈S az K(z, x) we have:
                                                  X
                             ∥f − p̃∥S ≤ ϵ and           ax az K(z, x) ≤ B
                                                  x,z∈S


Proof. We first observe that there is some v ∈ H such that ⟨v, v⟩ ≤ B and for p(x) = ⟨v, ψ(x)⟩ we
have ∥f − p∥S ≤ ϵ, because by Definition 3.3, there is a pointwise approximator for f with respect
to K. By Theorem 6.11 in Mohri et al. (2018), this implies the existence of p̃ as desired.

Note that since the evaluation of ϕ(x) only involves Kernel evaluations, we never need to compute
the initial feature expansion ψ(x) which could be overly expensive.
Forming a candidate output hypothesis. We know that the reference feature map approximately
represents the ground truth. However, having no access to test labels, we cannot directly hope to find
the corresponding coefficient a∗ ∈ R2m . Instead, we use only the training reference examples to
find a candidate hypothesis p̂ with close-to-optimal performance on the training distribution which
can be also expressed in terms of the reference feature map ϕ, as p̂ = â⊤ ϕ. It then suffices to test
the quality of ϕ on the test distribution.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: TDS Regression via the Kernel Method
Input: Parameters M, R, B, A, C, ℓ ≥ 1, ϵ, δ ∈ (0, 1) and sample access to D, Dx′
                    4
Set m = c (ABM
            ϵ4
               )
                 log( 1δ ), N = cm2 ABC          4 4ℓ+1
                                     ϵ4 (4C log( δ ))   , c large enough constant
                                                                              ′
Draw m i.i.d. labeled examples S̄ref from D and m i.i.d. unlabeled examples Sref from Dx′ ;
                   ′
if for some x ∈ Sref we have ∥x∥2 > R then
     Reject and terminate;
Let â = (âz )z∈Sref be the optimal solution to the following convex program
                              X             X                 2
                      minm            y−          az K(z, x)
                        a∈R
                                (x,y)∈S̄ref      z∈Sref
                                  X
                         s.t.              az aw K(z, w) ≤ B, where a = (az )z∈Sref
                                z,w∈Sref

                                                                            ′
Draw N i.i.d. unlabeled examples Sver from Dx and N unlabeled examples Sver     from Dx′ ;
                   ′
if for some x ∈ Sver we have ∥x∥2 > R then
     Reject and terminate;
                                                 with Φ̂z,w = N1 x∈Sver K(x, z)K(x, w);
                                                                 P
Compute the matrix Φ̂ = (Φ̂z,w )z,w∈Sref ∪Sref
                                             ′


Compute the matrix Φ̂′ = (Φ̂′z,w )z,w∈Sref ∪Sref with Φ̂′z,w = N1 x∈Sver
                                                                 P
                                               ′                     ′   K(x, z)K(x, w);
Let ρ be the value of the following eigenvalue problem
                                           max a⊤ Φ̂′ a s.t. a⊤ Φ̂a ≤ 1
                                         a∈R2m
                2
              ϵ
 if ρ > 1 + 50AB  then
    Reject and terminate;
                                                                       P
Otherwise, accept and output h : x 7→ h(x) = clM (p̂(x)), where p̂(x) = z∈Sref âz K(z, x);



Testing the quality of reference feature map on the test distribution. We know that the function
p̃∗ = (a∗ )⊤ ϕ performs well on the test distribution (since it is close to f ∗ on a reference test set).
We also know that the candidate output â⊤ ϕ performs well on the training distribution. Therefore,
in order to ensure that p̂ performs well on the test distribution, it suffices to show that the distance
between p̂ and p̃∗ under the test distribution, i.e., ∥â⊤ ϕ − (a∗ )⊤ ϕ∥Dx′ , is small. In fact, it suffices
to bound this distance by the corresponding one under the training distribution, because p̂ fits the
training data well and ∥â⊤ ϕ − (a∗ )⊤ ϕ∥Dx is indeed small. Since we do not know a∗ , we need to
run a test on ϕ that certifies the desired bound for any possible a∗ .
Using the spectral tester. We observe that ∥â⊤ ϕ − (a∗ )⊤ ϕ∥2Dx = (â − a∗ )⊤ Φ(â − a∗ ), where
Φ = Ex∼Dx [ϕ(x)ϕ(x)⊤ ] and similarly ∥â⊤ ϕ − (a∗ )⊤ ϕ∥2Dx′ = (â − a∗ )⊤ Φ′ (â − a∗ ). Since we
want to obtain a bound for all a∗ , we essentially want to ensure that for any a ∈ R2m we have
a⊤ Φ′ a ≤ (1 + ρ)a⊤ Φa for some small ρ. Having a multiplicative bound is important because we
do not have any bound on the norm of ∥â − a∗ ∥2 .
To implement the test, and since we cannot test Φ and Φ′ directly, we draw fresh verification ex-
                ′
amples Sver , Sver  from Dx and Dx′ and run a spectral test on the corresponding empirical versions
Φ̂, Φ̂ of the matrices Φ, Φ′ . To ensure that the test will accept when there is no distribution shift, we
      ′

use the following lemma (originally from Goel et al. (2024)) on multiplicative spectral concentration
for Φ̂, where the hypercontractivity assumption (Definition 3.4) is important.
Lemma 3.8 (Multiplicative Spectral Concentration, Lemma B.1 in Goel et al. (2024), modified). Let
Dx be a distribution over Rd and ϕ : Rd → Rm such that Dx is (ϕ, C, ℓ)-hypercontractive for some
C, ℓ ≥ 1. Suppose that S consists of N i.i.d. examples from Dx and let Φ = Ex∼Dx [ϕ(x)ϕ(x)⊤ ],
                                                                   2
and Φ̂ = N1 x∈S ϕ(x)ϕ(x)⊤ . For any ϵ, δ ∈ (0, 1), if N ≥ 64Cm       (4C log2 ( 4δ ))4ℓ+1 , then with
             P
                                                                ϵ2
probability at least 1 − δ, we have that

                        For any a ∈ Rm : a⊤ Φ̂a ∈ [(1 − ϵ)a⊤ Φa, (1 + ϵ)a⊤ Φa]


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that the multiplicative spectral concentration lemma requires access to independent samples.
                                                                                      ′
However, the reference feature map ϕ depends on the reference examples Sref , Sref      . This is the
                                    ′
reason why we do not reuse Sref , Sref , but rather draw fresh verification examples.
For the full formal proof of Theorem 3.6 as well as a proof of Lemma 3.8, see Appendix B. The full
proof involves appropriate uniform convergence bounds for kernel hypotheses, which are important
in order to shift from the reference to the verification examples and back.

3.2    A PPLICATIONS

Having obtained a general theorem for TDS learning under Assumption 3.5, we will now instantiate
it to obtain TDS learning algorithms for learning neural networks with Lipschitz activations. In
particular, we recover all of the bounds of Goel et al. (2017), using the additional assumption that
the training distribution is hypercontractive in the following standard sense.
Definition 3.9 (Hypercontractivity). We say that D is C-hypercontractive if for all polynomials of
degree ℓ and t ∈ N, we have that
                                                                         t
                             Ex∼D p(x)2t ≤ (Ct)2ℓt Ex∼D p(x)2 .


Note that many common distributions like log-concave or the uniform over the hypercube are known
to be hypercontractive for some constant C (see Carbery & Wright (2001) and O’Donnell (2014)).
We provide the following lemma, whose proof can be found in the appendix (see Theorems A.19
and A.21 and Lemma A.16).
Lemma 3.10. The following bounds on the parameters in Assumption 3.5 hold for specific instanti-
ations of the function classes.


    Function Class                 Degree (ℓ)                    Representation               Kernel
                                                                  Bound (B)                  Bound (A)
                                                                                1      t−2         t
                       O RW t−2 (t log( Wϵ ))t−1 log R

      Sigmoid Nets                                           2ℓ · W Õ(W t log( ϵ ))          (2R)2 ℓ
                                            √
    L-Lipschitz Nets      O (W L)t−1 Rk k/ϵ                        (k + ℓ)O(ℓ)                 RO(ℓ)

Table 2: We instantiate the parameters relevant to Assumption 3.5 for Sigmoid and Lipschitz Nets.
We have: (1) t denotes a bound on the depth of the network, (2) W is a bound on the sum of network
weights in all layers other than the first, (3) (ϵ, B) and radius R are the approximate representation
parameters, (4) k is the number of hidden units in the first layer. The kernel function can be evaluated
in time poly(d, ℓ). For each of the classes, we assume that the maximum two norm of any row of
the matrix corresponding to the weights of the first layer is bounded by 1. The kernel we use
                                              (t)
is the composed multinomial kernel MKℓ with appropriately chosen degree vector ℓ. Here, ℓ
                                                                                                (t)
equals the product of the entries of ℓ. Any C-hypercontractive distribution is also (MKℓ , C, ℓ)
hypercontractive for ℓ as specified in the table. For the case of k = 1, the bound B in the second
row can be improved to 2O(ℓ) .


Combining Lemma 3.10 with Theorem 3.6, we obtain the results of the middle column of Table 1.

4     U NBOUNDED D ISTRIBUTIONS
We showed that the kernel method provides runtime improvements for TDS learning, because it can
be used to obtain a concise reference feature map, whose spectral properties on the test distribution
are all we need to check to certify low test error. A similar approach would not provide any run-
time improvements for the case of unbounded distributions, because the dimension of the reference
feature space would not be significantly smaller than the dimension of the multinomial feature ex-
pansion. Therefore, we can follow the standard moment-matching testing approach commonly used
in TDS learning (Klivans et al., 2024a) and testable agnostic learning (Rubinfeld & Vasilyan, 2023;
Gollakota et al., 2023). We require the following assumptions.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 4.1. For a function class F ⊆ {Rd → R}, and training and test distributions D, D′
over Rd × R, we assume the following.

      1. For any f ∈ F, there is W ∈ Rk×d with ∥W ∥2 = 1 and W W ⊤ = Ik and a function
         g : Rk → R such that f (x) = g(W x) for all x ∈ Rd . Moreover, f (0) = O(1).

      2. For any f ∈ F, with f (x) = g(W x), there is polynomial q over Rk of degree at most
         ℓ s.t. for any x ∈ Rd with ∥x∥2 ≤ R we have |q(W x) − g(W x)| ≤ ϵ, where R ≥ 1,
         ϵ ∈ (0, 1). We also require that ℓ ≤ ÕF ,ϵ (R), where ÕF ,ϵ is hiding factors that are at most
         logarithmic in R, but can also depend on ϵ, F.

      3. The training marginal Dx is γ-strictly subexponential for γ ∈ (0, 1].

      4. The training and test labels are both bounded in [−M, M ] for some M ≥ 1.

Consider the function class F, and the parameters ϵ, γ, M, k, ℓ as defined in the assumption above
and let δ ∈ (0, 1). Then, we obtain the following theorem.
Theorem 4.2 (TDS Learning via Uniform Approximation). Under Assumption 4.1, Algorithm 2
learns the class F in the TDS regression setting up to excess error 5ϵ and probability of failure δ.
The time complexity is poly(ds , 1/ϵ, log(1/δ)ℓ ) where s = (ℓ log(M/ϵ))O(1/γ) .

Note that Assumption 4.1 involves a low-degree uniform approximation assumption, which only
holds within some bounded-radius ball. Since we work under unbounded distributions, we also
need to handle the errors outside the ball. To this end, we use the following lemma, which follows
from results in Ben-David et al. (2018).
Lemma 4.3. Suppose f = fW and q satisfy parts 1 and 2 of Assumption 4.1. Then

                                                       ℓ
                          |p(x)| ≤ (kℓ)O(ℓ) ∥W x∥2 , for all ∥W x∥2 ≥ R.

The lemma above gives a bound on the values of a low-degree uniform approximator outside the
interval of approximation. Therefore, we can hope to control the error of approximation outside
the interval by taking advantage of the tails of our target distribution as well as picking R suffi-
ciently large. In order for the strictly subexponential tails to suffice, the quantitative dependence of
ℓ on R is important. This is why we assume (see Assumption 4.1) that ℓ = Õ(R). In particular,
in order to bound the quantity Ex∼Dx [p2 (x)1{∥W x∥2 ≥ R}], we use Lemma 4.3 the Cauchy-
                                                      4ℓ
Schwarz inequality and the bounds Ex∼Dx [∥W x∥2 ] ≤ (kℓ)O(ℓ) and Prx∼Dx [∥W x∥2 ≥ R] ≤
exp(−Ω(R/k)1+γ ). Substituting for ℓ = Õ(R), we observe that the overall bound on the quan-
tity Ex∼Dx [p2 (x)1{∥W x∥2 ≥ R}] decays with R, whenever γ is strictly positive. Therefore, the
overall bound can be made arbitrarily small with an appropriate choice of R (and therefore ℓ). For
more details on the proof, see Appendix C. Apart from the careful manipulations described above,
the proof follows the lines of the corresponding results for TDS learning through sandwiching poly-
nomials (Klivans et al., 2024a).
In order to obtain end-to-end results for classes of neural networks (see the rightmost column of
Table 1), we need to prove the existence of uniform polynomial approximators whose degree scales
almost linearly with respect to the radius of approximation for the reasons described above. For
arbitrary Lipschitz nets (see Theorem A.19), we use a general tool from polynomial approximation
theory, the multivariate Jackson’s theorem (Theorem A.9). This gives us a polynomial with degree
scaling linearly in R and polynomially on 1ϵ and the number of hidden units (k) in the first layer.
For sigmoid nets, a more careful derivation yields improved bounds (see Theorem A.21) which have
a poly-logarithmic dependence on 1ϵ . Our construction involves composing approximators for the
activations at each layer. Naively, the degree of this composition would be super linear in R. To get
around this, we use the key property that the size of the output of a sigmoid network at any layer is
memoryless (i.e., has no R dependence). This follows from the fact that the sigmoid is bounded in
[0, 1]. Using this, we obtain an approximator with almost-linear dependence on R. For more details
see Appendix A.5.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers of ICLR 2025 for their feedback. Gautam Chandrasekaran
was supported by the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning (IFML). Adam R.
Klivans was supported by NSF award AF-1909204 and the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of
Machine Learning (IFML). Lin Lin Lee was supported by the NSF AI Institute for Foundations
of Machine Learning (IFML). Konstantinos Stavropoulos was supported by the NSF AI Institute
for Foundations of Machine Learning (IFML) and by scholarships from Bodossaki Foundation and
Leventis Foundation.

R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Yingyu Liang. Learning and generalization in overparame-
  terized neural networks, going beyond two layers. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.

Pranjal Awasthi, Corinna Cortes, and Mehryar Mohri. Best-effort adaptation. Annals of Mathematics
  and Artificial Intelligence, 92(2):393–438, 2024.

Ainesh Bakshi, Rajesh Jayaram, and David P Woodruff. Learning two layer rectified neural networks
  in polynomial time. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 195–268. PMLR, 2019.

Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira. Analysis of representations
  for domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 19, 2006.

Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wort-
  man Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Machine learning, 79:151–175,
  2010.

Shalev Ben-David, Adam Bouland, Ankit Garg, and Robin Kothari. Classical lower bounds from
  quantum upper bounds. In 2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
  Science (FOCS), pp. 339–349. IEEE, 2018.

John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman. Learning
  bounds for domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.

Alon Brutzkus and Amir Globerson. Globally optimal gradient descent for a convnet with gaussian
  inputs. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 605–614. PMLR, 2017.

Anthony Carbery and James Wright. Distributional and lq norm inequalities for polynomials over
  convex bodies in rn. Mathematical research letters, 8(3):233–248, 2001.

Gautam Chandrasekaran, Adam R Klivans, Vasilis Kontonis, Konstantinos Stavropoulos, and Ar-
  sen Vasilyan. Efficient discrepancy testing for learning with distribution shift. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.09373, 2024.

Sitan Chen, Aravind Gollakota, Adam Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Hardness of noise-free learning
   for two-hidden-layer neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
   10709–10724, 2022a.

Sitan Chen, Adam R Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning deep relu networks is fixed-parameter
   tractable. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
   pp. 696–707. IEEE, 2022b.

Sitan Chen, Zehao Dou, Surbhi Goel, Adam Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning narrow one-
   hidden-layer relu networks. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
   5580–5614. PMLR, 2023.

Shai Ben David, Tyler Lu, Teresa Luu, and Dávid Pál. Impossibility theorems for domain adaptation.
  In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 129–136. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ilias Diakonikolas and Daniel M Kane. Efficiently learning one-hidden-layer relu networks via
   schurpolynomials. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1364–
   1378. PMLR, 2024.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Surbhi Goel, Sushrut Karmalkar, Adam R Klivans, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi.
   Approximation schemes for relu regression. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 1452–1485.
   PMLR, 2020a.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel Kane, and Nikos Zarifis. Near-optimal sq lower bounds for agnostically
   learning halfspaces and relus under gaussian marginals. Advances in Neural Information Process-
   ing Systems, 33:13586–13596, 2020b.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M Kane, Vasilis Kontonis, and Nikos Zarifis. Algorithms and sq lower
   bounds for pac learning one-hidden-layer relu networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
   1514–1539. PMLR, 2020c.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Vasilis Kontonis, Christos Tzamos, and Nikos Zarifis. Learning a single neuron
   with adversarial label noise via gradient descent. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4313–
   4361. PMLR, 2022.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel Kane, Vasilis Kontonis, Sihan Liu, and Nikos Zarifis. Efficient testable
   learning of halfspaces with adversarial label noise. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 36, 2023.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel Kane, Sihan Liu, and Nikos Zarifis. Testable learning of general halfs-
   paces with adversarial label noise. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory,
   pp. 1308–1335. PMLR, 2024.
Simon S Du, Jason D Lee, and Yuandong Tian. When is a convolutional filter easy to learn? In 6th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, 2018.
Dietmar Ferger. Optimal constants in the marcinkiewicz–zygmund inequalities. Statistics &
  Probability Letters, 84:96–101, 2014. ISSN 0167-7152. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spl.
  2013.09.029. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0167715213003271.
Weihao Gao, Ashok V Makkuva, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. Learning one-hidden-
 layer neural networks under general input distributions. In The 22nd International Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1950–1959. PMLR, 2019.
Rong Ge, Jason D Lee, and Tengyu Ma. Learning one-hidden-layer neural networks with landscape
  design. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, 2018.
Rong Ge, Rohith Kuditipudi, Zhize Li, and Xiang Wang. Learning two-layer neural networks with
  symmetric inputs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Surbhi Goel and Adam R Klivans. Learning neural networks with two nonlinear layers in polynomial
  time. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1470–1499. PMLR, 2019.
Surbhi Goel, Varun Kanade, Adam Klivans, and Justin Thaler. Reliably learning the relu in poly-
  nomial time. In Satyen Kale and Ohad Shamir (eds.), Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
  Learning Theory, volume 65 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1004–1042.
  PMLR, 07–10 Jul 2017.
Surbhi Goel, Adam Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning one convolutional layer with overlapping
  patches. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1783–1791. PMLR, 2018.
Surbhi Goel, Aravind Gollakota, Zhihan Jin, Sushrut Karmalkar, and Adam Klivans. Superpolyno-
  mial lower bounds for learning one-layer neural networks using gradient descent. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3587–3596. PMLR, 2020a.
Surbhi Goel, Aravind Gollakota, and Adam Klivans. Statistical-query lower bounds via functional
  gradients. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2147–2158, 2020b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Surbhi Goel, Abhishek Shetty, Konstantinos Stavropoulos, and Arsen Vasilyan. Tolerant algorithms
  for learning with arbitrary covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02742, 2024.

Shafi Goldwasser, Adam Tauman Kalai, Yael Kalai, and Omar Montasser. Beyond perturbations:
  Learning guarantees with arbitrary adversarial test examples. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:15859–15870, 2020.

Aravind Gollakota, Adam R Klivans, and Pravesh K Kothari. A moment-matching approach to
  testable learning and a new characterization of rademacher complexity. Proceedings of the fifty-
  fifth annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2023.

Aravind Gollakota, Parikshit Gopalan, Adam Klivans, and Konstantinos Stavropoulos. Agnostically
  learning single-index models using omnipredictors. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024a.

Aravind Gollakota, Adam Klivans, Konstantinos Stavropoulos, and Arsen Vasilyan. Tester-learners
  for halfspaces: Universal algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024b.

Aravind Gollakota, Adam R Klivans, Konstantinos Stavropoulos, and Arsen Vasilyan. An efficient
  tester-learner for halfspaces. The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024c.

Steve Hanneke and Samory Kpotufe. On the value of target data in transfer learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Steve Hanneke and Samory Kpotufe. A more unified theory of transfer learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.16189, 2024.

Majid Janzamin, Hanie Sedghi, and Anima Anandkumar. Beating the perils of non-convexity: Guar-
 anteed training of neural networks using tensor methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.08473, 2015.

Sham M Kakade, Varun Kanade, Ohad Shamir, and Adam Kalai. Efficient learning of generalized
  linear and single index models with isotonic regression. In J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett,
  F. Pereira, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 24. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011.

Alkis Kalavasis, Ilias Zadik, and Manolis Zampetakis. Transfer learning beyond bounded density
  ratios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11963, 2024.

Michael Kearns. Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. Journal of the ACM
 (JACM), 45(6):983–1006, 1998.

Adam R Klivans, Konstantinos Stavropoulos, and Arsen Vasilyan. Testable learning with distribu-
  tion shift. The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory, 2024a.

Adam R Klivans, Konstantinos Stavropoulos, and Arsen Vasilyan. Learning intersections of half-
  spaces with distribution shift: Improved algorithms and sq lower bounds. The Thirty Seventh
  Annual Conference on Learning Theory, 2024b.

Qi Lei, Wei Hu, and Jason Lee. Near-optimal linear regression under distribution shift. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6164–6174. PMLR, 2021.

Yuanzhi Li and Yang Yuan. Convergence analysis of two-layer neural networks with relu activation.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Yuanzhi Li, Tengyu Ma, and Hongyang R Zhang. Learning over-parametrized two-layer neural
  networks beyond ntk. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 2613–2682. PMLR, 2020.

Roi Livni, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Ohad Shamir. On the computational efficiency of training
  neural networks. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems - Volume 1, NIPS’14, pp. 855–863, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014. MIT Press.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Domain adaptation: Learning
  bounds and algorithms. In Proceedings of The 22nd Annual Conference on Learning The-
  ory (COLT 2009), Montréal, Canada, 2009. URL http://www.cs.nyu.edu/˜mohri/
  postscript/nadap.pdf.
Pasin Manurangsi and Daniel Reichman. The computational complexity of training relu (s). arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1810.04207, 2018.
James Mercer. Functions of positive and negative type, and their connection with the theory of
  integral equations. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 209:415–446, 1909. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:121070291.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning.
 MIT press, second edition, 2018.
Mohammadreza Mousavi Kalan, Zalan Fabian, Salman Avestimehr, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Min-
 imax lower bounds for transfer learning with linear and one-hidden layer neural networks. Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1959–1969, 2020.
D. J. Newman and H. S. Shapiro. Jackson’s Theorem in Higher Dimensions, pp. 208–219. Springer
  Basel, Basel, 1964.
Ryan O’Donnell. Analysis of boolean functions. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Ievgen Redko, Emilie Morvant, Amaury Habrard, Marc Sebban, and Younès Bennani. A sur-
  vey on domain adaptation theory: learning bounds and theoretical guarantees. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.11829, 2020.
Ronitt Rubinfeld and Arsen Vasilyan. Testing distributional assumptions of learning algorithms.
  Proceedings of the fifty-fifth annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2023.
Lucas Slot, Stefan Tiegel, and Manuel Wiedmer. Testably learning polynomial threshold functions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06106, 2024.
Yuandong Tian. An analytical formula of population gradient for two-layered relu network and its
  applications in convergence and critical point analysis. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 3404–3413. PMLR, 2017.
Santosh Vempala and John Wilmes. Gradient descent for one-hidden-layer neural networks: Poly-
  nomial convergence and sq lower bounds. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3115–3117.
  PMLR, 2019.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Puqian Wang, Nikos Zarifis, Ilias Diakonikolas, and Jelena Diakonikolas. Robustly learning a sin-
  gle neuron via sharpness. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 36541–36577.
  PMLR, 2023.
Xiao Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Lingxiao Wang, and Quanquan Gu. Learning one-hidden-layer relu
  networks via gradient descent. In The 22nd international conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 1524–1534. PMLR, 2019.
Yuchen Zhang, Jason D. Lee, and Michael I. Jordan. L1-regularized neural networks are improperly
  learnable in polynomial time. In Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 993–1001, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016a.
  PMLR.
Yuchen Zhang, Jason D Lee, and Michael I Jordan. l1-regularized neural networks are improperly
  learnable in polynomial time. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 993–1001.
  PMLR, 2016b.
Kai Zhong, Zhao Song, Prateek Jain, Peter L Bartlett, and Inderjit S Dhillon. Recovery guaran-
  tees for one-hidden-layer neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  4140–4149. PMLR, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P OLYNOMIAL A PPROXIMATIONS OF N EURAL N ETWORKS

A.1   R ESULTS FROM A PPROXIMATION T HEORY

We first introduce some definitions that we will use throughout the appendix.
Definition A.1 ((ϵ, R)-Uniform Approximation). For ϵ > 0, R ≥ 1, and g : Rk → R, we say that
q : Rk → R is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation polynomial for g if
                                  |q(x) − g(x)| ≤ ϵ ∀ ∥x∥2 ≤ R.

Definition A.2. Let F ⊆ {Rd → R} be a function class over Rd . For ℓ, B > 0, we say the (ϵ, R)-
uniform approximation degree of F is at most ℓ with coefficient bound B if for any f ∈ F, there
is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation polynomial p(x) for f such that deg(p) ≤ ℓ and each of the
coefficients of p are bounded in absolute value by B.

The following are useful facts about the coefficients of approximating polynomials.
Fact A.3 (Lemma 23 from Goel et al. (2017)). Let p be a polynomial of degree ℓ such that |p(x)| ≤ b
for |x| ≤ 1. Then, the sum of squares of all its coefficients is at most b2 · 2O(ℓ) .
Lemma A.4. Let p be a polynomial of degree ℓ such that |p(x)| ≤ b for |x| ≤ R. Then, the sum of
squares of all its coefficients is at most b2 · 2O(ℓ) when R ≥ 1.

Proof. Consider q(x) = p(Rx). Clearly, |q(x)| ≤ b for all |x| ≤ 1. Thus, the sum of squares of its
coefficients is at most b2 · 2O(ℓ) from Fact A.3. Now, p(x) = q(x/R) has coefficients bounded by
b2 · 2O(ℓ) when R ≥ 1.

Fact A.5 (Ben-David et al. (2018)). Let q be a polynomial with real coefficients on k variables with
degree ℓ such that for all x ∈ [0, 1]k , |q(x)| ≤ 1. Then the magnitude of any coefficient of q is at
most (2kℓ(k + ℓ))ℓ and the sum of the magnitudes of all coefficients of q is at most (2(k + ℓ))3ℓ .
Lemma A.6. Let q be a polynomial with real coefficients on k variables with degree ℓ such that for
all x ∈ Rk with ∥x∥2 ≤ R, |q(x)| ≤ b. Then the sum of the magnitudes of all coefficients of q is at
most b(2(k + ℓ))3ℓ k ℓ/2 for R ≥ 1.

                                                       √                                    √
Proof. Consider
          √       the polynomial h(x) = 1/b · q(Rx/ √k). Then |h(x)| = 1/b · |q(Rx/ k)| ≤ 1
for ∥xR/ k∥2 ≤ R,   √ or equivalently for all ∥x∥2 ≤ k. In particular,      since the unit cube [0, 1]k
                                                                     k
is contained in the k radius ball, then |h(x)| ≤ 1 for x ∈ [0, 1] . By Fact A.5,     √ the sum of the
magnitudes of the coefficients of h is at most (2(k + ℓ))3ℓ . Since q(x) = b · h(x k/R), then the
sum of the magnitudes of the coefficients of q is at most b(2(k + ℓ))3ℓ k ℓ/2 .

Lemma A.7. Let p(x) be a degree ℓ polynomial in x ∈ Rd such that each coefficient is bounded in
absolute value by b. Then the sum of the magnitudes of the coefficients of p(x)t is at most bt dtℓ .

In the following lemma, we bound the magnitude of approximating polynomials for subspace juntas
outside the radius of approximation.
Lemma A.8. Let ϵ > 0, R ≥ 1, and f : Rd → R be a k-subspace junta, and consider the
corresponding function g(W x). Let q : Rk → R be an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation polynomial
for g, and define p : Rd → R as p(x) := q(W x). Let r := sup∥W x∥2 ≤R |g(W x)|. Then
                                                              ℓ
                                                        Wx
                   |p(x)| ≤ (r + ϵ)(2(k + ℓ))3ℓ k ℓ/2              ∀ ∥W x∥2 ≥ R.
                                                        R 2

Proof. Since q(x) is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation for g, then |q(x) − g(x)| ≤ ϵ for ∥x∥2 ≤ R.
Let h(x) = q(Rx). Then |h(x/R) − g(x)| ≤ ϵ for ∥x∥2 ≤ R, and soP|h(x/R)| ≤ r + ϵ for
                                                                                                αk
∥x∥2 ≤ R, or equivalently |h(x)| ≤ r + ϵ for ∥x∥2 ≤ 1. Write h(x) = ∥α∥ ≤ℓ hα xα       1 . . . xk .
                                                                                        1
                                                                                   1


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          3ℓ
                                                               · k ℓ/2 . Then for ∥x∥2 ≥ 1,
                 P
By Lemma A.6,        ∥α∥1 ≤ℓ |hα | ≤ (r + ϵ)(2(k + ℓ))
                                              X                        αk
                                  |h(x)| ≤             |hα ||xα
                                                              1 . . . xk |
                                                               1


                                             ∥α∥1 ≤ℓ
                                                                   ∥α∥1
                                              X
                                         ≤             |hα | ∥x∥2
                                             ∥α∥1 ≤ℓ
                                                 ℓ
                                                          X
                                         ≤ ∥x∥2 ·                |hα |,
                                                       ∥α∥1 ≤ℓ

where the second inequality holds because |xi | ≤ ∥x∥2 for all i, and the last inequality holds because
   ℓ        ∥α∥
∥x∥2 ≥ ∥x∥2 1 for ∥α∥1 ≤ ℓ when ∥x∥2 ≥ 1. Then since p(x) = q(W x) = h(W x/R), we have
           Wx ℓ
|p(x)| ≤   R  2
                (r + ϵ)(2(k + ℓ))3ℓ k ℓ/2 for ∥W x∥2 ≥ R.


Proof. Note that p(x) has at most dℓ terms. Expanding p(x)t gives at most dtℓ terms, where any
monomial is formed from a product of t terms in p(x). Then the coefficients of p(x)t are bounded
in absolute value by B t . Summing over all monomials gives the bound.


The following is an important theorem that we use later to obtain uniform approximators for Lips-
chitz Neural networks.
Theorem A.9 (Newman & Shapiro (1964)). Let f : Rk → R be a function continuous on the
unit sphere Sk−1 . Let ωf be the function defined as ωf (t) := sup∥x∥2 ,∥y∥2 ≤1 |f (x) − f (y)| for any
                                                                           ∥x−y∥2 ≤t
t ≥ 0. Then, we have that there exists a polynomial of degree ℓ such that sup∥x∥2 ≤1 |f (x)−p(x)| ≤
C · ωf (k/ℓ) where C is a universal constant.

This implies the following corollary.
Corollary A.10. Let f : Rk → R be an L-Lipschitz function for L ≥ 0 and let R ≥ 0. Then,
for any ϵ ≥ 0, there exists a polynomial p of degree O(LRk/ϵ) such that p is an (ϵ, R)-uniform
approximation polynomial for f .


Proof. Consider the function g(x) := f (Rx). Then, we have that g is RL-Lipschitz. From
statement of Theorem A.9, we have that ωg (t) ≤ RLt. Thus, from Theorem A.9, there exists a
polynomial q of degree O(LRk/ϵ) such that sup∥y∥2 ≤1 |g(y) − q(y)| ≤ ϵ. Thus, we have that
sup∥x∥2 ≤R |f (x) − q(x/R)| = sup∥x∥2 ≤R |g(x/R) − q(x/R)| = sup∥y∥2 ≤1 |g(y) − q(y)| ≤ ϵ.
p(x) := q(x/R) is the required polynomial of degree O(LRk/ϵ).

A.2   U SEFUL N OTATION AND FACTS

Given a univariate function g on R and a vector x = (x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ Rd , the vector g(x) ∈ Rd
is defined as the vector with ith co-ordinate equal to g(xi ). For a matrix A ∈ Rm×n , we use the
following notation:

       • ∥A∥2 := sup∥x∥2 =1 ∥Ax∥2 ,
                  q           Pn
       • ∥A∥∞
            2 :=    maxi∈[m] j=1 (Aij )2 ,
                 P
       • ∥A∥1 := (i,j)∈[n]×[m] |Aij |.
Fact A.11. Given a matrix W ∈ Rm×n , we have that

      1. ∥A∥2 ≤ ∥A∥1 ,
                √
      2. ∥A∥2 ≤ m · ∥A∥∞
                       2 .


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We first prove (1). We have that for an x ∈ Rn with ∥x∥2 = 1,
                                v                  v
                                um
                                                   um X   n
                                                   uX
                                uX
                      ∥Ax∥2 ≤ t (Ai · x)2 ≤ t               (Aij )2 ≤ ∥A∥1
                                         i=1                         i=1 j=1

where the second inequality follows from Cauchy Schwartz and the last inequality follows from the
fact that for any vector v, ∥v∥2 ≤ ∥v∥1 . We now prove (2). We have that
                             v                 v
                             um                           n
                                                                      √
                                               u
                             uX                         X
                                                            (Aij )2 ≤ m∥A∥∞
                                               u
                   ∥Ax∥2 ≤   t             2
                                   (Ai · x) ≤ tm max                         2
                                                                   i∈[m]
                                   i=1                                     j=1

where the second inequality follows from Cauchy Schwartz and the last inequality is the definition.


Recall the definition of a neural network.
Definition A.12 (Neural  Network). Let σ : R → R be an activation function with σ(0) ≤ 1. Let
W = W (1) , . . . W (t) with W (i) ∈ Rsi ×si−1 be the tuple of weight matrices. Here, s0 = d
is the input dimension
                       and st = 1. Define recursively the function fi : Rd → Rsi as fi (x) =
W · σ fi−1 (x) with f1 (x) = W (1) · x. The function f : Rd → R computed by the neural
   (i)
                                                                  Pt
network (W, σ) is defined as f (x) := ft (x). We denote ∥W∥1 = i=2 ∥W (i) ∥1 . The depth of
this network is t.

A.3    K ERNEL R EPRESENTATIONS

We now state and prove facts about Kernel Representations that we require. First, we recall the
multinomial kernel from Goel et al. (2017).
                                                                             Pℓ
Definition A.13. Consider the mapping ψℓ : Rn → RNℓ , where Nd = i=1 dℓ indexed by tuples
(i1 , i2 , . . . , ij ) ∈ [d]j for j ∈ [ℓ] such that value of ψℓ (x) at index (i1 , i2 , . . . , ij ) is equal to
Qj
   t=1 xit . The kernel MKℓ is defined as

                                                                             d
                                                                             X
                              MKℓ (x, y) = ⟨ψℓ (x), ψℓ (y)⟩ =                      (x · y)i .
                                                                             i=1

We denote the corrresponding RKHS as HMKℓ .

We now prove that polynomial approximators of subspace juntas can be represented as elements of
HMKℓ .
Lemma A.14. Let k ∈ N and ϵ, R ≥ 0. Let f : Rd → R be a k-subspace junta such that
f (x) = g(W x) where g is a function on Rk and W is a projection matrix from Rk×d . Suppose,
there exists a polynomial q of degree ℓ such that sup∥y∥2 ≤R |g(y) − q(y)| ≤ ϵ and the sum of
squares of coefficients of q is bounded above by B 2 . Then, f is (ϵ, B 2 · (k + 1)ℓ )-approximately
represented within radius R with respect to HMKℓ .

Proof. We argue that there exists a vector v ∈ HMKℓ such that ⟨v, v⟩ ≤ B 2 and |f (x) −
⟨v, σℓ (x)⟩| ≤ ϵ for all ∥x∥2 ≤ R. Consider the polynomial p of degree ℓ such that p(x) =
q(W x). We argue that p(x) = ⟨v, σℓ (x)⟩ for some v and that ⟨v, v⟩ ≤ B 2 . Let q(y) =
P                 Qk            |Sj |
                                                                                 P
   S∈Nk ,|S|≤ℓ qS     j=1 y           . From our assumption on q, we have that S∈Nk ,|S|≤ℓ |qS | ≤ B.
                                              P
For i ∈ ℓ, we use define Bi as Bi = S∈Nk ,|S|=ℓ |qS |. Given multi-index S, for any i ∈ [d], we
                                              Pj−1             Pj
define S(i) as the number t such that i=1 |Si | ≤ j < i=1 |Si |. We now compute the entry of v
indexed by (i1 , i2 , . . . , it ). By expanding the expression for p(x), we obtain that
                                                      X            t
                                                                   Y
                                      vi1 ,...,it =           qS         WS(j),ij .
                                                      |S|=t        j=1



                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We are now ready to bound ⟨v, v⟩. We have that
                                                                                                                               2
                       ℓ
                       X           X                                ℓ
                                                                    X          X                  X           t
                                                                                                              Y
       ⟨v, v⟩ =                                 (vi1 ,...,it )2 =                                       qS         WS(j),ij 
                       t=0 (i1 ,...,it )∈[d]k                       t=0 (i1 ,...,it )∈[d]k       |S|=t        j=1
                                                                                              
                       ℓ
                       X           X                X                   t
                                                                      X Y
                   ≤                                      qS2                    2
                                                                                   WS(j),ij
                                                                                            
                       t=0 (i1 ,...,it )∈[d]k      |S|=t             |S|=t j=1
                                                                                !                                  
                       ℓ
                       X         X                    t
                                                    X Y             d
                                                                    X                         ℓ
                                                                                              X            X
                   ≤                    qS2                             2
                                                                          WS(j),i ≤                            qS2  · (k + 1)t
                       t=0       |S|=t             |S|=t j=1        i=1                          t=0     |S|=t
                                    
                           X
                   ≤              qS2  · (k + 1)ℓ ≤ B 2 · (k + 1)ℓ .
                           |S|≤ℓ

Here, the first inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwartz, the second follows by rearranging terms.
The third inequality follows from the fact that the number of multi-indices of size t from a set of k
elements is at most (k + 1)t . The final inequality follows from the fact that the sum of the squares
of the coefficients of q is at most B 2 .

We introduce an extension of the multinomial kernel that will be useful for our application to
sigmoid-nets.
Definition A.15 (Composed multinomial kernel). Let ℓ = (ℓ1 , . . . , ℓt ) be a tuple in Nt . We denote
                        (0)  (1)          (t)
a sequence of mappings ψℓ , ψℓ , . . . , ψℓ on Rd inductively as follows:
             (0)
      1. ψℓ (x) = x

          (i)          (i−1)
      2. ψℓ (x) = ψℓi ψℓ     (x) .

       (i)                                                                   (i)
Let Nℓ denote the number of coordinates in ψℓ .                                         This induces a sequence of kernels
   (0)  (1)           (t)
MKℓ , MKℓ , . . . , MKℓ defined as
                                                                           ℓi
                     (i)          (i)     (i)                                            (i−1)             (i−1)
                                                                           X
                   MKℓ (x, y) = ⟨ψℓ (x), ψℓ (y)⟩ =                                     ⟨ψℓ       (x), ψℓ           (y)⟩j
                                                                           j=0
and a corresponding sequence of RKHS denoted by HMK(0) , HMK(1) , . . . HMK(t) .
                                                                                   ℓ              ℓ                 ℓ

                                                (1)
Observe that the the multinomial Kernel MKℓ = MK(ℓ) is an instantiation of the composed multi-
nomial kernel.
We now state some properties of the composed multinomial kernel.
Lemma A.16. Let ℓ = (ℓ1 , . . . , ℓt ) be a tuple in Nt and R ≥ 0. Then, the following hold:
                                   (t)                                    t Qt
      1. sup∥x∥2 ≤R MKℓ (x, x) ≤ max{1, (2R)2                                i=1 ℓi    },
                                                                      P
                               (t)                                        t
      2. For any x, y ∈ Rd , MKℓ (x, y) can be computed in time poly d, ( i=1 ℓi ) ,

                                                                                        (t)
      3. For any v ∈ HMK(t) and x ∈ Rd , we have ⟨v, ψℓ (x)⟩ is a polynomial in x of degree
                        ℓ
         Qt
           i=1 ℓi .

Proof. We assume without loss of generality that R ≥ 1 as the kernel function is increasing in norm.
To prove (1), observe that for any x, we have that
                                  ℓi                   j                      ℓi +1
                    (i)                   (i−1)                  (i−1)
                                 X
                MKℓ (x, x) =           MKℓ      (x, x) ≤ 2MKℓ          (x, x)       .
                                            j=0


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     (0)
We also have that sup∥x∥2 ≤R MKℓ (x, x) = x · x = R. Thus, unrolling the recurrence gives us
                               Qt                             t Qt
   (t)
MKℓ (x, x) ≤ max{1, (2R)         i=1 (ℓi +1)
                                        } ≤ max{1, (2R)2 i=1 ℓi }.
                                            (i)       Pℓi         (i−1)

The run time follows from the fact that MKℓ (x, x) = j=0    MKℓ         (x, x)j and thus can be
                    (i−1)
computed from MKℓ           with ℓi additions and exponentiation operations. Recursing gives the final
runtime.
                   (i)                                                                    (i)
The fact that ⟨v, ψℓ (x)⟩ follows immediately from the fact the fact the entries of ψℓ (x) arise
                                                                                  Qt
from the multinomial kernel and hence are polynomials in x. The degree is at most i=1 ℓi .

We now argue that a distribution that is hypercontractive with respect to polynomials is hypercon-
tractive with respect to the multinomial kernel.
Lemma A.17. Let D be a distribution on Rd that is C-hypercontractive for some constant C. Then,
             (t)   Qt
D is also (MKℓ , C, i=1 ℓi )-hypercontractive.

Proof. The proof immediately follows from Definition 3.4 and Lemma A.16(3).

A.4      N ETS WITH L IPSCHITZ ACTIVATIONS

We are now ready to prove our theorem about uniform approximators for neural networks with
Lipschitz activations. First, we prove that such networks describe a Lipschitz function.
Lemma A.18. Let f : Rd → R be the function computed by an t-layer neural network with L-
                                                    W. Say, ∥W∥1 ≤ W for W ≥ 0 and the first
Lipschitz activation function σ and weight matrices √
hidden layer has k neurons. Then we have that f is k∥W (1) ∥∞2 (W L)
                                                                     t−1
                                                                         -Lipschitz.

Proof. First, observe
                  √ from     Fact A.11 that for all 1 < i ≤ T , ∥W (i) ∥2 ≤ W (since ∥W∥1 ≤ W )
         (1)             (1) ∞
and ∥W ∥2 ≤ k∥W  ∥2 . Recall from Definition A.12, we have the functions f1 , . . . , ft where
fi (x) = W (i) · σ fi−1 (x) and f1 (x) = W (1) · x. We prove by induction on i that ∥fi (x) − fi (x +
         √
u)∥2 ≤ k∥W (1) ∥∞    2 (W L)
                             i−1
                                 ∥u∥2 . For the base case, observe that
                               v                                            v
                               u d1                                       u   d1               2
                               uX            (1)          (1)         2     uX          (1)
    ∥f1 (x + u) − f1 (x)∥2 ≤   t         ⟨Wi , x⟩ − ⟨Wi , x + u⟩          ≤ t       ⟨Wi , u⟩
                                    i=1                                         i=1
                                 (1)
                                               √
                             ≤ ∥Wi u∥2 ≤           k∥W (1) ∥∞
                                                            2 ∥u∥2

where the second inequality follows from the Lipschitzness of σ and the final inequality follows
from the definition of operator norm. √
                                      We now proceed to the inductive step. Assume by induction
that ∥fi (x) − fi (x + u)∥2 is at most k∥W (1) ∥∞
                                                2 (W L)
                                                           i−1
                                                               ∥u∥2 . Thus, we have
                                  v
                                  u d1                                                         2
                                           (i+1)                      (i+1)
                                  uX
  ∥fi+1 (x + u) − fi+1 (x)∥2 = t        ⟨Wj      , σ (fi (x))⟩ − ⟨Wj        , σ (fi (x + u))⟩
                                      j=1

                                ≤ ∥W (i+1) ∥2 ∥σ(fi (x)) − σ(fi (x + u))∥2
                                        √                               √
                                ≤ (W L) k∥W (1) ∥∞   2 (W L)
                                                            i−1
                                                                ∥u∥2 ≤ k∥W (1) ∥∞      i
                                                                                2 (LW ) ∥u∥2

                                                            σ and the inductive hypothesis. Thus,
where the third inequality follows from the Lipschitzness of√
we get that |f (x + u) − f (x)| ≤ ∥ft (x + u) − ft (x)∥2 ≤ k∥W (1) ∥∞ 2 (W L)
                                                                               t−1
                                                                                   · ∥u∥2 .

We now state are theorem regarding the uniform approximation of Lipschitz nets. We also prove
that the approximators can be represented by low norm vectors in RMKℓ for appropriately chosen
degree ℓ.
Theorem A.19. Let ϵ, R ≥ 0. Let f on Rd be a neural network with an L-Lipschitz activation
function σ, depth t and weight matrices W = (W (1) , . . . , W (t) ) where W (i) ∈ Rsi ×si−1 . Let


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


k be the number  of neurons in the first hidden layer. Then, there exists of a polynomial p of de-

                (1) ∞       t−1
                                   √
gree ℓ = O ∥W ∥2 (W L) Rk k/ϵ that is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation polynomial for
f . Furthermore, f is (ϵ, (k + ℓ)O(ℓ) )-approximately represented within radius R with respect to
HMKℓ = HMK(1) . In fact, when k = 1, it holds that f is (ϵ, 2O(ℓ) )-approximately represented within
              (ℓ)
R with respect to HMK(1) .
                       ℓ



Proof. We can express f as f (x) = g(P x) where P is a projection matrix and g is a neu-
ral network with input size k. We observe that the Lipschitz constant of g is the same as the
Lipschitz
 √         constant of f since P is a projection matrix. From Lemma A.18, we have that g is
∥ kW (1) ∥∞ 2 (W L)
                      t−1
                       -Lipshitz. From Corollary   A.10, we have that there exists a polynomial q
                          (1) ∞      t−1
                                           √
of degree ℓ = O ∥W ∥2 (W L) Rk k/ϵ that is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation for g.
From  √Lemma A.6, we have that   the sum of squares of magnitudes of coefficients of q is bounded
             (1) ∞
by ∥ kW ∥2 (W L) R (k + ℓ)O(ℓ) ≤ (k + ℓ)O(ℓ) . Now, applying Lemma A.14 yields the
                          t−1

result. When k = 1, we apply Lemma A.4 to obtain that the sum of squares of magnitudes of
coefficients of q is bounded by ∥W (1) ∥∞
                                        2 (W L)
                                               t−1
                                                   · 2O(ℓ) ≤ 2O(ℓ) .

A.5   S IGMOIDS AND S IGMOID - NETS

We now give a custom proof for the case of neural networks with sigmoid activation. We do this
as we can hope to get O(log(1/ϵ) degree for our polynomial approximation. We largely follow
the proof technique of Goel et al. (2017) and Zhang et al. (2016a). The modifications we make
are to handle the case where the radius of approximation is a variable R instead of a constant. We
require(for our applications to strictly-subexponential distributions) that the degree of approximation
must scale linear in R, a property that does not follow directly from the analysis given in Goel et al.
(2017). We modify their analysis to achieve this linear dependence.
We first state a result regarding polynomial approximations for a single sigmoid activation.
Theorem A.20 (Livni et al. (2014)). Let σ : R → R denote the function σ(x) = 1+e1−x . Let R, ϵ ≥
0. Then, there exists a polynomial p of degree ℓ = O(R log(R/ϵ)) such that sup|x|≤R |σ(x) −
p(x)| ≤ ϵ. Also, the sum of the squares of the coefficients of p is bounded above by 2O(ℓ) .

We now present a construction of a uniform approximation for neural networks with sigmoid activa-
tions. The construction is similar to the one in Goel et al. (2017) but the analysis deviates as linear
dependence on radius of approximation is important to us.
Theorem A.21. Let ϵ, R ≥ 0. Let f on Rd be a neural network with sigmoid activations, depth t
and weight matrices W = (W (1) , . . . , W (t) ) where W (i) ∈ Rsi ×si−1 . Also, let ∥W∥1 ≤ W . Then,
there exists of a polynomial p of degree ℓ = O (R log R) · (∥W (1) ∥∞      2 W
                                                                               t−2
                                                                                    ) · (t log(W/ϵ))t−1
that is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation polynomial for f . Furthermore, f is (ϵ, B)-approximately
represented within radius R with respect to HMK(t) where ℓ = (ℓ1 , . . . , ℓt−1 ) is a tuple of degrees
                                                    ℓ
                                                                      t−2            t−2
whose product is bounded by ℓ. Here, B ≤ (2∥W (1) ∥∞ )ℓ · W O(W (t log(W/ϵ) ) .
                                                       2


Proof. First, let q1 be the polynomial guaranteed by Theorem A.20 that (ϵ/(2W )t )-approximates
the sigmoid in an interval  of radius R∥W (1) ∥∞         2 .     Denote the degree of q1 as ℓ1 =
O Rt∥W (1) ∥∞     2 log(RW/ϵ)     . For  all 1  <    i < t,  let qi be the polynomial that (ϵ/(2W )t )-
approximates the sigmoid upto radius 2W . These have degree equal to O (W t log(W/ϵ)). Let
                                                          Pℓi      (i)                 Pℓi     (i)
ℓ = (ℓ1 , . . . ℓt−1 ). For all i ∈ [t − 1], let qi (x) = j=0    βj xj . We know that i=0    (βj )2 ≤
2O(ℓi ) .
We now construct the polynomial p that approximates f . For i ∈ [t], define pi (x) = W (i) ·
qi−1 (pi−1 (x)) with p1 (x) = W (1) · x. Define p(x) = pt (x). Recall that pi (x) is a vector of si
polynomials. We prove the following by induction: for every i ∈ [t],

      1. ∥pi (x) − fi (x)∥∞ ≤ ϵ/(2W )t−i ,


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                       (i)
      2. For each j ∈ [si ], we have that (pi )j (x)                                    =       ⟨v, ψℓ (x)⟩ with ⟨v, v⟩            ≤
                         Qi−1            Qi−1
         (2∥W (1) ∥∞
                   2 )
                       O( n=1 ℓn )
                                   · W O( n=2 ℓn ) .

where the function fi is as defined in Definition A.12.
The above holds trivially for i = 1 and f1 (x) = p1 (x) = W (1) · (x) is an exact approximator. Also,
                   (1)          (1)   (1)                              (1)               (1)  (1)
(p1 )i (x) = ⟨Wi , x⟩ = ⟨Wi , ψℓ (x)⟩ from the definition of ψℓ . Clearly, ⟨Wi , Wi ⟩ ≤
              2
 ∥W (1) ∥∞

          2     . We now prove that the above holds for i + 1 ∈ [t] assuming it holds for i.
We first prove (1). For j ∈ [si+1 ], we have that
                                             (i+1)
 |(pi+1 )j (x) − (fi+1 )j (x)| = |Wj          qi (pi (x)) − σ(fi (x)) |
                                        (i+1)                              (i+1)
                                    ≤ |Wj     qi (pi (x)) − σ(pi (x) | + |Wj     σ(pi (x)) − σ(fi (x) |
                                    ≤ W · (ϵ/(2W )t ) + W · ϵ/(2W )t−i ≤ ϵ/(2W )t−(i+1) .
For the second inequality, we analyse the cases i = 1 and i > 1 separately. When i = 1, we have
that (p1 )j (x) = (f1 )j (x) ≤ R∥W1 ∥∞                                 t
                                     2 and σ(x) − q1 (x) ≤ (ϵ/(2W ) ) when |x| ≤ R∥W1 ∥2 . For
                                                                                              ∞
                                                      (i+1)              (i+1)              (i+1)
i > 1, from the inductive hypothesis, we have that |W       pi (x)| ≤ |W       fi (x)| + ∥W       ∥1 ·
(ϵ/(2W )t−i ) ≤ 2W . The second term in the second inequality is bounded since σ is 1-Lipschitz.
We are now ready to prove that (pi+1 )j is representable by small norm vectors in HMK(i+1) for all
                                                                                     ℓ
j ∈ [sj+1 ]. We have that
                                                        si
                                                                    (i+1)
                                                        X
                                    (pi+1 )j (x) =            Wjk             · qi ((pi )k (x)) .
                                                        k=1
                                                                                     (i)
From the inductive hypothesis, we have that (pi )k = ⟨v (k) , ψℓ ⟩. Thus, we have that
                                                       si
                                                               (i+1)                    (i)
                                                       X
                               (pi+1 )j (x) =                Wjk         · qi ⟨v (k) , ψℓ ⟩ .
                                                       k=1


We expand each term in the above sum. We obtain,
                       ℓi
                       X                       n
                 (i)                      (i)
    qi ⟨v (k) , ψℓ ⟩ =    βn(i) ⟨v (k) , ψℓ ⟩
                              n=0
                              ℓi
                                                                                           (i)                       (i)
                              X                      X
                         =          βn(i)                              (k)
                                                                      vm 1
                                                                           . . . vm
                                                                                   (k)
                                                                                     n
                                                                                         ψℓ    (x)            . . . ψℓ (x)
                                                                                                        m1                    mn
                              n=0                             (i)
                                            (m1 ,...,mn )∈[Nℓ ]n
                                                 (i)                            (i+1)
                         = ⟨u(k) , ψℓi ((ψℓ (x))⟩ = ⟨u(k) , ψℓ                          (x)⟩.
The second inequality follows from expanding the equation. u(k) indexed by (m1 , . . . , mn ) ∈
   (i)                                   (k)              (i) (k)       (k)
[Nℓ ]n for n ≤ ℓi has entries given by u(m1 ,...,mn ) = βn vm1 . . . vmn . Putting things together, we
obtain that
                                          si
                                                 (i+1)            (i+1)
                                         X
                          (pi+1 )j (x) =     Wjk       · ⟨u(k) , ψℓ     (x)⟩
                                                       k=1
                                                         si
                                                                    (i+1)            (i+1)
                                                        X
                                                  =⟨          Wjk           u(k) , ψℓ        (x)⟩.
                                                       k=1

Thus, we have proved that (pi+1 )j is representable in HMK(i+1) . We now prove that the norm of the
                                                          ℓ
representation is small. We have that
                  si
                         (i+1)
                  X
              ∥         Wjk      u(k) ∥2 ≤ ∥W (i+1) ∥1 max ∥u(k) ∥2 ≤ W · max ∥u(k) ∥2 .
                                                                    k∈[si ]                         k∈[si ]
                  k=1



                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We bound maxk∈[si ] ∥u(k) ∥2 . For any k, from the definition of u(k) and the inductive hypothesis,
we have that
                                         ℓi
                                         X                2                 X                n
                                                                                             Y              2
                           ∥u(k) ∥22 =           βn(i)        ·                                    u(k)
                                                                                                    mj
                                         n=0                      (m1 ,...,mn )∈[Nℓ ]n j=1
                                                                                       (i)


                                         ℓi
                                         X                2
                                     =           βn(i)        ∥v (k) ∥2n
                                                                      2 ≤2
                                                                           O(ℓi )
                                                                                  · ∥v (k) ∥2ℓ
                                                                                            2
                                                                                               i


                                         n=0

We analyse the case i = 1 and i > 1 separately. When i = 1, we have that 2O(ℓ1 ) ∥v (k) ∥2ℓ
                                                                                         2
                                                                                            1
                                                                                              ≤
     (1) ∞ O(ℓ1 )
(2∥W ∥2 )         from the bound on the base case. When i > 1, we have
              si
                     (i+1)
              X
          ∥         Wjk      u(k) ∥22 ≤ W 2 2O(ℓi ) ∥v (k) ∥2ℓ
                                                            2
                                                               i


              k=1
                                                                                                2ℓi
                                                                 O( i−1
                                                                   Q                 Qi−1
                                     ≤ W 2 2O(ℓi ) (2∥W (1) ∥∞
                                                             2 )
                                                                     n=1 ℓn ) · W O(  n=2 ℓn )

                                                                    Qi                       Qi
                                     ≤ (2∥W (1) ∥∞
                                                 2 )
                                                    O(                   n=1 ℓn )   · W O(    n=2 ℓn )



which completes the induction. We are ready to calculate the bound on the degree.
We have ℓ1 = O(Rt∥W (1) ∥∞     log(RW/ϵ)). Also, for i > 1, we have ℓi = O(W t log(W/ϵ)).      Thus,
                       Qt−12
the total degree is ℓ ≤ i=1 ℓi = O (R log R) · (∥W (1) ∥∞    t−2                  t−1

                                                         2 W     ) · (t log(W/ϵ))       . The square
of the norm of the kernel representation is bounded by B where
                                                                              t−2
                                                     O (W                           (t log(W/ϵ)t−2 )
                                B ≤ (2∥W (1) ∥∞  ℓ
                                              2 ) ·W                                                   .

This concludes the proof.


B     TDS L EARNING AND K ERNEL M ETHODS

B.1   G ENERAL T HEOREM

We provide here the full proof of Theorem 3.6. First, we restate and prove the multiplicative spectral
concentration lemma (Lemma 3.8).
Lemma B.1 (Multiplicative Spectral Concentration, Lemma B.1 in Goel et al. (2024), mod-
ified). Let Dx be a distribution over Rd and ϕ : Rd → Rm such that Dx is (ϕ, C, ℓ)-
hypercontractive for some C, ℓ ≥ 1. Suppose that S consists of N i.i.d. examples from Dx
and let Φ = Ex∼Dx [ϕ(x)ϕ(x)⊤ ], and Φ̂ = N1 x∈S ϕ(x)ϕ(x)⊤ . For any ϵ, δ ∈ (0, 1), if
                                                        P
           2
N ≥ 64Cmϵ2   (4C log2 ( 4δ ))4ℓ+1 , then with probability at least 1 − δ, we have that

                          For any a ∈ Rm : a⊤ Φ̂a ∈ [(1 − ϵ)a⊤ Φa, (1 + ϵ)a⊤ Φa]

Proof of Lemma 3.8. Let Φ = U DU ⊤ be the compact SVD of Φ (i.e., D is square with dimension
equal to the rank of Φ and U is not necessarily square). Note that such a decomposition exists (where
the row and column spaces are both spanned by the same basis U ), because Φ = Φ⊤ , by definition.
Moreover, note that U U T is an orthogonal projection matrix that projects points in Rm on the span
of the rows of Φ. We also have that, U ⊤ U = I.
                                             †                1
Consider Φ† = U D−1 U ⊤ and Φ 2 = U D− 2 U ⊤ . Our proof consists of two parts. We first show
                                       †    †     †     †
that it is sufficient to prove that ∥Φ 2 ΦΦ 2 − Φ 2 Φ̂Φ 2 ∥2 ≤ ϵ with probability at least 1 − δ and then
we give a bound on the probability of this event.
                                         †       †        †          †
Claim. Suppose that for A = Φ 2 ΦΦ 2 − Φ 2 Φ̂Φ 2 we have ∥A∥2 ≤ ϵ. Then, for any a ∈ Rm :

                                    a⊤ Φ̂a ∈ [(1 − ϵ)a⊤ Φa, (1 + ϵ)a⊤ Φa]


                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Let a ∈ Rm , a+ = U U ⊤ a, and a0 = (I − U U ⊤ )a (i.e., a = a0 + a+ , where a0 is the
component of a lying in the nullspace of Φ). We have that a⊤ Φa = a⊤
                                                                   + Φa+ .

Moreover, for a0 , we have that 0 = a⊤                      ⊤
                                        0 Φa0 = Ex∼Dx [(ϕ(x) aP
                                                                 2                  ⊤
                                                              0 ) ] and, hence, ϕ(x) a0 =
                                                   ⊤        1              ⊤    2
0 almost surely over Dx . Therefore, we also have a0 Φ̂a0 = N x∈S (ϕ(x) a0 ) = 0, with
probability 1. Therefore, a⊤ Φ̂a = a⊤
                                    + Φ̂a+ .
                      1       †              1               1                                                  1   †
Observe, now, that Φ 2 Φ 2 = U D 2 U ⊤ U D− 2 U ⊤ = U U ⊤ and, hence, Φ 2 Φ 2 a+ = (U U ⊤ )2 a =
U U ⊤ a = a+ , because U U ⊤ is a projection matrix. Overall, we obtain the following
                      a⊤ Φ̂a = a⊤ Φa + a⊤
                                        + (Φ̂ − Φ)a+
                                                                  1        †           †       †    †   1
                                          = a⊤ Φa + a⊤
                                                     + Φ (Φ Φ̂Φ − Φ ΦΦ )Φ a+
                                                        2  2   2   2  2  2

                                                                  1            1
                                          = a⊤ Φa + a⊤
                                                     + Φ AΦ a+
                                                        2  2


                          1       1                                                1       1
Since ∥A∥2 ≤ ϵ and Φ 2 Φ 2 = Φ, we have that |a⊤                ⊤            ⊤
                                               + Φ AΦ a+ | ≤ ϵ|a+ Φa+ | = ϵ|a Φa|, which
                                                  2  2

concludes the proof of the claim.

It remains to show that for the matrix A defined in the previous claim, we have ∥A∥2 ≤ ϵ with
probability at least 1 − δ. The randomness of A depends on the random choice of S from Dx⊗m . In
the rest of the proof, therefore, consider all probabilities and expectations to be over S ∼ Dx⊗m . We
have the following for t = log2 (4/δ).
                                                                                               E[∥A∥2t F]
                                  Pr[∥A∥2 > ϵ] ≤ Pr[∥A∥F > ϵ] ≤                                     2t
                                                                                                  ϵ
                                                                                                                        †
We will now bound the expectation of E[∥A∥2t  F ]. To this end, we define ai = Φ ei ∈ R
                                                                                2       m
                                                                                          for
i ∈ [m]. We have the following, by using Jensen’s inequality appropriately.
                                    h  X                             t i
                      E[∥A∥2tF]=E             (a⊤           ⊤
                                                i Φaj − ai Φ̂aj )
                                                                  2

                                                        i,j∈[m]
                                                              X
                                            ≤m     2(t−1)
                                                                           E[(a⊤        ⊤       2t
                                                                               i Φaj − ai Φ̂aj ) ]
                                                            i,j∈[m]

                                            ≤m     2t
                                                        max E[(a⊤        ⊤       2t
                                                                i Φaj − ai Φ̂aj ) ]
                                                        i,j∈[m]

In order to bound the term above, we may use Marcinkiewicz-Zygmund inequality (see Ferger
(2014)) to exploit the independence of the samples in S and obtain the following.
                                             2(4t)t
     E[(a⊤        ⊤       2t
         i Φaj − ai Φ̂aj ) ] ≤                      Ex∼Dx [(a⊤         ⊤           ⊤
                                                             i Φaj − ai ϕ(x)ϕ(x) aj ) ]
                                                                                       2t
                                              Nt
                                             2(4t)t 2t ⊤
                                                     2 (ai Φaj )2t + 22t Ex∼Dx [(a⊤         ⊤    2t

                                           ≤    t                                 i ϕ(x)ϕ(x) aj ) ]
                                              N
                                                                                                    †       †
We now observe that Ex∼Dx [a⊤            ⊤         ⊤          ⊤ 2              ⊤    T
                              i ϕ(x)ϕ(x) aj ] = ai Φaj = ei Φ ΦΦ ej = ei U U ej , which
                                                                       2
                                                    ⊤       2
is at most equal to 1. Therefore, we have Ex∼Dx [(ai ϕ(x)) ] ≤ 1 and, by the hypercontractiv-
ity property (which we assume to be with respect to the standard inner product in Rm ), we have
Ex∼Dx [(a⊤        4t
           i ϕ(x)) ] ≤ (4Ct)
                              4ℓt
                                  . We can bound Ex∼Dx [(a⊤              ⊤  2t
                                                            i ϕ(x)ϕ(x) aj ) ] by applying the
                                                               ⊤      4t
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and using the bound for Ex∼Dx [(ai ϕ(x)) ]. In total, we have the
following bound.
                                                 16m2 t(4Ct)4ℓ  t
                             Pr[∥A∥2 > ϵ] ≤ 4
                                                      N ϵ2
                                      2       4ℓ
We choose N such that 16m Nt(4Ct)
                             ϵ2                    ≤ 12 and t = log2 (4/δ) so that the bound is at most δ.

We are now ready to prove the main theorem, which we restate here for convenience.
Theorem B.2 (TDS Learning via the Kernel Method). Suppose that F ⊆ {Rd → R}, the training
and test distributions D, D′ over Rd × R, are such that the following are true for A, B, C, M, ℓ ≥ 1
and ϵ ∈ (0, 1).


                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. F is (ϵ, B)-approximately represented within radius R w.r.t. a PDS kernel K : Rd × Rd →
         R, for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1) and B, R ≥ 1 and let A = supx:∥x∥2 ≤R K(x, x).

      2. The training marginal Dx (1) is bounded within {x : ∥x∥2 ≤ R} and (2) is (K, C, ℓ)-
         hypercontractive for some C, ℓ ≥ 1.
      3. The training and test labels are both bounded in [−M, M ] for some M ≥ 1.

Then, Algorithm 1 learns the class F in the TDS regression setting up to excess error 5ϵ and proba-
bility of failure δ. The time complexity is O(T ) · poly(d, 1ϵ , (log(1/δ))ℓ , A, B, C ℓ , 2ℓ , M ), where T
is the evaluation time of K.

Proof of Theorem 3.6. Consider the reference feature map ϕ : Rd → R2m with ϕ(x) =
                                  ∗
(K(x, z))z∈Sref ∪Sref   ′ . Let f   = arg minf ∈F [LD (f ) + LD′ (f )] and fopt = arg minf ∈F [LD (f )].
By Assumption 3.5, we know that there are functions p∗ , popt : Rd → R with p∗ (x) = ⟨v ∗ , ψ(x)⟩
and popt = ⟨vopt , ψ(x)⟩, that uniformly approximate f ∗ and fopt within the ball of radius R,
i.e., supx:∥x∥2 ≤R |f ∗ (x) − p∗ (x)| ≤ ϵ and supx:∥x∥2 ≤R |fopt (x) − popt (x)| ≤ ϵ. Moreover,
⟨v ∗ , v ∗ ⟩, ⟨vopt , vopt ⟩ ≤ B.
By Proposition 3.7, there is a∗ ∈ R2m such that for p̃∗ : Rd → R with p̃∗ (x) = (a∗ )⊤ ϕ(x) we
have ∥f ∗ − p̃∗ ∥Sref ≤ 3ϵ/2 and ∥f ∗ − p̃∗ ∥Sref
                                              ′   ≤ 3ϵ/2. Let K be a matrix in R2m×2m such that
Kz,w = K(z, w) for z, w ∈ Sref ∪ Sref . We additionally have that (a∗ )⊤ Ka∗ ≤ B. Therefore,
                                       ′

for any x ∈ Rd we have
                             D X                       E 2
                (p̃∗ (x))2 =             a∗z ψ(z), ψ(x)
                                          ′
                                 z∈Sref ∪Sref
                            D       X                           X                 E
                           ≤                   a∗z ψ(z),                  a∗z ψ(z) · ⟨ψ(x), ψ(x)⟩
                                         ′
                                z∈Sref ∪Sref                        ′
                                                           z∈Sref ∪Sref

                           = (a∗ )⊤ Ka∗ · K(x, x) ≤ B · K(x, x) ,
where we used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. For x with ∥x∥2 ≤ R, we, hence, have (p̃∗ (x))2 ≤
AB (recall that A = max∥x∥2 ≤R K(x, x)).
Similarly, by applying the representer theorem (Theorem 6.11 in Mohri et al. (2018)) for popt , we
have that there exists aopt = (aopt
                                  z )z∈Sref ∈ R
                                                      m
                                                          such that forPp̃opt : Rd → R with p̃opt (x) =
           opt                                                                      opt opt
P
  z∈Sref za    K(z, x) we have  L      (p̃
                                  S̄ref opt  ) ≤   L S̄ref (popt ) and    z,w∈Sref az aw K(z, w) ≤ B.
Since p̂ in Algorithm 1 is formed by solving a convex program whose search space includes p̃opt ,
we have
                               LS̄ref (p̂) ≤ LS̄ref (p̃opt ) ≤ LS̄ref (popt )                        (1)
In the following, we abuse the notation and consider â to be a vector in R2m , by appending m zeroes,
                                 ′
one for each of the elements of Sref . Note that we then have â⊤ K â ≤ B, and, also, (p̂(x))2 ≤ A·B
for all x with ∥x∥2 ≤ R.

Soundness. Suppose first that the algorithm has accepted. In what follows, we will use the triangle
inequality of the norms to bound for functions h1 , h2 , h3 the quantity ∥h1 − h2 ∥D by ∥h1 − h3 ∥D +
∥h2 − h3 ∥D . We also use the inequality LD (h1 ) ≤ LD (h2 ) + ∥h1 − h2 ∥D , as well as the fact that
∥clM ◦ h1 − clM ◦ h2 ∥D ≤ ∥clM ◦ h1 − h2 ∥D ≤ ∥h1 − h2 ∥D . We bound the test error of the output
hypothesis h : Rd → [−M, M ] of Algorithm 1 as follows.
                                LD′ (h) ≤ ∥h − clM ◦ f ∗ ∥Dx′ + L′D (f ∗ )
Since (h(x) − clM (f ∗ (x)))2 ≤ 4M 2 for all x and the hypothesis h does not depend on the set
 ′
Sref , by a Hoeffding bound and the fact that m is large enough, we obtain that ∥h − clM ◦ f ∗ ∥Dx′ ≤
∥h−clM ◦f ∗ ∥Sref′ +ϵ/10, with probability at least 1−δ/10. Moreover, we have ∥h−clM ◦f ∥S ′
                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                                ref
                                                                                                    ≤
              ∗           ∗   ∗                                       ∗     ∗
∥h − clM ◦ p̃ ∥Sref′ + ∥p̃ − f ∥Sref
                                  ′ . We have already argued that ∥p̃ − f ∥S ′
                                                                                ref
                                                                                    ≤ 3ϵ/2.
In order to bound the quantity ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Sref
                                                 ′ , we observe that while the function h does
                ′
not depend on Sref , the function p̃∗ does depend on Sref
                                                      ′
                                                          and, therefore, standard concentration


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


arguments fail to bound the ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Sref′   in terms of ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Dx′ . However, since
                   ∗        ∗                  ∗
we have clipped p̃ , and p̃ is of the form ⟨v , ψ⟩, we may obtain a bound using standard results
from generalization theory (i.e., bounds on the Rademacher complexity of kernel-based hypotheses
like Theorem 6.12 in Mohri et al. (2018) and uniform convergence bounds for classes with bounded
Rademacher complexity under Lipschitz and bounded losses like Theorem 11.3 in Mohri et al.
(2018)). In particular, we have that with probability at least 1 − δ/10
                           ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Sref
                                            ′   ≤ ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Dx′ + ϵ/10
                                          ′
The corresponding requirement for m = |Sref | is determined by the bounds on the Lipschitz constant
of the loss function (y, t) 7→ (y − clM (t))2 , with y ∈ [−M, M ] and t ∈ R, which is at most
5M , the overall bound on this loss function, which is at most 4M 2 , as well as the bounds A =
maxx:∥x∥2 ≤R K(x, x) and (a∗ )⊤ Ka ≤ B (which give bounds on the Rademacher complexity).
By applying the Hoeffding bound, we are able to further bound the quantity ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Dx′ by
∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Sver
                   ′ + ϵ/10, with probability at least 1 − δ. We have effectively managed to bound
the quantity ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Sref
                              ′   by ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥Sver
                                                      ′
                                                                                                     ′
                                                          + ϵ/5. This is important, because the set Sver
is a fresh set of examples and, therefore, independent from p̃. Our goal is now to use the fact that
our spectral tester has accepted. We have the following for the matrix Φ̂′ = (Φ̂′z,w )z,w∈Sref ∪Sref  ′

        ′       1
                  P
with Φ̂z,w = N x∈S ′ K(x, z)K(x, w).
                         ver


                               ∥h − clM ◦ p̃∗ ∥2Sver
                                                 ′   ≤ ∥p̂ − p̃∗ ∥2Sver
                                                                    ′


                                                     = (â − a∗ )⊤ Φ̂′ (â − a∗ )

Since our test has accepted, we know that (â − a∗ )⊤ Φ̂′ (â − a∗ ) ≤ (1 + ρ)(â − a∗ )⊤ Φ̂(â − a∗ ), for
the matrix Φ̂ = (Φ̂z,w )z,w∈Sref ∪Sref with Φ̂z,w = N1 x∈Sver K(x, z)K(x, w). We note here that
                                                         P
having a multiplicative bound of this form is important, because we do not have any upper bound
on the norms of â and a∗ . Instead, we only have bounds on distorted versions of these vectors, e.g.,
on â⊤ K â, which does not imply any bound on the norm of â, because K could have very small
singular values.
                                                         q                               √
Overall, we have that ∥p̂ − p̃∗ ∥Sver
                                  ′   − ∥p̂ − p̃∗ ∥Sver ≤ ρ(2∥p̂∥2Sver + 2∥p̃∗ ∥2Sver ) ≤ 4ABρ ≤ 10     3ϵ
                                                                                                           .

By using results from generalization theory once more, we obtain that with probability at least
1 − δ/5 we have ∥p̂ − p̃∗ ∥Sver ≤ ∥p̂ − p̃∗ ∥Sref + ϵ/5. This step is important, because the only
fact we know about the quality of p̂ is that it outperforms every polynomial on the sample Sref (not
necessarily over the entire training distribution). We once more may use bounds on the values of p̂
and p̃∗ , this time without requiring clipping, since we know that the training marginal is bounded
and, hence, the values of p̂ and p̃∗ are bounded as well. This was not true for the test distribution,
since we did not make any assumptions about it.
In order to bound ∥p̂ − p̃∗ ∥Sref , we have the following.
           ∥p̂ − p̃∗ ∥Sref ≤ LS̄ref (p̂) + LS̄ref (cl ◦ f ∗ ) + ∥f ∗ − p̃∗ ∥Sref
                          ≤ LS̄ref (p̃opt ) + LS̄ref (cl ◦ f ∗ ) + ∥f ∗ − p̃∗ ∥Sref       (By equation 1)
                          ≤ LS̄ref (popt ) + LS̄ref (cl ◦ f ∗ ) + ∥f ∗ − p̃∗ ∥Sref
The first term above is bounded as LS̄ref (popt ) ≤ LS̄ref (clM ◦ fopt ) + ∥popt − fopt ∥Sref , where the
second term is at most ϵ (by the definition of popt ) and the first term can be bounded by LD (fopt ) +
ϵ/10 = opt + ϵ/10, with probability at least 1 − δ/10, due to an application of the Hoeffding bound.
For the term LS̄ref (cl ◦ f ∗ ) we can similarly use the Hoeffding bound to obtain, with probability at
least 1 − δ/10 that LS̄ref (cl ◦ f ∗ ) ≤ LD (f ∗ ) + ϵ/10.
Finally, for the term ∥f ∗ − p̃∗ ∥Sref , we have that ∥f ∗ − p̃∗ ∥Sref ≤ 3ϵ/2, as argued above.
Overall, we obtain a bound of the form L′D (h) ≤ LD (f ∗ ) = LD′ (f ∗ ) + LD (fopt ) + 5ϵ, with
probability at least 1 − δ, as desired.

Completeness. For the completeness criterion, we assume that the test marginal is equal to the
training marginal. Then, by Lemma 3.8 (where we observe that any (ψ, C, ℓ)-hypercontractive


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distribution is also (ϕ, C, ℓ)-hypercontractive), with probability at least 1 − δ, we have that for all
                        1+(ρ/4) ⊤
a ∈ R2m , a⊤ Φ̂′ a ≤ 1−(ρ/4)    a Φ̂a ≤ (1 + ρ)a⊤ Φ̂a, because E[Φ̂] = E[Φ̂′ ] and the matrices are
sums of independent samples of ϕ(x)ϕ(x)⊤ , where x ∼ Dx . It is crucial here that ϕ (which recall
                             ′                                                           ′
is formed by using Sref , Sref ) does not depend on the verification samples Sver and Sver  , which is
why we chose them to be fresh. Therefore, the test will accept with probability at least 1 − δ.

Efficient Implementation. To compute â, we may run a least squares program, in time polyno-
mial in m. For the spectral tester, we first compute the SVD of Φ̂ and check that any vector in the
kernel of Φ̂ is also in the kernel of Φ̂′ (this can be checked without computing the SVD of Φ̂′ ).
                                 †
Otherwise, reject. Then, let Φ̂ 2 be the root of the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of Φ̂ and find the
                                           †     †
maximum singular value of the matrix Φ̂ 2 Φ̂′ Φ̂ 2 . If the value is higher than 1 + ρ, reject. Note that
this is equivalent to solving the eigenvalue problem described in Algorithm 1.

B.2   A PPLICATIONS

We first state and prove our end to end results on TDS learning Sigmoid and Lipschitz nets over
bounded marginals that are C-hypercontractive for some constant C.
Theorem B.3 (TDS Learning for Nets with Sigmoid Activation). Let F on Rd be the class of neural
network with sigmoid activations, depth t and weight matrices W = (W (1) , . . . , W (t) ) such that
∥W∥1 ≤ W . Let ϵ ∈ (0, 1). Suppose the training and test distributions D, D′ over Rd × R are such
that the following are true:

      1. Dx is bounded within {x : ∥x∥2 ≤ R} and is C-hypercontractive for R, C ≥ 1,
      2. The training and test labels are bounded in [−M, M ] for some M ≥ 1.

Then, Algorithm 1 learns the class F in the TDS regression up to excess
error  ϵ and probability of failure δ.                      The time and sample          complexity is
                                       t                        O ((W t log(W/ϵ))t−2 )
poly d, 1ϵ , C ℓ , M, log(1/δ)ℓ , (2R)2 ·ℓ , (2∥W (1) ∥∞
                                                       2 )ℓ
                                                            · W                                  where
ℓ = O (R log R) · (∥W (1) ∥∞        t−2

                              2 W       ) · (t log(W/ϵ))t−1 .

                                                                           O (W t−2 (t log(W/ϵ)t−2 )
Proof. From Theorem A.21, we have that F is (ϵ, (2∥W (1) ∥∞             ℓ
                                                                     2 ) W                           )-
                                                        (t)
approximately represented within radius R w.r.t MKℓ where ℓ is  a degree vector whose product
is equal to ℓ = O (R log R) · (∥W (1) ∥∞
                                       2 W
                                            t−2
                                                ) · (t log(W/ϵ))t−1 . Also, from Lemma A.16, we
                               (t)                   t
have that A := sup∥x∥2 ≤R MKℓ (x, x) ≤ (2R)2 ℓ . From Lemma A.16, the entries of the ker-

                                                                                            (t)
nel can be computed in poly(d, ℓ) time and from Lemma A.17, we have that Dx is MKℓ , C, ℓ
hypercontractive. Now, we obtain the result by applying Theorem B.2.

The following corollary on TDS learning two layer sigmoid networks in polynomial time readily
follows.
Corollary B.4. Let F on Rd be the class of two-layer neural networks with weight matrices W =
(W (1) , W (2) ) and sigmoid activations. Let ∥W (1) ∥∞
                                                      2 ≤ O(1) and ∥W∥1 ≤ W . Suppose the
training and test distributions satisfy the assumptions from Theorem B.3 with R = O(1). Then,
Algorithm 1 learns the class F in the TDS regression setting up to excess error ϵ and probability of
failure 0.1 in time and sample complexity poly(d, 1/ϵ, W, M ).

Proof. The proof immediately follows from Theorem B.3 by setting t = 2 and the other parameters
to the appropriate constants.

Theorem B.5 (TDS Learning for Nets with Lipschitz Activation). Let F on Rd be the class of
neural network with L-Lipschitz activations, depth t and weight matrices W = (W (1) , . . . , W (t) )
such that ∥W∥1 ≤ W . Let ϵ ∈ (0, 1). Suppose the training and test distributions D, D′ over Rd × R
are such that the following are true:


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. Dx is bounded within {x : ∥x∥2 ≤ R} and is C-hypercontractive for R, C ≥ 1,
      2. The training and test labels are bounded in [−M, M ] for some M ≥ 1.

Then, Algorithm 1 learns the class F in the TDS regression up to excess error ϵ and probability         of
                                                         1     ℓ              ℓ               O(ℓ)

        δ. The time and sample complexity
failure                                      is poly  d, ϵ , C   , M, log(1/δ)  , (2R(k + ℓ))        where
                                 √
ℓ = O ∥W (1) ∥∞   2 (W L) t−1
                              Rk   k/ϵ . When    k  = 1, we have that the time and sample complexity
            1
                                           ) where ℓ = O ∥W (1) ∥∞
                ℓ              ℓ      O(ℓ)                                     t−1

is poly(d, ϵ , C , M, log(1/δ) , (2R)                                  2 (W L)      R/ϵ .

Proof. From Theorem A.19, for k > 1 we have that F is (ϵ, (k + ℓ)O(ℓ) )-approximately rep-
                                  (1)
resented  within radius R w.r.t MKℓ   where ℓ is a degree vector whose product is equal to
                               √
ℓ = O ∥W (1) ∥∞  2 (W L)
                         t−1
                             Rk k/ϵ . For k = 1, we have that we have that F is (ϵ, 2O(ℓ) )-
                                                          (1)
approximately represented within radius R w.r.t  MKℓ where ℓ is a degree vector whose prod-
uct is equal to ℓ = O ∥W (1) ∥∞  2 (W L)
                                           t−1
                                               R/ϵ . Also, from Lemma A.16, we have that A :=
                 (t)             O(ℓ)
sup∥x∥2 ≤R MKℓ (x, x) ≤ (2R)          . From Lemma A.16, the entries of the kernel can be computed

                                                                 (1)
in poly(d, ℓ) time and from Lemma A.17, we have that Dx is MKℓ , C, ℓ hypercontractive. Now,
we obtain the result by applying Theorem B.2.

The above theorem implies the following corollary about TDS learning the class of ReLUs.
Corollary B.6. Let F = {x → max(0, w · x) : ∥w∥2 = 1} on Rd be the class of ReLU functions
with unit weight vectors. Suppose the training and test distributions satisfy the assumptions from
Theorem B.5 with R = O(1). Then, Algorithm 1 learns the class F in the TDS regression setting up
to excess error ϵ and probability of failure 0.1 in time and sample complexity poly(d, 2O(1/ϵ) , M ).

Proof. The proof immediately follows from Theorem B.5 by setting t = 2, W = (w) and the
activation to be the ReLU function.

In particular, this implies that the class of ReLUs is TDS learnable in polynomial time when ϵ <
O(1/ log d).

C     TDS L EARNING AND U NIFORM A PPROXIMATION
C.1   P RELIMINARIES

We first define the notion of a subspace junta which will be useful in this section. Intuitively, we
want to consider the neural network as a function of W x after the first layer of weights has been
applied, which allows us to project from the higher d-dimensional input space to a k-dimensional
subspace.
Definition C.1 (Subspace Junta). A function f : Rd → R is a k-subspace junta (where k ≤ d) if
there exists W ∈ Rk×d with ∥W ∥2 = 1 and W W ⊤ = Ik and a function g : Rk → R such that
                                f (x) = fW (x) = g(W x) ∀x ∈ Rd .
Note that by taking k = d, letting W = Id covers all functions f : Rd → R.

We obtain the following corollary which gives the analogous bound on the (ϵ, R)-uniform approxi-
mation to a k-subspace junta, given the (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation to the corresponding function
g.
Corollary C.2. Let ϵ > 0, R ≥ 1, and f : Rd → R be a k-subspace junta, and consider the
corresponding function g(W x). Let q : Rk → R be an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation polynomial
for g, and define p : Rd → R as p(x) := q(W x). Then |p(x) − f (x)| ≤ ϵ for all ∥W x∥2 ≤ R.

In this section, we obtain TDS learning algorithms with respect to a training marginal which is a
strictly sub-exponential distribution, which we now define.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition C.3 (Strictly Sub-exponential Distribution). A distribution D on Rd is γ-strictly subex-
ponential if there exist constants C, γ ∈ (0, 1] such that for all w ∈ Rd , ∥w∥ = 1, t ≥ 0,
                                                                 1+γ
                                  Prx∼D [|⟨w, x⟩| > t] ≤ e−Ct          .

These distributions have the following bounds on their moments.
Fact C.4 (see Vershynin (2018)). Let D on Rd be a γ-strictly subexponential distribution. Then for
all w ∈ Rd , ∥w∥ = 1, t ≥ 0, p ≥ 1, there exists a constant C ′ such that
                                                                p
                                   Ex∼D [|⟨w, x⟩|p ] ≤ (C ′ p) 1+γ .
In fact, the two conditions are equivalent.
We will use the following bounds on the concentration of subexponential moments in the analysis
of our algorithm. This will be useful in showing the sample complexity N required in order for the
empirical moments of the sample S concentrate around the moments of the training marginal Dx .
Lemma C.5 (Moment Concentration of Subexponential Distributions). Let Dx be a distribution
over Rd such that for any w ∈ Rd with ∥w∥2 = 1 and any t ∈ N we have Ex∼Dx [|w ·
x|t ] ≤ (Ct)t for some C ≥ 1. For α = (αi )i∈[d] ∈ Nd , we denote with xα the quantity
         Qd
xα = i=1 xα    i , where x = (xi )i∈[d] . Then, for any ∆, δ ∈ (0, 1), if S is a set of at least
                i

       1
N = ∆2 (Cc)4ℓ ℓ8ℓ+1 (log(20d/δ))4ℓ+1 i.i.d. examples from Dx for some sufficiently large universal
constant c ≥ 2, we have that with probability at least 1 − δ, the following is true.
            For any α ∈ Nd with ∥α∥1 ≤ 2ℓ we have |Ex∼S [xα ] − Ex∼Dx [xα ]| ≤ ∆.

Proof. Let α = (αi )i∈[d] ∈ Nd with ∥α∥1 ≤ 2ℓ. Consider the random variable X =
   1
       P        α       1
                            P      Q        αi                                     α
mtrain    x∈S x = mtrain       x∈S   i∈[d] xi . We have that E[X] = Ex∼Dx [x ] and also the fol-
lowing.
                                                  E[(X − E[X])2t ]
                        Pr[|X − E[X]| > ∆] ≤
                                                         ∆2t
                                                   2(4t)t
                                               ≤           E[(xα − E[xα ])2t ]
                                                  (N ∆2 )t
where the last inequality follows from the Marcinkiewicz–Zygmund inequality (see Ferger (2014)).
We have that E[(xα − E[xα ])2t ] ≤ 4t E[(xα )2t ]. Since ∥α∥1 ≤ 2ℓ, we have that E[(xα )2t ] ≤
sup∥w∥2 =1 [E[(w · x)4tℓ ]] ≤ (4Ctℓ)4tℓ , which yields the desired result, due to the choice of N and
after a union bound over all the possible choices of α (at most d2ℓ ).

C.2   G ENERAL T HEOREM

We now present the assumptions that are required by our TDS learner under strictly sub-exponential
distributions.
Assumption C.6. For a function class F ⊆ {Rd → R} consisting of k-subspaces juntas, and
training and test distributions D, D′ over Rd × R, we assuming the following.
      1. For f ∈ F, there exists an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation polynomial for f with degree at
         most ℓ = R log R · gF (ϵ), where gF (ϵ) is a function depending only on the class F and ϵ.
      2. For f ∈ F, the value rf := sup∥W x∥2 ≤R |f (x)| is bounded by a constant r > 0.

      3. The training marginal Dx is a γ-strictly subexponential distribution.
      4. The training and test labels are both bounded in [−M, M ] for some M ≥ 1.
Given this assumption, we now give the statement of the TDS learning algorithm.
Theorem C.7 (TDS Learning via Uniform Approximation). Assume Assumption C.6 holds. Let
ϵ, δ ∈ (0, 1). Then, algorithm (Algorithm 2) learns F in the TDS regression setting up to excess
error 4ϵ and
             has probability of failure δ.    The time complexity is poly(ds , ln(1/δ)ℓ , 1/ϵ) where
                                        1+1/γ
s = poly (kgF (ϵ) log(r) log(M/ϵ))              and TDS learns F with respect to Dx up to excess
error 4ϵ and with failure probability δ.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The following lemma allows us to relate the squared loss of the difference of polynomials under a
set S and under D, as long as we have a bound on the coefficients of the polynomials. This will be
convenient in the analysis of the algorithm.
Lemma C.8 (Transfer Lemma for Square Loss, see Klivans et al. (2024a)). Let D be a distribution
over Rd and S be a set of points in Rd . If |Ex∼S [xα ] − Ex∼D [xα ]| ≤ ∆ for all α ∈ Nd with
∥α∥1 ≤ 2ℓ, then for any degree ℓ polynomials p1 , p2 with coefficients absolutely bounded by B, it
holds that
                Ex∼S [(p1 (x) − p2 (x))2 ] − Ex∼D [(p1 (x) − p2 (x))2 ] ≤ 4B 2 d2ℓ ∆

Algorithm 2: TDS Regression via Uniform Approximation
Input: Parameters ϵ > 0, δ ∈ (0, 1), R ≥ 1, M ≥ 1, and sample access to D, Dx′
                                                                                           ϵ′2
Set ϵ′ = ϵ/11, δ ′ = δ/4, ℓ = R log R · gF (ϵ), t = 2 log 2M
                                                                                 3ℓ
                                                           ϵ′ , B = r(2(k + ℓ)) , ∆ = 4B 2 d2ℓt
Set mtrain = mtest = poly(M, ln(1/δ)ℓ , 1/ϵ, dℓ , r) and draw mtrain i.i.d. labeled examples S
 from D and mtest i.i.d. unlabeled examples S ′ from Dx′ .
For each α ∈ Nd with ∥α∥1 ≤h 2 max(ℓ, t),   i compute the quantity
  b α = Ex∼S ′ [xα ] = Ex∼S ′ Q          αi
 M                                     x
                                  i∈[d] i

Reject and terminate if |Mα − Ex∼Dx [xα ]| > ∆ for some α with ∥α∥1 ≤ 2 max(ℓ, t).
                          b
Otherwise, solve the following least squares problem on S up to error ϵ′
                      min E(x,y)∼S (y − p(x))2

                       p

                           s.t. p is a polynomial with degree at most ℓ
                                each coefficient of p is absolutely bounded by B
Let p̂ be an ϵ′2 -approximate solution to the above optimization problem.
Accept and output clM (p̂(x)).


Proof. We will prove soundness and completeness separately.
Soundness. Suppose the algorithm accepts and outputs clM (p̂). Let f ∗ = arg minf ∈F [LD (f ) +
LD′ (f )] and fopt = arg minf ∈F [LD (f )]. By the uniform approximation assumption in Assump-
tion C.6, there are polynomials p∗ , popt which are (ϵ, R)-uniform approximations for f ∗ and fopt ,
respectively. Let f ∗ and fopt have the corresponding matrices W ∗ , Wopt ∈ Rk×d , respectively.
Denote λtrain = LD (f ∗ ) and λtest = LD′ (f ∗ ). Note that for any f, g : Rd → R, “unclipping” both
functions will not increase their squared loss under any distribution, i.e. ∥clM (f ) − clM (g)∥D ≤
∥f − g∥D , which can be seen through casework on x and when f (x), g(x) are in [−M, M ] or not.
Recalling that the training and test labels are bounded, we can use this fact as we bound the error of
the hypothesis on D′ .
                      LD′ (clM (p̂)) ≤ LD′ (clM (f ∗ )) + ∥clM (f ∗ ) − clM (p̂)∥D′
                                       ≤ LD′ (f ∗ ) + ∥clM (f ∗ ) − clM (p̂)∥S ′ + ϵ′ .
The second inequality follows from unclipping the first term and by applying Hoeffding’s inequality,
                        4      ′
so that for mtest ≥ 8M ln(2/δ
                          ϵ′4
                                 )
                                   , the second term is bounded with probability ≥ 1 − δ ′ . Proceeding
with more unclipping and using the triangle inequality:
          LD′ (clM (p̂)) ≤ λtest + ∥clM (f ∗ ) − clM (p∗ )∥S ′ + ∥clM (p∗ ) − clM (p̂)∥S ′ + ϵ′
                        ≤ λtest + ∥clM (f ∗ ) − clM (p∗ )∥S ′ + ∥p∗ − p̂∥S ′ + ϵ′ .
                                               p
We first bound ∥clM (f ∗ ) − clM (p∗ )∥S ′ = Ex∼S ′ [(clM (f ∗ (x)) − clM (p∗ (x)))2 ]. Since p∗ (x)
is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation to f ∗ (x), we separately consider when we fall in the region of
good approximation (∥W ∗ x∥ ≤ R) or not.
             Ex∼S ′ [(clM (f ∗ (x)) − clM (p∗ (x)))2 ]
                    = Ex∼S ′ [(clM (f ∗ (x)) − clM (p∗ (x)))2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ ≤ R]
                    + Ex∼S ′ [(clM (f ∗ (x)) − clM (p∗ (x)))2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]]
                    ≤ ϵ2 + Ex∼S ′ [2(clM (f ∗ (x))2 + clM (p∗ (x))2 ) · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]]


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then by applying Cauchy-Schwarz, (and similarly for clM (p∗ )):
   Ex∼S ′ [clM (f ∗ (x))2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]] ≤ Ex∼S ′ [clM (f ∗ (x))4 ] · Prx∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]].
                                                  p                          p

By definition, clM (p∗ )2 , clM (f ∗ )2 ≤ M 2 . So it suffices to bound Prx∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]], since we
now have                                                             p
            Ex∼S ′ [(clM (f ∗ (x)) − clM (p∗ (x)))2 ] ≤ ϵ2 + 4M 2 Prx∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]].              (2)
In order to bound this probability of the test samples falling outside the region of good approxima-
tion, we use the property that the first 2t moments of S ′ are close to the moments of D (as tested by
the algorithm). Applying Markov’s inequality, we have
                                                                           2t
                                                            Ex∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ ]
                              Prx∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]] ≤                        .
                                                                    R2t
                         P                   t                               Pk  Pd                2
                 2t          k                          Pk
Write ∥W ∗ x∥ =                      ∗
                             i=1 ⟨Wi , x⟩
                                          2
                                               , where i=1 ⟨Wi∗ , x⟩2 =         i=1
                                                                                              ∗
                                                                                       j=1 Wij xj     is a
degree 2 polynomial with each coefficient bounded in absolute value by 2k (noting that since
                                                                                2t
W W ⊤ = 1, then |Wij | ≤ 1). Let aα denote the coefficients of ∥W ∗ x∥ . Applying Lemma A.7,
                                                                                                     2t
                         t 2t      O(t)
                                        . By linearity of expectation, we also have |Ex∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ −
P
   ∥α∥1 ≤2t |aα | ≤ (2k) d     ≤d
                 2t
Ex∼D [∥W ∗ x∥ ]| ≤                                  O(t)
                                                          · ∆ ≤ ϵ, where ∆ ≤ ϵ′ · d−Ω(t) . Since D is
                         P
                            ∥α∥ ≤2t |aα | · ∆ ≤ d
                              1
                                                                               2t
γ-strictly subexponential, then by Fact C.4, Ex∼D [⟨Wi∗ , x⟩2t ] ≤ (2C ′ t) 1+γ . Then, we can bound
                               2t                    2t                    2t
the numerator Ex∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ ] ≤ Ex∼D [∥W ∗ x∥ ] + ϵ′ ≤ (Ckt) 1+γ for some large constant C.
So we have that                                                      2t
                                                              (Ckt) 1+γ
                                Prx∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]] ≤                 .
                                                                R2t
                ′                            ′
Setting t ≥ C (log(M/ϵ)) and R ≥ C (kt) p          ≥ C k log(M/ϵ) for large enough C ′ makes the
                                                         ′

above probability at most 16ϵ′4 /M 4 so that 4M 2 Prx∼S ′ [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]] ≤ ϵ′2 . Thus, from Equa-
tion (2), we have that
                                  ∥clM (f ∗ ) − clM (p∗ )∥S ′ ≤ ϵ + ϵ′ .
We now bound the second term ∥clM (p∗ ) − clM (p̂)∥S ′ . By Lemma C.5, the first 2ℓ moments of
S will concentrate around those of Dx whenever mtrain ≥ ∆12 (Cc)4ℓ ℓ8ℓ+1 (log(20d/δ))4ℓ+1 , and
similarly the first 2ℓ moments of S ′ match with Dx because the algorithm accepted. Using the
transfer lemma (Lemma C.8) when considering p′ = (p∗ − p̂)2 , along with the triangle inequality,
we get:
                                                                     √
                       ∥p∗ (x) − p̂(x)∥S ′ ≤ ∥p∗ (x) − p̂(x)∥D + 4B 2 d2ℓ ∆
                                            ≤ ∥p∗ (x) − p̂(x)∥S + 2ϵ′
                                            ≤ LS (p∗ ) + LS (p̂) + 2ϵ′ ,
where we note that we can bound the sum of the magnitudes of the coefficients by r(2(k + ℓ))3ℓ
using Lemma A.6. Recall that by definition p̂ is an ϵ′2 -approximate solution to the optimization
problem in Algorithm 2, so LS (p̂) ≤ LS (popt ) + ϵ′ . Plugging this in, we obtain
          ∥p∗ (x) − p̂(x)∥S ′ ≤ LS (p∗ ) + LS (popt ) + 3ϵ′
                              ≤ ∥p∗ − clM (f ∗ )∥S + L(clM (f ∗ ))S
                              + ∥popt (x) − clM (fopt (x))∥S + LS (clM (fopt )) + 3ϵ′ .
By applying Hoeffding’s inequality, we get that ∥clM (f ∗ ) − y∥S ≤ ∥clM (f ∗ ) − y∥D + ϵ′ which
                                                        4    ′
holds with probability ≥ 1 − δ ′ when mtrain ≥ 8M ln(2/δ
                                                     ϵ′4
                                                             )
                                                               . By unclipping clM (f ∗ ), this is at most
λtrain + ϵ . Similarly, with probability ≥ 1 − δ , ∥clM (fopt (x)) − y∥S ≤ opt + ϵ′ . It remains to
          ′                                      ′

bound ∥p∗ (x) − clM (f ∗ )∥S and ∥popt − clM (fopt (x))∥S . The analysis for both is similar to how
we bounded ∥clM (p∗ ) − clM (f ∗ )∥S , except since we do not clip p∗ or popt we will instead take
advantage of the bound on p∗ (x) on ∥W ∗ x∥ > R (respectively popt (x) on ∥Wopt x∥ > R). We
show how to bound ∥p∗ (x) − clM (f ∗ )∥S :
        Ex∼S [(clM (f ∗ (x)) − p∗ (x))2 ] = Ex∼S [(clM (f ∗ (x)) − p∗ (x))2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ ≤ R]
                                          + Ex∼S [(clM (f ∗ (x)) − p∗ (x))2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]]
                                          ≤ ϵ2 + 2Ex∼S [clM (f ∗ (x))2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]]
                                                + 2Ex∼S [p∗ (x)2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]].


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We can bound the first expectation term with ϵ′2 /4 since the same analysis holds for bounding
Ex∼S ′ [clM (f ∗ (x))2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]], except instead of matching the first 2t moments of S ′ with
Dx , we match the first 2ℓ moments of S with Dx . We use the strictly subexponential tails of Dx to
bound the second term. Cauchy-Schwarz gives
           Ex∼S [p∗ (x)2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]] ≤ Ex∼S [p∗ (x)4 ] · Prx∼S [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]]
                                               p

Note that by definition of r and using that p∗ is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation of f ∗ , then p∗ (x) ≤
                                                                                      ℓ
(r +ϵ) when ∥W ∗ x∥ ≤ R. By Lemma A.6, |p∗ (x)| ≤ (r +ϵ)·(2kℓ)cℓ ∥(W ∗ x)/R∥ for sufficiently
                                                                                4ℓ
large constant c1 > 0. Then since R ≥ 1, p∗ (x) ≤ (r + ϵ)4 · (2kℓ)cℓ ∥W ∗ x∥ . Then we have
                                                                              4ℓ
                   Ex∼S [p∗ (x)4 ] ≤ (r + ϵ)4 · (2kℓ)c1 ℓ · Ex∼S [∥W ∗ x∥ ]
                                                                                   4ℓ
                                    ≤ (r + ϵ)4 · (2kℓ)c1 ℓ · (Ex∼Dx [∥W ∗ x∥ ] + 1)
                                    ≤ (r + ϵ)4 · (2kℓ)cℓ
                                                             4ℓ         4Cℓ
where using Fact C.4 we bound on Ex∼Dx [∥W ∗ x∥ ] ≤ k 2ℓ (4ℓ) 1+γ similar to above, which can be
upper bounded with (2kℓ)c2 ℓ for c2 > 0 a sufficiently large constant. Take c = c1 + c2 . We bound
Prx∼S [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]] as follows:
                                                     " k                   #
                                                      X
                              ∗                               ∗    2     2
                  Prx∼S [∥W x∥ > R]] = Prx∼S              ⟨Wi , x⟩ > R
                                                                  i=1
                                                  k
                                                  X
                                              ≤         Prx∼S [⟨Wi∗ , x⟩2 > R2 /k]
                                                  i=1
                                              ≤ k sup Prx∼S [⟨W, x⟩2 > R2 /k],
                                                    ∥w∥2 =1

where the first inequality follows from a union bound. Since ⟨w, x⟩2 is a degree 2 polynomial, we
can view sign(⟨w, x⟩2 − R2 /k) as a degree-2 PTF. The class of these functions has VC dimension
at most d2 (e.g. by viewing it as the class of halfspaces in d2 dimensions). Using standard VC
                                     2           ′
arguments, whenever mtrain ≥ C · d +log(1/δ
                                       (ϵ′′ /k)2
                                                   )
                                                     for some sufficiently large universal constant C > 0,
                          ′
with probability ≥ 1 − δ we have
                  Prx∼S [⟨w, x⟩2 > R2 /k] ≤ Prx∼Dx [⟨w, x⟩2 > R2 /k] + ϵ′′ /k.
Using the strictly subexponential tails of Dx , we have
                                                                                                !
                           ∗                                            2      2           ′′
              Prx∼S [∥W x∥ > R]] ≤ k              sup Prx∼Dx [⟨w, x⟩ > R /k] + ϵ /k
                                              ∥w∥=1

                                                         1+γ
                                       ≤ 2k · exp − (R/k)      + ϵ′′ .
                     ′4
Choose ϵ′′ = (r+ϵ)ϵ4 (2kℓ)cℓ . Putting it together:
                                                                               1+γ
    Ex∼S [p∗ (x)4 ] · Prx∼S [∥W ∗ x∥ > R]] ≤ (r + ϵ)4 · (2kℓ)cℓ e−(R/k)                 + ϵ′4
                                                  ≤ (r + ϵ)4 · exp cℓ log(2kℓ) − (R/k)1+γ + ϵ′4 .


We want to bound the first part with ϵ′4 . Equivalently, we need to show that the ex-
                      ϵ′
ponent is ≤ 4 ln r+ϵ     . Substituting ℓ = R log R · gF (ϵ), we get that cℓ log(2kℓ) ≤
cgF (ϵ)R(log R)2 log(2kgF (ϵ)). Thus, it suffices to show that
                          1+γ
                         R                                            ϵ′
                                ≥ cgF (ϵ)R(log R)2 (2kgF (ϵ)) − 4 ln     .
                          k                                          r+ϵ

                                                             1+ 1
This is satisfied when R ≥ poly (kgF (ϵ) log(r) log(M/ϵ)) γ . Then, we have that
                                                                    √
                               Ex∼S [p∗ (x)2 · 1[∥W ∗ x∥ > R]] ≤ ϵ′2 2.


                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


So,                                   q                      √
                            ∗       ∗
                    ∥clM (f ) − p ∥S ≤ ϵ2 + 2 · ϵ′2 /4 + 2ϵ′2 2 ≤ ϵ + 2ϵ′ .
The same argument will also give
                                ∥clM (fopt (x)) − popt (x)∥S ≤ ϵ + 2ϵ′ .
Putting everything together, we have
                      LD′ (clM (p̂)) ≤ λ + opt + 3ϵ + 11ϵ′ ≤ λ + opt + 4ϵ.
The result holds with probability at least 1 − 5δ ′ = 1 − δ (taking a union bound over 5 bad events).
Completeness. For completeness, it is sufficient to ensure that mtest ≥ N for N in Lemma C.5.
This is because when Dx = Dx′ , our test samples S ′ are in fact being drawn from the subexponential
distribution Dx . Then the moment concentration of subexponential distributions (Lemma C.5) gives
that the empirical moments of S ′ are close to the moments of Dx with probability ≥ 1 − δ ′ . This is
the only condition for acceptance, so when Dx = Dx′ , the probability of acceptance is at least 1 − δ,
as required.
Runtime. The runtime of the algorithm is poly(dℓ , mtrain , mtest ), where ℓ = R log R · gF (ϵ).
As
  noted above, the two lower     bounds on R required in the proof are satisfied by setting R ≥

                          O( 1 )
 (kgF (ϵ) log(r) log(M/ϵ)) γ . Note that the lower bounds we required for mtrain in the
proof are satisfied whenever mtrain = poly(M, ln(1/δ)ℓ , 1/ϵ, dℓ , r). For mtest we required that
              4      ′
mtest ≥ 8M ln(2/δ
                ϵ′4
                       )
                         and also mtest ≥ N for N in Lemma C.5. This is satisfied by choosing
                                                                           s         ℓ
mtest  = mtrain . Putting this altogether,
                                          we see that the runtime is poly(d , ln(1/δ) , 1/ϵ) where
                                  O(1/γ)
s = (kgF (ϵ) log(r) log(M/ϵ))              .

C.3   A PPLICATIONS

We are now ready to state our theorem for TDS learning neural networks with sigmoid activations.
Theorem C.9 (TDS Learning for Nets with Sigmoid Activation and Strictly Subexponential
Marginals). Let F on Rd be the class of neural network with sigmoid activations, depth t and weight
matrices W = (W (1) , . . . , W (t) ) such that ∥W ∥1 ≤ W . Let ϵ ∈ (0, 1). Suppose the training and
test distributions D, D′ over Rd × R are such that the following are true:

      1. Dx is γ-strictly subexponential,
      2. The training and test labels are bounded in [−M, M ] for some M ≥ 1.

Then, Algorithm 2 learns the class F in the TDS regression up to excess error ϵ and proba-
bility of failure δ. The time and sample complexity is at most poly(ds , log(1/δ)s ) where s =
                                                  O( γ1 )
 k log M · (∥W (1) ∥∞2 W
                         t−2
                             ) · (t log(W/ϵ))t−1          .

Proof. From Theorem A.21, we have that F there is an (ϵ, R)-uniform approximation             poly-
nomial for f with degree ℓ = O (R log R) · (∥W (1) ∥∞          t−2                 t−1

                                                           2 W     ) · (t log(W/ϵ))      . Here, let
              (1) ∞   t−2                   t−1
gF (ϵ) := (∥W ∥2 W         ) · (t log(W/ϵ)) . We also have that r = sup∥x∥2 ≤R,f ∈F |f (x)| ≤
poly(Rk∥W (1) ∥∞2 W t−2
                        ) from   the Lipschitzness of the sigmoid nets (Lemma A.18) and the fact
that the sigmoid evaluated at 0 has value 1. The theorem now directly follows from Theo-
rem C.7.

We now state our theorem on TDS learning neural networks with arbitrary Lipschitz activations.
Theorem C.10 (TDS Learning for Nets with Lipschitz Activation with strictly subexponential
marginals). Let F on Rd be the class of neural network with L-Lipschitz activations, depth t and
weight matrices W = (W (1) , . . . , W (t) ) such that ∥W ∥1 ≤ W . Let ϵ ∈ (0, 1). Suppose the
training and test distributions D, D′ over Rd × R are such that the following are true:

      1. Dx is γ-strictly subexponential,


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2. The training and test labels are bounded in [−M, M ] for some M ≥ 1.

Then, Algorithm 2 learns the class F in the TDS regression up to excess error ϵ and proba-
bility of failure δ. The time and sample complexity is at most poly(ds , log(1/δ s ) where s =
                                  O( γ1 )
 k log M · ∥W (1) ∥∞2 (W L)
                           t−1
                               /ϵ         .

Proof. From Theorem A.19, we have that             F there is an (ϵ, R)-uniform    approxima-
                                                        √       (1) ∞       t−1
tion polynomial for f with degree ℓ = O Rk k · ∥W ∥2 (W L) /ϵ .                       Here, let
              √       (1) ∞       t−1
gF (ϵ) := k k∥W ∥2 (W L) /ϵ. We also have that r = sup∥x∥2 ≤R,f ∈F |f (x)| ≤
poly(Rk∥W (1) ∥∞ 2 W
                      t−2
                          ) from the Lipschitz constant (Lemma A.18) and the fact that the each
individual activation has value at most 1 when evaluated at 0 (see Definition A.12. The theorem
now directly follows from Theorem C.7.

D    A SSUMPTIONS ON THE L ABELS

Our main theorems involve assumptions on the labels of both the training and test distributions.
Ideally, one would want to avoid any assumptions on the test distribution. However, we demonstrate
that this is not possible, even when the training marginal and the training labels are bounded, and the
test labels have bounded second moment. On the other hand, we show that obtaining algorithms that
work for bounded labels is sufficient even in the unbounded labels case, as long as some moment of
the labels (strictly higher than the second moment) is bounded.
We begin with the lower bound, which we state for the class of linear functions, but would also hold
for the class of single ReLU neurons, as well as other unbounded classes.
Proposition D.1 (Label Assumption Necessity). Let F be the class of linear functions over Rd ,
i.e., F = {x 7→ w · x : w ∈ Rd , ∥w∥2 ≤ 1}. Even if we assume that the training marginal is
bounded within {x ∈ Rd : ∥x∥2 ≤ 1}, that the training labels are bounded in [0, 1], and that for the
test labels we have Ey∼Dy′ [y 2 ] ≤ Y where Y > 0, no TDS regression algorithm with finite sample
complexity can achieve excess error less than Y /4 and probability of failure less than 1/4 for F.

The proof is based on the observation that because we cannot make any assumption on the test
marginal, the test distribution could take some very large value with very small probability, while
still being consistent with some linear function. The training distribution, on the other hand, gives
no information about the ground truth and is information theoretically indistinguishable from the
constructed test distribution. Therefore, the tester must accept and its output will have large excess
error. The bound on the second moment of the labels does imply a bound on excess error, but this
bound cannot be made arbitrarily small by drawing more samples.

Proof of Proposition D.1. Suppose, for contradiction that we have a TDS regression algorithm for F
with excess error ϵ < Y /4 and probability of failure δ < 1/4. Let m ∈ N be the sample complexity
of the algorithm and p ∈ (0, 1) such that m ≪ 1/p. We consider three distributions over Rd × R.
First
  √
      D(1)
         √
           outputs (0, 0) with probability 1. Second, D(2) outputs (0, 0) with probability 1 − p and
    Y      Y
( √p w, √p ) with probability p, for some w ∈ Rd with ∥w∥2 = 1. Third, D(3) outputs (0, 0) with
                        √
probability 1 − p and ( √Yp w, 0) with probability p.
We consider two instances of the TDS regression problem. The first instance corresponds to the case
D = D(1) and D′ = D(2) . The second corresponds to the case D = D(1) and D′ = D(3) . Note
that the assumptions we asserted regarding the test distribution   √ and√the test labels are true for both
instances. For D(2) , in particular, we have Ey∼D(2) [y 2 ] = p · ( Y / p)2 = Y . Moreover, in each of
                                                   y
the cases, there is a hypothesis in F that is consistent with all of the examples (either the hypothesis
x 7→ 0 or x 7→ w · x), so opt := minf ∈F [LD (f )] = 0 = minf ′ ∈F [LD (f ′ ) + LD′ (f ′ )] =: λ.
Note that the total variation distance between D(1) and D(2) is p and similarly between D(1) and
D(3) . Therefore, by the completeness criterion, as well as the fact that sampling only increases total
variation distance at a linear rate, i.e., dtv ((D)⊗m , (D′ )⊗m ) ≤ m · dtv (D, D′ ) ≤ m · p, we have that


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in each of the two instances, the algorithm will accept with probability at least 1 − m · p − δ (due to
the definition of total variation distance1 ).
Suppose that the algorithm accepts in both instances (which happens w.p. at least 1 − 2δ − 2mp).
By the soundness criterion, with overall probability at least 1 − 4δ − 2mp, we have the following.
                                             p · (h(x) − 0)2 < Y /4
                                                  √ √
                                     p · (h(x) − Y / p)2 < Y /4
The inequalities above cannot be satisfied simultaneously, so we have arrived to a contradiction. It
only remains to argue that 1 − 4δ − 2mp > 0, which is true if we choose p < 1−4δ
                                                                              2m . Therefore, such
a TDS regression algorithm cannot exist.

The lower bound of Proposition D.1 demonstrates that, in the worst case, the best possible excess
error scales with the second moment of the distribution of the test labels. In contrast, we show that
a bound on any strictly higher moment is sufficient.
Corollary D.2. Suppose that for any M > 0, we have an algorithm that learns a class F in the TDS
setting up to excess error ϵ ∈ (0, 1), assuming that both the training and test labels are bounded in
[−M, M ]. Let T (M ) and m(M ) be the corresponding time and sample complexity upper bounds.
Then, in the same setting, there is an algorithm that learns F up to excess error 4ϵ under the relaxed
assumption that for both training and test labels we have E[y 2 g(|y|)] ≤ Y for some Y > 0 and
g some strictly increasing, positive-valued and unbounded function. The corresponding time and
sample complexity upper bounds are T (g −1 (Y /ϵ2 )) and m(g −1 (Y /ϵ2 )).

The proof is based on the observation that the effect of clipping on the labels, as measured by the
squared loss, can be controlled by drawing enough samples, whenever a moment that is strictly
higher than the second moment is bounded.
Lemma D.3. Let Y > 0 and g : (0, ∞) → (0, ∞) be strictly increasing and surjective. Let y be a
random variable
         p        over R such that E[y 2 g(|y|)] ≤ Y . Then, for any ϵ ∈ (0, 1), if M ≥ g −1 (Y /ϵ2 ),
we have E[(y − clM (y))2 ] ≤ ϵ.

Proof of Lemma D.3. We have that E[(y−clM (y))2 ] ≤ E[y 2 1{|y| > M }], because y ≥ clM (y) and
y, clM (y) always have the same sign, so (y−clM (y))2 ≥ y 2 and also (y−clM (y))2 = 0 if |y| ≤ M .
Since g(|y|) is non-zero whenever y > 0, we have E[y 2 1{|y| > M }] = E[y 2 · g(|y|)
                                                                              g(|y|)
                                                                                     · 1{|y| > M }].
We now use the fact that g is increasing to conclude that E[y 2 1{|y| > M }] ≤ E[yg(M
                                                                                          2
                                                                                    g(|y|)]     Y
                                                                                       )    ≤ g(M ).
                   −1       2
By choosing M ≥ g (Y /ϵ ), we obtain the desired bound.

We are now ready to prove Corollary D.2, by reducing TDS learning with moment-bounded labels
to TDS learning with bounded labels.

Proof of Corollary D.2. The idea is to reduce the problem under the relaxed label assumptions to a
corresponding bounded-label problem for M = g −1 (Y /ϵ2 ). In particular, consider a new training
distribution clM ◦D and a new test distribution clM ◦D′ , where the samples are formed by drawing a
sample (x, y) from the corresponding original distribution and clipping the label y to clM (y). Note
that whenever we have access to i.i.d. examples from D, we also have access to i.i.d. examples from
clM ◦D and similarly for (Dx′ , clM ◦Dx′ ). Therefore, we may solve the corresponding TDS problem
for clM ◦ D and clM ◦ D′ , to either reject or obtain some hypothesis h such that
              LclM ◦D′ (h) ≤ min[LclM ◦D (f )] + min
                                                 ′
                                                     [LclM ◦D (f ′ ) + LclM ◦D′ (f ′ )] + ϵ
                              f ∈F                  f ∈F

Our algorithm either rejects when the algorithm for the bounded labels case rejects or accepts and
outputs h. It suffices to show LD′ (h) ≤ minf ∈F [LD (f )] + minf ′ ∈F [LD (f ′ ) + LD′ (f ′ )] + 4ϵ,
because the marginal distributions do not change and completeness is, therefore, satisfied directly.
   1
     We know that the algorithm would accept with probability at least 1 − δ if the set of test examples was
drawn from (Dx )⊗m . Since (Dx′ )⊗m is (mp)-close to (Dx )⊗m , no algorithm can have different behavior if
we substitute (Dx )⊗m with (Dx′ )⊗m except with probability m · p. Hence, any algorithm must accept with
probability at least 1 − m · p − δ.


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     p for any distribution D, we have |LD (h) − LclM ◦D (h)| ≤ ϵ. To this end, note
It suffices to show that
that LclM ◦D (h) = E(x,y)∼D [(clM (y) − h(x))2 ]. We have the following.
                             q
                LclM ◦D (h) = E(x,y)∼D [(clM (y) − h(x))2 ]
                             q
                            = E(x,y)∼D [(clM (y) − y + y − h(x))2 ]
                             q                              q
                            ≤ E(x,y)∼D [(clM (y) − y)2 ] + E(x,y)∼D [(y − h(x))2 ]
                         ≤ ϵ + LD (h)
The first inequality follows from an application of the triangle inequality for the L2 -norm and the
second inequality follows from Lemma D.3. The other side follows analogously.


                                                34
